Title 1: General Provisions
Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF RARITAN, COUNTY, OF
HUNTERDON, STATE OF NEW JERSEY TO COMPILE AND CODIFY THE
PRIOR CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF 1974, AS AMENDED, AND
ORDINANCES ADOPTED FROM 1982 THROUGH 1999
NOW THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED, by the Mayor and Township
Committee of the Township of Raritan as follows:
I. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the Ordinances of the
Township of Raritan and the Raritan Township Board of Health of a general
and permanent nature previously adopted by the Township Committee and
the Board of Health, and including Ordinances previously compiled in the
"Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan, 1974", as
amended thereafter to include Ordinances through and including calendar
year 1981, as well as the Ordinances adopted by the Township Committee
from 1982 through and including 1999, as revised and edited, compiled,
codified and published by the Township of Raritan are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted.
II. Title - Citation - Reference.
The Codification hereby adopted shall be known as the "REVISED
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWNSHIP OF RARITAN, 1999" and
shall hereafter be known and referred to as the "Code" and may be referred
to as such in any prosecution for the violation of any provision of this Code
or in any proceeding at law or in equity. The Code is comprised of Titles
1 through 17, together with an Index, Tables, and Statutory References,
which may hereinafter be amended, added to, revised or repealed and
which shall thereafter become a part of the Code.
Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the "REVISED GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWNSHIP OF RARITAN, 1999", as codified herein,
the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions
heretofore, now or hereinafter made. References made to the Titles,
Chapters, Sections and Sub-Sections of the "REVISED GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWNSHIP OF RARITAN, 1999" shall apply to
those Titles, Chapters, Sections or Sub-Sections as they appear in the
Code. It is sufficient to designate any Ordinance adding to, amending,
correcting or repealing all or any part or portion of this Code as an addition
to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "REVISED GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE TOWNSHIP OF RARITAN, 1999" or the "Code".
1.01:1
III. Ordinances Not Codified.
The prior Code of the Township, known as the revised "General Ordinances
of the Township of Raritan, 1974" as amended through the end of calendar
year 1981, as well as the Ordinances hereinafter enumerated in Section
V are codified so as to become part of this Code. Those Ordinances from
1982 through 1999 not codified herein are continued as the Special and
Permanent Ordinances of the Township and maintained in the permanent
records of the Office of the Clerk as "Special Ordinances" in categories
such as, but not limited to, FINANCE which includes by way of example,
but not limited to, Capital Improvement Ordinances, Bond Ordinances, etc.;
TRAFFIC which includes, by way of example, but not limited to Streets,
Roads, Speed Limits and Weight Limits, etc.; and MISCELLANEOUS - which
includes by way of example, but not limited to, Acquisition or Sale of Land,
Condemnation, Acceptance of Donations of Land, Vacating of Easements,
Municipal Consent to Utilities, etc. All such Ordinances not codified herein
or maintained as the Permanent "Special Ordinances" of the Township,
or adopted subsequent to December 31, 1999, are expressly saved and
continued in full force and effect.
IV. Effect of Headings.
Title, Chapter, Section or Sub-Section headings contained in this Code shall
not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope,
meaning or intent of the provisions of any Title, Chapter, Section or Sub-
Section in this Code.
V. Publication of Code - Adoption Ordinance.
The prior Code of the Township of Raritan, "Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Raritan, 1974" as amended, and all Ordinances compiled
as part of this Codification shall not be published at length other than
through reference in this Adopting Ordinances which shall be published
according to law, and a copy of this compilation and revision comprising
the Code herein adopted and known as "REVISED GENERAL ORDINANCES
OF THE TOWNSHIP OF RARITAN, 1999", has been filed in the Office of
the Township Clerk and shall remain there for the use and examination of
the Public until final action is taken on the said Adopting Ordinance, and
thereafter, while the same shall be in effect, a copy of said compilation
and revision of Ordinances shall be and remain on file in the Permanent
Records of the Office of the Clerk of the Township. In addition to the
re-adoption of the prior Code of the Township and Amendments thereto
through the end of the calendar year 1981, the following is a compilation of
those Ordinances and description of the effect of each Ordinance adopted
from 1982 through 1999, which Ordinances are adopted as part of this
compilation and codification:
Codification Ordinance Listing
III RARITAN CODE V
1.01:2
Ordinance
Number
82-4 licensing of coin-controlled amusement devices
82-10 site plans required as a condition of license
83-24 regulation of bicycles and other wheeled vehicles
83-25 change of planning board membership
84-3 adopts new land development code; repeals prior code chs.
12, 14, 17
84-7 amends development regulations
84-8 amends animal control regulations re: dogs running at
large
84-9 amends development regulations re: variance fees and
special meeting fee
84-10 amends development regulations - definitions, sales from
vehicles and group home standards
84-12 amends development regulations - lot area, lot averaging,
side yards and square footage requirements on lots with
public water and sewer
84-16 amends development regulations schedule of controls
84-18 amends the zoning map
84-22 amends development regulations - fees for minor site plan
84-23 amends development regulations to add new conditional
use of training centers for handicapped persons and
specific standards
85-1 amends development regulations - provide for temporary
use permit
85-6 amends development regulations - special meeting fees;
amends zoning map
85-7 term road department supervisor; hours of solicitation
85-13 amends development regulations - backland lots, standards
85-19 amends zoning map
85-20 amends animal control fees, effective dates, separate
license and tags
85-22 amends development regulations - Township planner as
deputy land use enforcement officer
85-24 enforcement NJ fire code, fees, appointment of fire official
85-25 amends development regulations re: off-street parking
requirements
85-26 flood damage prevention ordinance
V CODE ADOPTION V
1.01:3
Ordinance
Number
85-27 amends development regulations re: establishing
maximum number of bedrooms; maximum density per acre
85-28 amends development regulations - definition of day
nursery
86-3 special road events permit
86-4 amends development regulations - certificate of occupancy
on change of use or tenant
86-9 amends development regulations - fee for filing easement;
parking requirement
86-11 amends driveway permit fees
86-12 regulates inoperable or unregistered motor vehicles
86-15 amends development regulations - regulating soil
disturbance
86-16 amends development regulations - standards for dead-end
streets and cul-de-sacs
87-4 amends development regulations - establishing minimum
lot areas in certain zones affected by easements
87-7 amends development regulations - establishing types of
guarantees; requirement for maintenance guarantee
87-10 amends development regulations - establishing escrow
fees; regulation of escrow accounts
87-12 flood damage prevention ordinance
87-16 regulates placement of newsracks on public property
87-27 amends development regulations - standards for plats;
definition and standards of parking, canopy signs and site
plan escrow accounts
87-30 amends development regulations - establishes low and
moderate income housing districts; standards
88-4 amends development regulations - zoning permit fees
88-8 amends development regulations - establishes percolation
witness test fees
88-21 amends development regulations - maintenance
guarantees; acceptance and maintenance of improvements
88-25 adds definitions and additional standards to litter
ordinance
88-26 authorizes impoundment of inoperable or unlicensed motor
vehicles
V RARITAN CODE V
1.01:4
Ordinance
Number
88-29 adds traffic controls for street and highway construction
and maintenance operations
88-33 control of dog littering
89-3 amends § 2-8.1 of prior code, police department
organization - supervisory officers
89-10 establishes the position and duties of chief finance officer
89-11 development regulations - rezones certain properties;
creates R-1A zoning district; repeals ord. 88-28
89-14 amends § 2-17.3 of prior code, municipal utilities authority
- composition and compensation
89-16 development regulations - amends Schedule I area, yard,
and building requirements
89-26 amends § 2-17.3 of prior code, municipal utilities authority
- compensation
89-33 establishes regulations on private alarm systems
89-34 amends development regulations to incorporate freshwater
wetlands act; minimum lot areas affected by detention
facilities and steep slopes
89-40 amends private alarm system ordinance to designate an
officer in charge of enforcement
90-5 amends development regulations to establish
Transportation Improvement District I
90-6 amends development regulations to provide information
and location of wetlands; amends traffic and well test
analysis requirements;
90-7 amends § 5-3.2 of prior code, liquor license fees
90-10 requires display of building numbers on all structures
90-12 repeals and replaces § 2-7.3 of prior code, approving,
recording and paying claims
90-18 amends development regulations on non-conforming uses;
reconstruction; building and use regulations; amends
regulations in the R-1 and R-3 zones; parking
requirements;
90-20 amends development regulations on escrow fees and
amounts of escrow account
90-22 establishes regulations for animal control and licensing
90-28 amends development regulations to change the bonus
provision on certain housing; adds low and moderate
income use to various sections
V CODE ADOPTION V
1.01:5
Ordinance
Number
90-30 amends ords. 86-6 and 88-6, affordable housing board and
housing officer
90-34 amends § 2-20.3(b) of prior code, Township Administrator
— to eliminate residency requirement
91-4 regulates retail display of obscene material
91-9 amends development regulation to change minimum lot
standards
91-10 amends development regulations to change subdivision
variance escrow requirements
91-12 designates the Raritan Township Fire Company as primary
fire protection agency within Township boundaries
91-13 amends development regulations to change the definition
of a business office; establishes a non-conforming lot
record date; amends requirements for complete
applications; effect of final approval; establishes time
limits for "D type variances; establishes conditional
approval time limits
91-22 amends development regulations re: landscaping in
parking areas; changes schedule of area land and building
requirements
91-31 amends development regulations for side and rear yard
minimum distance between structures
91-32 amends pool/billiard room hours of operation, fees;
establishes minimum age and requires attendant
91-34 amends to increase the number of liquor licenses;
ownership requirements; location and proximity to certain
structures (schools, churches)
91-35 amends development regulations to add new hospital
district and regulations for permitted use
91-38 amends development regulations to change the schedule of
controls; establish maximum number of lots for a cluster
development
92-2 amends development regulations to provide alternate
members to the planning board
92-4 amends development regulations to establish regulations
on banners, buntings and other temporary signs
92-5 amends police regulations section on penalties
92-6 amends development regulations to clarify release of
performance guarantees; establish procedure for reduction
of performance guarantees; standards
V RARITAN CODE V
1.01:6
Ordinance
Number
92-7 establishes fees for duplication of tax bills and insufficient
funds checks (2.100)
92-9 prohibits signs within public rights-of-way and on public
property
92-11 establishes a mandatory recycling program (8.36)
92-19 adds § 5-6 to prior code, display of fetal alcohol syndrome
warning signs (5.08)
92-26 establishes the position and duties of the municipal
superintendent of public works
92-28 amends affordable housing regulation regarding rents and
duration of rent control
92-29 amends affordable housing ordinance to establish priority
tenant selection
93-2 amends § 3-1.1 or prior code, police regulations to redefine
litter (8.24)
93-17 amends time period for removal of snow and ice from
sidewalks and establishes enforcement and penalties
93-24 amends development regulations to change certain zoning
districts; modify the schedule of controls and area, yard
and building requirements; adds new highway business
zone and regulations
93-25 establishes curfew for minors for Halloween and
emergencies (9.12)
93-27 amends development regulations to delete certain
sections; proof of sanitary sewer availability
93-32 amending the penalty provisions for parking in a
handicapped zone
94-3 establishes parking prohibition on snow covered roads
(10.08)
94-5 amends development regulations to permit echo units and
establishes regulations on use
94-7 prohibits smoking in police/court facility (8.40)
94-11 changes name of industrial development committee to
economic development committee and establishes powers
and duties
94-15 regulates open space and recreation areas; repeals and
replaces ord. 82-5
94-36 amends development regulations to change the zones of
certain blocks and lots
V CODE ADOPTION V
1.01:7
Ordinance
Number
94-37 right to farm ordinance (16.12)
94-39 applies Title 39 Motor Vehicle Statute of New Jersey to
certain Township parks; establishes handicapped and
speed regulations
95-2 amends development regulations to establish and require
affordable housing development fees
95-10 amends code re: compensation for utilities authority
members (2.68)
95-11 establishes fees for certain Township services (2.100)
95-14 amends development regulations to grant exemptions from
affordable housing development fees on low and moderate
income units
95-18 prohibits tobacco vending machines (5.40)
95-29 prohibits smoking on board of education property (8.40)
95-31 amends development regulations to prohibit clothing
collections bins in all zones (16.64)
95-33 amends development regulations to establish conditional
use standards for accessory use apartments; fences, fence
heights; maximum petroleum tank sizes
95-35 prohibiting collections bins, enforcement and penalties
(8.12)
95-36 amends coin operated amusement devices to expand
definition of operator (5.16)
95-40 amends affordable housing ordinance to increase the
duration of affordable housing price controls; modifications
to marketing program (15.20)
95-41 amends development regulations on parking requirements
for certain uses
96-6 amends development regulations to require disbursing low
and moderate units
96-15 amends development regulations to add agricultural
research farm use and regulations
96-16 amends development regulations to revise area
requirements in the industrial zone
96-34 amends rules governing use of bicycles and rollerblades in
open space areas
96-35 amends development regulations re: maintenance of ontract
improvements to insure snow removal by developer;
performance guarantee
V RARITAN CODE V
1.01:8
Ordinance
Number
96-36 amends development ordinance (not adopted)
96-37 amends Halloween curfew for minors (9.12)
96-38 amends development regulations to permit surgical center
use in restricted industrial zone
97-5 amends title to fire marshal and creates new rapid entry
system requirements for fire safety
97-9 establishes fees for use of open space and recreation areas
(12.48)
97-13 establishes open space trust fund and advisory board
(2.88)
97-27 amends development regulations to repeal lot averaging
97-28 amends the uniform construction code re: composition of
department; amends fee schedule
97-32 amends section 8 of the open space trust fund ordinance
(2.88)
97-34 amends the prior code, liquor licenses to regulate location
and limitation of licenses (5.08)
97-40 amends rapid entry key lock systems ordinance to provide
for exemptions (8.16)
97-41 amends development regulations to provide for certain
exemptions to height limitations
97-47 establishes the position and requirements for municipal
public defender (2.64)
98-1 amends development regulations to add requirements and
standards for fire protection systems in developments
98-18 amends development regulations on requirements for
notice of hearings
98-20 amends development regulations to change zoning map
98-22 amends prior code to establish hours of sale for liquor
licenses (5.08)
98-24 establishes regulations and guidelines for tower/wrecker
operations within the Township (5.44)
98-29 amends affordable housing regulations re: calculation of
rents (15.20)
98-30 amends prior code re: alcoholic beverage control hours of
sale (5.08)
V CODE ADOPTION V
1.01:9
Ordinance
Number
98-31 amends development regulations re: schedule of controls;
eliminates cluster development in the R1 zone; modifies
echo unit requirements; amends non-conforming lot
requirements
98-33 amends prior code to provide for various amendments to
the administration section
98-36 amends development regulations to "grandfather"
complete applications prior to July 27, 1998 (16.24)
98-41 amends development regulations to add additional
properties in the R6-LM zone and establish area and bulk
requirements
98-42 amends, corrects and updates various sections of the prior
code; amends the uniform construction code to provide for
fee exemptions for certain development in the industrial
zone
98-47 amends development regulations to revise the zoning map
for certain lots; establishes a new conditional use and
regulations in low-intensity, highway-oriented, conditional
use; add new planned age-restricted adult community zone
and regulations
98-49 amends police regulations for maintenance of peace and
good order (9.04)
98-50 amends development regulations re: definitions,
membership of planning board; fees for percolation
witnesses; check list requirements; correction of ordinance
designations and requirements; permits for political signs
99-1 amends development regulations to change the zoning
map, establish new use of planned age-restricted, assisted
living district and standards (16.22, 16.43)
99-6 amends development regulations to require aquifer testing
and standards
99-11 amends construction code fee schedule
99-21 establishes a local historians committee (2.104)
99-26 establishes an agriculture advisory committee
99-35 amends development regulations to add permitted uses in
the R6-LM district
99-36 amends development regulations to permit collection of
additional developers' fees on granting of a "D" variance
permitting additional residential units
99-39 eliminates the local board of assistance
V RARITAN CODE V
1.01:10
Board of Health Ordinance Codification List
Ordinance
Date (#)
3-23-81 portable chemical toilets (17.16)
10-15-81 swimming pool code (17.36)
12-16-85 adds prior code §§ bh:8-1 — bh:8-7, food and beverage
vending machine code (17.28)
12-16-85 adds prior code §§ bh:9-1 — bh:9-7, operation and
maintenance of food and beverage vending machines
(17.28)
11-17-88 adds prior code §§ bh:10-1 — bh:10-3, application, license
and permit fees (17.44)
10-18-90 amends prior code §§ bh:4-1 — bh:4-9, sewage disposal
systems (17.12)
7-17-97 adds prior code §§ bh:11-1 — bh:11-4, permeability and
soil log testing (17.40)
VI. Ordinances Saved.
The adoption of this Code shall not effect, amend, or repeal any of the
following Ordinances, rights or obligations, and which Ordinances are
saved and classified as "Special Ordinances" and maintained in the
permanent records on file in the Office of the Township Clerk:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 31, 1999.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
Ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
V CODE ADOPTION VI
1.01:11
VII. Code Update, Publication and Certification.
The Township Clerk or the Clerk's designated representative shall update
the certified copy of the Code required to be maintained in the Office of the
Township Clerk and available for use of the Public. All changes in the Code
and all Ordinances adopted subsequent to December 31, 1999, which shall
be adopted specifically as part of this Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessment or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective Ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any Ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any Ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. All currently effective land development Ordinances.
O. Any Ordinance establishing or amending voluntary agricultural
districts and boundaries.
P. All currently effective Ordinances establishing or amending permit and
other fees for the uniform construction codes.
Q. All currently effective Ordinances regulating dogs and other animals.
R. All currently effective Ordinances regulating vehicles, traffic and
parking in the Township.
S. Any provision of an Ordinance or Resolution creating employments,
positions; or offices and fixing salaries and duties therefore which are
not provided in the Code hereby adopted, and which are not in conflict
or inconsistent therewith or any ordinance pertaining to the salaries
and compensation of municipal officials, officers and employees of the
Township.
T. Prosecution for Ordinance violations committed prior to the effective
date of this Code, any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective
date of this Code and the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted.
VI RARITAN CODE VII
1.01:12
Copies of the Code, or any Title, Chapter or portion thereof may be
purchased from the Clerk of the Township or through the Clerk's Office
upon the payment of the fees as established by the Township Committee.
The Township Clerk shall establish the procedures for the periodic
supplementation of the Code and provide for such supplements to be
available for purchase by the general public.
A copy of the Code as published, and as may be amended with supplements,
and thereafter certified to by the Seal of the Municipality through the Office
of the Township Clerk, shall be received in all Courts of the State of New
Jersey as evidence of the Ordinance contained in such compilation and
revision as fully as if the original Ordinances were produced.
VIII. Severability.
Each section of the Code and every part of each Section, as well as each
Section of any Ordinance in the Code or supplementation thereto is an
independent Section, and the holding of any Section or part thereof to be
unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to
effect the validity or constitutionality of any other Sections or parts thereof,
and to this end, the provisions of the Code and Ordinances therein, as may
be amended, are hereby declared to be severable.
IX. Effective Date.
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final adoption and
publication according to the Laws of the State of New Jersey.
First Reading: September 25, 2000
Final Adoption: October 11, 2000
Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1.04.010. Short Title. [Prior code § 1-1]
This book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Raritan," and is referred to herein as "this
Code."
§ 1.04.020. Definitions. [Prior code § 1-2]
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
CLERK or TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
VII CODE ADOPTION § 1.04.020
1.01:13
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the Township government
established or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the Township Government
assigned to such organizational unit by the Township Committee.
DEPARTMENT HEAD — The Township Administrator, if there be one
appointed, or a department head designated as such by ordinance; or on the
absence of either the immediate supervisor of an employee.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
including this Code, so long as it has been adopted by the procedure
required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it remains in force
and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity, acting
either for himself or herself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Raritan in the County of Hunterdon and
state of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE or COMMITTEE — The Governing Body of the
Township.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1.04.030. Construction. [Prior code § 1-3; amended during 1999
codification]
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Township are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
§ 1.04.020 RARITAN CODE § 1.04.030
1.01:14
"Writing" and "written" includes printing, typewriting and any other mode
of communication using paper or similar material which is in general use,
as well as legible handwriting.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it means the prevailing and
established time in effect in the state of New Jersey during any day in any
year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
§ 1.04.040. Severability. [Prior code § 1-4]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Code.
Chapter 1.08
GENERAL PENALTY
§ 1.08.010. Maximum Penalty. [Prior code § 3-9.1; amended by Ord.
92-5]
For violation of any provision of this chapter, any other chapter of this
Code, or any other ordinance of the Township where no specific penalty is
provided regarding the section or sections violated, the maximum penalty,
upon conviction, shall be one or more of the following: (1) a fine not
exceeding $1,000; or (2) imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days;
or (3) serving a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1.08.020. Separate Violations. [Prior code § 3-9.2]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Township exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1.08.030. Applicability. [Prior code § 3-9.3]
The maximum penalty stated in this chapter is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser penalty,
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a
particular case or violation.
§ 1.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 1.08.030
1.01:15
Title 2: Administration and Personnel
Chapter 2.04
TOWNSHIP OFFICERS GENERALLY
§ 2.04.010. Elective Officers. [Prior code § 2-2; amended by Ord.
98-33]
§ 2.04.020. Appointive Officers. [Prior code § 2-3; amended by Ord.
98-33]
Chapter 2.08
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE
A. Enumerated. The elective officers of the Township shall be the members
of the Township Committee.
B. Residence — Terms. All elected officers shall be residents of the
Township and except where otherwise provided by law shall hold office
for three years, beginning January 1st next succeeding their election.
No Township Officer, whether elected or appointed, shall hold over in
his or her office after the expiration of the term in which he or she was
elected or appointed. The Township Clerk shall hold office for three
years, the collector for four years, subject to any right of tenure
prescribed by the laws of New Jersey.
A. Enumeration — Residence. In addition to the officers to be elected, the
Township Committee may appoint and employ a Township Clerk, Tax
Assessor, Tax Collector, Administrator, Township Attorney, Chief
Financial Officer, Chief of Police, Construction Code Official, Court
Administrator, Township Treasurer, Township Engineer, Township
Planner, Superintendent of Public Works and Township Physician and
such other officers as it shall deem necessary and proper and consistent
with law. None of the appointed officers need be residents of the
Township.
B. Term. All appointive officers, except where otherwise provided by law,
shall hold office until January 1st next following their appointment.
C. Vacancies. Where a vacancy occurs in any appointive office the
Township Committee shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term,
except in the case where the Township Committee shall grant a leave of
absence to join any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States. No
officer shall hold over in his or her office after the expiration of the term
for which he or she has been appointed.
§ 1.08.030 RARITAN CODE § 2.08.010
1.01:16
§ 2.08.010. Legislative Power. [Prior code § 2-4.1]
All legislative power of the Township shall be exercised by the Township
Committee pursuant to law.
§ 2.08.020. Organizations. [Prior code § 2-4.2]
The Township Committee shall organize annually on the first day of January,
or during the first seven days of January, at which time it shall elect a
Mayor from among its members. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of
the Township Committee and perform such other duties as the Township
Committee may prescribe. In the absence of the Mayor, the Committee
shall elect a temporary presiding officer. One member of the Township
Committee may be designated Deputy Mayor and he or she shall preside in
the absence of the Mayor.
§ 2.08.030. Mayor — Powers. [Prior code § 2-4.3]
The Mayor shall have the power to make proclamations concerning holidays
and events of interest to the Township. He or she may from time to time
appoint citizens' committees to inquire into matters that are of interest to
the Township and he or she shall have such other appointment powers as
are conferred upon him or her by law. He or she shall have and exercise
the ceremonial power of the Township and he or she shall exercise every
other power usually exercised by Township Mayors and conferred upon him
or her by law.
§ 2.08.040. Meetings. [Prior code § 2-4.4; amended by Ord. 98-33]
§ 2.08.050. Meetings — Rules. [Prior code § 2-4.5]
All regular and special meetings of the Township Committee shall be open
to the public. The rules of procedure to be followed for the conduct of
business of the committee may be established by resolutions. Where not
otherwise provided, Robert's Rules of Order, revised, shall govern, and the
Township Attorney shall be parliamentarian ex officio.
A. Regular Meetings. The Township Committee shall meet annually on the
first day of January or during the first seven days of January in any year,
and shall conduct such other meetings or adjourned meetings at such
times and places as it may direct by resolution. All regular meetings
shall be held within the Township.
B. Special Meetings. A special meeting may be called at any time upon
request of a majority of the members of the Township Committee. The
request and call for special meeting shall specify the purpose of the
meeting, and no business shall be transacted at any special meeting
other than that specified. All special meetings shall be conducted in
accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.,
and as may be amended.
§ 2.08.010 CODE ADOPTION § 2.08.060
1.01:17
§ 2.08.060. Quorum. [Prior code § 2-4.7; amended by Ord. 98-33]
A majority of the whole number of members of the Township Committee
shall constitute a quorum.
§ 2.08.070. Voting. [Prior code § 2-4.8]
The vote upon every resolution or ordinance shall be taken by roll call and
the years and nays shall be entered on the minutes. All ordinances shall be
introduced, considered, published, reconsidered and enacted in the manner
provided by general law.
§ 2.08.080. Execution of Certain Documents; Authorization.
[Amended by Ord. 01-33]
All official documents on behalf of the Township of Raritan requiring
signature by the Chief Executive Officer shall be executed by the Mayor,
or in the Mayor's absence, the Deputy Mayor, and such execution shall be
witnessed and attested to by the Township Clerk. Such documents shall
include, but not be limited to, ordinances, resolutions, deeds, contracts, etc.
The authorization to execute the document on behalf of the Township of
Raritan shall be specifically stated in a formal, written resolution adopted
by the Township Committee, by a vote of a majority of those Township
Committee persons comprising a quorum for purpose of conducting an
official meeting.
Chapter 2.12
TOWNSHIP ADMINISTRATOR
§ 2.12.010. Statutory Authority, Creation of Position. [Amended by
Ord. 07-40]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 to 138 and N.J.S.A. 40A:63-7, there is created
the position of Township Administrator.
§ 2.12.020. Appointment; Compensation. [Amended by Ord. 07-40]
The Township Administrator shall be appointed by the majority vote of the
Township Committee. The term of office of the Township Administrator
shall be at the pleasure of the governing body. The Township Committee
shall fix the compensation of the Township Administrator in accordance
with the applicable Salary Ordinance. During the absence or disability of
the duly appointed Township Administrator, the Township Committee shall,
by resolution, appoint an officer or regular employee of the Township to
perform the duties of the Township Administrator during such absence or
disability. Absence or disability shall be limited to three months after which
time such absence or disability may be deemed a vacancy.
§ 2.08.060 RARITAN CODE § 2.12.030
1.01:18
§ 2.12.030. Removal From Office. [Amended by Ord. 07-40]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-138, the Township Administrator may be
removed by a 2/3 vote of the Township Committee, the resolution of removal
ordinarily to become effective three months after its adoption. The
Township Committee may provide, however, that the resolution shall have
immediate effect, provided that there shall be paid to the Administrator
forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary and his salary for the next three
calendar months following the adoption of the resolution.
§ 2.12.040. Residency Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 07-40]
The Township Administrator shall become a resident of the Township within
six months after his appointment and shall remain a resident of the
Township while so employed; provided, however, that the residency
requirements of this subsection may be waived by a vote of four of the five
members of the Township Committee when found to be in the best interest
of the Township.
§ 2.12.050. Qualifications Required. [Amended by Ord. 07-40]
The Township Administrator shall be chosen on the basis of his executive
and administrative abilities and qualifications with special regard to
education, training and previous experience. No elected member of the
Township Committee may receive such appointment during his term of
office.
§ 2.12.060. Chief Administrative Officer. [Amended by Ord. 07-40]
The Township Administrator shall serve as the chief administrative officer
of the Township, and at all times be under the supervision and control of the
Mayor and Township Committee, as a whole, and shall be responsible to the
Mayor and Township Committee for all actions relevant to the duties and
responsibilities of such office to the extent not prohibited by law.
§ 2.12.070. Duties and Responsibilities of the Township
Administrator. [Amended by Ord. 07-40]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:63-7, the duties and responsibilities of the
Township Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, coordination
of operations, activities and administration of the departments, divisions,
offices, boards and agencies of the Township government; exchanging and
disseminating information and generally advising and consulting with the
Township Committee without infringing upon the lawful powers and duties
of other officers, boards and departments. In addition, it shall be the duty of
the Township Administrator, under the control and supervision of the mayor
and Township Committee, and to the extent not prohibited by law, to have
the following specific duties and responsibilities:
A. Attend all meetings of the Township Committee as required, with the
right to participate in all discussions, but without the right to vote.
§ 2.12.030 CODE ADOPTION § 2.12.070
1.01:19
Work with and assist the Township Clerk in the Clerk's preparation of
the agenda for each meeting of the Township Committee, and supply
facts pertinent thereto to the Township Committee preceding each
meeting.
B. Advise the Township Committee on policy decisions and carry out all
policies established by the Township Committee.
C. Ensure that all laws and all acts of the Township Committee subject to
enforcement by the administrator or by offices and employees subject
to the administrator's direction and supervision are executed faithfully.
D. Serve as liaison between the Township Committee and the Township's
departments, boards and offices, ensuring that employees are informed
of the Township Committee's activities and requirements, and that the
Township Committee is informed of the programs, needs and
achievements of the Township.
E. Keep the Township Committee adequately informed of Township
activities. Prepare and submit to the Township Committee an annual
complete written report of the Township affairs and the administrative
activities of the Township for the preceding year, which shall include a
report from each department head, as soon as possible after the close of
the calendar year. Prepare and submit such other reports, either in
writing or orally, as the Township Committee shall request, and make
such recommendations to the Township Committee as he deems
necessary and advisable for the welfare of the Township.
F. Direct, coordinate and supervise the administration of all departments,
offices and agencies of the Township, except as otherwise provided by
law.
G. Supervise the preparation of and recommend annually to the Township
Committee an operating budget, a capital budget, and a detailed fiveyear
capital plan. The recommended operating budget shall include
projections of revenues and expenses and a projected tax rate and the
capital budget shall include funding sources, and an explanatory
budget message. A draft of the proposed budgets and capital plan shall
be submitted to the Township Committee by December 1st of each year.
H. Work with and assist the Chief Financial Officer in oversight of all
financial affairs of the Township and specifically administer the budget
after its adoption by the Township Committee, and implement the work
programs contained in the budget. In conjunction with such oversight,
maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations, work
programs and cost of municipal services.
I. Coordinate with the Chief Financial Officer to keep the Township
Committee fully advised as to the current financial condition and future
needs of the Township, make such recommendations concerning the
affairs of the Township as the administrator deems appropriate, and
§ 2.12.070 RARITAN CODE § 2.12.070
1.01:20
submit periodic reports, either in writing or orally, on the condition of
the Township finances.
J. Review and recommend all bills and vouchers for payment prior to final
approval by the Township Committee.
K. Negotiate contracts for the Township as authorized and directed by and
subject to the approval of the Township Committee, and ensure that all
terms and conditions favorable to the Township, in any statute or
contract are kept faithfully and performed and, upon knowledge of any
violation, immediately make such violation known to the Township
Committee.
L. Establish and oversee a proper purchasing system; approve all
specifications for goods and services to be purchased by the Township
by public bid for formal solicitation of proposals, except for the
technical portions of specifications prepared by any licensed
professional; purchase all materials, supplies, equipment, and labor
under contract required by any department, office or agency of the
Township; and approve all bills and vouchers for payment prior to final
approval by the Township Committee. The Township Administrator, or
his or her designee, is designated as the "purchasing agent," as such
term is defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3(a),
the Administrator, or his or her designee, as the purchasing agent is
authorized to award contracts under the bid threshold for nonqualified
purchasing agents as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3(a), and where the
Administrator, or his or her designee, is a qualified purchasing agent,
then under the bid threshold set forth for qualified purchasing agents in
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3(c) as may be raised by the governor from time to time.
The Administrator, or his or her designee, shall comply with all
requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et
seq.) and all applicable regulations. [Amended 5-21-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-17]
M. Serve as the Township's director of human resources, with
responsibility to oversee the employment practices of the Township's
departments and agencies, and to establish and maintain effective
personnel practices and maintain appropriate records of all employees.
N. Investigate the affairs of any officer or department at the initiation of
the Township Committee and report to the committee on the work of all
departments. Recommend a comprehensive program of personnel
policies and procedures for approval by the Township Committee that
may be codified in an Employment or Personnel Manual, and once the
program or manual is adopted, shall review it annually and recommend
any appropriate changes. In this role, the administrator shall develop
and oversee a comprehensive training program for Township
employees; develop a program to recognize Township employees for
exceptional skills and achievements; oversee the Township's labor
relations activities and be included in all labor negotiations; and advise
department heads on the handling of grievances. The Township
§ 2.12.070 CODE ADOPTION § 2.12.070
1.01:21
Administrator shall develop and implement a process for evaluations
of the performance of all Township employees. The Township
Administrator shall either perform or assure such evaluations are
conducted annually, except when prohibited by law or otherwise. A
member of the Township Committee may inspect at any time the
written report on any individual employee from the annual evaluation
performed by the Township Administrator.
O. Hire and remove all employees of the Township, with the advice and
consent of the Township Committee, consistent with the relevant
provisions of union contracts between the Township and its employees,
except where such action, by statute, shall be the action of the
Township Committee. Discipline all employees of the Township,
including suspension of employees consistent with the personnel rules
of the Township as adopted by the Township Committee, except where
such action, by statute, shall be the action of the Township Committee.
P. Make recommendations concerning the nature and location of
Township improvements as determined by the Township Committee.
Q. Delegate to any department head or staff member such of his powers as
he may deem necessary for efficient administration.
R. Authorize any transfer of supplies, materials and equipment between
departments and offices and, with the authorization of the Township
Committee, sell surplus, obsolete, unused or waste supplies, materials
and equipment.
S. Ensure implementation of technology systems and responsible
technology practices within the Township.
T. Receive and deal with requests for, and complaints about, Township
services that cannot be dealt with by the operating departments and
agencies. The Administrator shall keep a record of all such requests and
complaints, and their disposition, and shall report on them to the
Township Committee quarterly.
U. Receive and reply to all inquiries and complaints concerning Township
business and provide information and assistance in respect thereto and,
in addition, review, suggest a method for handling and follow up on all
requests for information.
V. Review and supervise the Township's insurance program and policies.
W. Advise the Township Committee of actions of other units of government
of importance to the Township.
X. Keep the Township Committee informed as to federal aid projects and
state aid projects and any other aid programs for which the Township
may qualify.
Y. Represent the Township in its relations with the federal government,
state, county, and other municipalities and assess the Township's
§ 2.12.070 RARITAN CODE § 2.12.070
1.01:22
§ 2.12.080. Position of Administrator to Be Full Time. [Amended by
Ord. 07-40]
The Township Administrator shall devote full time to the interests of the
Township.
§ 2.12.090. Participation in Political Campaigns Within the
Township. [Amended by Ord. 07-40]
The Township Administrator shall not engage in any organized political
campaigns within the Township.
§ 2.12.100. Administrator May Be Chief Financial Officer. [Amended
by Ord. 07-40]
The Township Administrator may also be the Chief Financial Officer,
provided he is qualified pursuant to statutory law.
§ 2.12.110. Relationship With Township Committee. [Amended by
Ord. 07-40]
The Township Committee shall deal with administration of Township affairs
primarily through the Township Administrator. Individual members of the
Township Committee shall not give direction or orders to any Township
employee without the involvement of the Township Administrator, unless
by agreement of the Township Committee as a whole, or in an emergency
circumstance; however, individual members of the Township Committee
may discuss matters with and gather information through and from
Township employees without the necessity of involving the Township
Administrator. The Township Committee shall at least annually review the
performance of the Township Administrator, which review shall take place
during a closed session portion of a Township Committee meeting.
§ 2.12.120. Powers of Officials Not Derogated. [Amended by Ord.
07-40]
Nothing in this chapter shall derogate from the powers and duties of the
elective, appointive or other officials of the Township, or of the boards
and commissions thereof established pursuant to law, nor authorize the
Township Administrator to exercise the powers and duties of the elected
and appointed officials of the Township.
Chapter 2.16
TOWNSHIP CLERK
interest in contracts, franchises and other business transactions, or as
directed by the Township Committee.
Z. Perform such other duties as may be required by ordinance, resolution
or direction of the Township Committee.
§ 2.12.070 CODE ADOPTION § 2.16.010
1.01:23
§ 2.16.010. Clerk of Township Committee. [Prior code § 2-5.1]
The Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Township Committee. He or she
shall attend and keep the minutes of all meetings of the Committee, which
minutes shall be signed by the officer presiding at the meeting and by the
Clerk.
§ 2.16.020. Record of Ordinances and Resolutions. [Prior code
§ 2-5.2]
§ 2.16.030. Custodian of Records. [Prior code § 2-5.3]
The Clerk shall have custody of and safely keep all records, books and
documents of the Township, except those committed by ordinance to any
other office or transferred thereto by the Township Committee. He or
she shall, on request and the payment of the fees prescribed therefor by
resolution of the Township Committee for the use of the Township, furnish
a certified copy of any such paper in his or her custody under the corporate
seal of the Township.
§ 2.16.040. Corporate Seal. [Prior code § 2-5.4]
The Clerk shall cause the corporate seal of the Township to be affixed to
instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or resolution of
the Township Committee or when necessary to exemplify any document
on record in his or her office, or to certify any act or paper which from
the records in his or her office appears to have been a public act of the
Township or a public document. He or she shall not affix the seal or cause or
permit it to be affixed to any other instrument, writing or other paper unless
required by law or ordinance.
A. The Clerk shall record all ordinances of a permanent character in books
to be provided for that purpose. After each ordinance he or she shall
also record and certify the proof of publication thereof as required by
law. Each ordinance so recorded shall be signed by the Mayor and the
Clerk, who shall attest that it was fully adopted upon a date stated, and
when so signed the recorded copy shall be deemed to be a public record
of the ordinance. Any omission by the Clerk or the Mayor to sign or
certify shall not impair or affect the validity of any ordinance which has
been duly adopted.
B. At the close of each year the Clerk, with the advice and assistance of the
Township Attorney, shall bind, compile or codify all the ordinances, or
true copies thereof, which then remain in force and effect. He or she
shall also properly index the record books, compilation or codification
of ordinances. These services may be physically accomplished by
contract with a company engaged in such business.
§ 2.16.010 RARITAN CODE § 2.16.050
1.01:24
§ 2.16.050. Insurance — Surety Bonds — Contracts. [Prior code
§ 2-5.5]
The Clerk, subject to the supervision of the Township Committee, shall:
§ 2.16.060. Administrative Rules and Regulations — Filing and
Publication. [Prior code § 2-5.6]
The clerk shall maintain a current compilation of all such rules and
regulations which shall be available for public inspection in his or her
office during business hours. No rule or general regulations made by any
department, officer, agency or authority of the Township, except such as
relates to the organization or internal management of the municipal
government or a part thereof, shall take effect until it is filed with the Clerk.
§ 2.16.070. Oaths. [Prior code § 2-5.7]
The Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths in all matters
concerning Township business.
§ 2.16.080. Notice to Officers. [Prior code § 2-5.8]
The Township Clerk shall, within five days after the Township Committee
has appointed or elected any officer, whether to fill a vacancy or otherwise,
cause to be delivered to or left at the place of abode of the person so elected
or appointed a written notice of his or her election or appointment, and
within the same time shall file a certified copy of the record or the election
or appointment with the Clerk of the County.
A. Be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds furnished by
or on account of any officer or employee, except his or her own bond
which shall be placed in the custody of the Treasurer, of all insurance
policies upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the
Township or to protect it against any claim, demand or liability
whatsoever; and all formal contracts for work, labor, services, supplies,
equipment and materials to which the Township may be a party;
B. Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the Township as obligee, or any other form of security given
by any contractor, subdivision developer or other person on account of
work done or to be done in or for the Township;
C. Have custody of all leases of property owned by the Township;
D. Report to the Township Committee annually, at such time as it may
require, on the coverage, expiration date and premium of each surety
bond and contract of insurance; the nature and terms of outstanding
leases, the rent reserved by each and their respective expiration dates.
§ 2.16.050 CODE ADOPTION § 2.16.090
1.01:25
§ 2.16.090. Administrative Duties. [Prior code § 2-5.9]
Until such time as an Administrator is appointed, the Clerk shall have the
following administrative duties:
§ 2.16.100. Additional Duties. [Prior code § 2-5.10]
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed
by ordinance, and subject to the supervision and direction of the Township
Committee, the clerk shall:
§ 2.16.110. Deputy Township Clerk. [Prior code § 2-5.11]
There is created the Office of Deputy Township Clerk. The Deputy Township
Clerk, at such times as may be directed by the Township Clerk or Township
Committee, shall act as Clerk to the Township Committee and keep a record
of its proceedings, perform all other acts as may be provided by law and
shall execute all documents required by law or ordinance to be executed
by the Clerk and affix the seal of the Township thereto whenever required.
The Deputy Clerk shall execute such documents by signing the name of the
Clerk followed by the word "By" and the Deputy Clerk's own name and title.
A. Provide a liaison between the Township Committee and the
departments, boards and officials of the municipal government and
other boards and bodies carrying out municipal functions;
B. Coordinate the functions of all departments and officers;
C. Advise the Township Committee on all matters of administrative
organization, practices, personnel policies and purchasing;
D. Assist the Township Committee in the preparation of the budget;
E. Advice the Township Committee on all background matters as an aid to
the establishment of policy and the carrying out of the functions of
municipal government, and advise the Township Committee and other
municipal officials on matters affecting the public interest;
F. Receive, distribute and follow up requests for information and
complaints from citizens on all manner of problems, and keep the
Township Committee informed on such matters.
A. Perform all the functions required of Municipal Clerks by the General
Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and any other law or
ordinance;
B. Administer the provisions of Township ordinances with reference to the
licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are required
by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk;
C. Have such other different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to him or her by
the Township Committee.
§ 2.16.090 RARITAN CODE § 2.16.110
1.01:26
The Deputy Township Clerk shall act in the place and stead of the Township
Clerk only in the absence of the Township Clerk when he or she is unable to
perform the duties of the office.
§ 2.16.120. Township Clerk Authorized to Issue Raffle and Bingo
Licenses. [Amended by Ord. 06-36]
The Municipal Clerk of the Township of Raritan is hereby authorized and
delegated the authority to approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses
to be held in the Township of Raritan, County of Hunterdon, New Jersey.
Chapter 2.20
TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY
§ 2.20.010. Appointment. [Prior code § 2-10.1]
The Township Attorney shall be appointed by the Township Committee. He
or she shall be an attorney at law of New Jersey, but need not be a resident
of the Township. The Attorney shall be paid his or her reasonable fees and
charges.
§ 2.20.020. Powers and Duties. [Prior code § 2-10.2]
The Attorney shall give all Legal counsel and advice required by the
Township Committee or any member thereof and shall in general serve as
the legal advisor to the Township Committee on all matters of Township
business. He or she shall represent the Township in all judicial and
administrative proceedings in which the Township or any of its officers or
agencies not separately represented may be a party or have an interest. In
furtherance of his or her general powers and duties, but without limiting
them, the Attorney shall:
A. Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the Township;
B. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the Township;
C. With the approval of the Township Committee, compromise or settle
litigation in which the Township is involved;
D. Render written opinions upon questions of law submitted to him or her
by the Township Committee or any member thereof with respect to its
official powers and duties;
E. Supervise and direct the work of any additional attorneys and technical
and professional assistants the Township Committee may authorize for
special or regular employment in or for the Township.
§ 2.16.110 CODE ADOPTION § 2.20.020
1.01:27
Chapter 2.24
TOWNSHIP PROSECUTOR
§ 2.24.010. Establishment. [Prior code § 2-12A.1]
The office of Prosecutor of the Flemington-Raritan joint municipal court is
established.
§ 2.24.020. Compensation — Sharing of Costs. [Prior code
§ 2-12A.2]
§ 2.24.030. Term. [Prior code § 2-12A.3]
The Prosecutor shall serve for a term of one year from January 1st of each
year or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 2.24.040. Duties. [Prior code § 2-12A.4]
The Prosecutor shall appear and participate in all contested cases pending
in the Flemington-Raritan joint municipal court wherein a police officer of
the Borough of Flemington or the Township of Raritan is the complaining
witness.
Chapter 2.28
DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING, PLANNING AND ZONING
§ 2.28.010. Establishment. [Amended by Ord. 2016-26]
There is hereby established a Department of Engineering, Planning and
Zoning within the Township which shall include (i) the Office of the
Township Engineer, who may also serve as the Township Planner and
Township Zoning Officer, and (ii) the Office of the Land Use Enforcement
Officer. The Department Head shall be the Township Engineer.
§ 2.28.020. Qualifications. [Amended by Ord. 2016-26]
The Township Engineer shall serve as the Township Engineer, Township
Planner and Township Zoning Officer. He or she shall be a licensed
professional engineer of the State of New Jersey in good standing, and
A. The salary of the Prosecutor and the person to hold such office shall be
determined annually by joint agreement between the common Council
of the Borough of Flemington and the Township Committee of the
Township of Raritan.
B. The Borough of Flemington and the Township of Raritan shall share the
salary of the Prosecutor and all other costs of such office on the same
basis as other operational costs for the court are shared.
§ 2.20.020 RARITAN CODE § 2.28.020
1.01:28
with sufficient education, knowledge and experience to carry out the duties
of the office. He or she may also hold a regularly issued New Jersey
professional planner's license and may also be a licensed surveyor of the
State of New Jersey. Alternatively, the Township Engineer may designate
someone else to conduct survey work as long as such person is licensed as a
surveyor by the State of New Jersey and is in good standing. Such surveyor
shall be approved by the Township Committee. Moreover, the Township
Engineer may select a consulting planner with the approval of the Township
Committee.
§ 2.28.030. Duties and Responsibilities. [Amended by Ord. 2016-26;
2-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-2]
The Township Engineer shall perform all of the duties, presently described
by the statutes of New Jersey and any ordinances adopted, as may be
required to be performed by the Township Engineer. In addition to that, the
Township Engineer shall perform the following duties:
A. Prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans, designs and specifications for
public works and improvements undertaken by the Township, either on
force account or by public contract.
B. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and control
records with respect to public works and facilities owned or operated
by the Township.
C. Be responsible for the review and comment on plans prepared for
driveway permits, for the issuance of such permits and for the on-site
inspection of these driveways during construction.
D. Be responsible for the issuance of road opening permits and for
inspection during construction.
E. Perform inspection of permeability tests or the supervision thereof and
review plans prepared for on-lot disposal systems.
F. Be responsible for enforcing the rules and regulations for the
Floodplain Ordinance and the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Ordinance throughout the Township and for issuing floodplain
certifications when requested.1
G. Provide technical consultation for projects to be undertaken for
playgrounds, parks and recreation and prepare or cause to be prepared
and then review plans and specifications for the Township Parks and
Recreation Commission.
H. Consult with the Superintendent of Public Works and Township
Administrator, inspect the repair and maintenance of existing Township
roads from an engineering standpoint and provide technical
engineering advice when required.
1. Editor's Note: See Title 16, Art. V, Flood Control, and Art. IV, Soil Erosion.
§ 2.28.020 CODE ADOPTION § 2.28.030
1.01:29
§ 2.28.040. Planning Consultant. [Amended by Ord. 2016-26]
A Planning Consultant may be appointed by the Township Administrator
with the advice and consent of the Township Committee. The Planning
Consultant shall be appointed on the basis of administrative abilities and
qualifications with special regard to education, training and experience
in land use planning and related governmental affairs. The Planning
Consultant shall hold a valid New Jersey professional planner's license, and
I. Respond to citizen complaints, inspect problem areas and make
recommendations for the solutions to these problems.
J. Be designated as engineering consultant to the Township Planning
Board, thereby reviewing plans submitted to the Planning Board for site
improvements, subdivisions, etc.; provide liaison with applicants, their
engineers, architects, etc., advising and instructing them about
Township requirements; and attend Planning Board meetings and
prepare and present reports and comments on applications before the
Board for review.
K. Determine the effects of proposed development on the overall
ecological and environmental condition of the Township and prepare
environmental impact statements for the Township when required.
L. Be responsible for the inspection of all ongoing construction projects
within the Township from start of construction to final approval or
acceptance.
M. Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other
Township departments as needed. Attend Township Committee
meetings and make reports as required.
N. Assist the Township in the preparation of new ordinances or revisions to
existing ordinances, when required for engineering information or data.
O. Keep informed of all recent rulings by other governmental agencies
which have a direct effect on the practices or functions of the Township.
P. Assist with the planning of long-range capital improvement programs
and with the overall planning of future development within the
Township.
Q. Assist the Township Committee in establishing a yearly budget and
provide engineering cost estimates when required.
R. Upon the termination of his or her service, surrender all papers,
documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to the
administration of his or her duties.
S. Update the Official Tax Map yearly to reflect subdivisions and
conveyance of land.
T. Maintain all parks, recreation and all other municipal facilities.
§ 2.28.030 RARITAN CODE § 2.28.040
1.01:30
shall perform those functions as directed by the Township Engineer. No
elected official of the Township may receive appointment as the Planning
Consultant during his or her term of office.
Chapter 2.32
MUNICIPAL SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
§ 2.32.010. Duties. [Prior code § 2-11A.1; amended by Ord. 92-26;
Ord. 98-33]
The Superintendent of Public Works shall have the following
responsibilities:
§ 2.32.020. Responsibility to Township Administrator. [Prior code
§ 2-11A.2; amended by Ord. 98-33]
The Public Works Superintendent shall report to the Township
Administrator. He or she shall meet with the Township Administrator on
a periodic basis to report on the responsibilities under his or her direct
supervision. He or she shall receive authorization from the Township
Administrator before hiring new employees.
A. Supervise and administer the activities of the Township Road
Departments;
B. Supervise all Road Department personnel;
C. Operate and maintain all Road Department equipment;
D. Prepare a priority list of road repairs;
E. Coordinate the work of the Road Department personnel;
F. Be responsible for the acquisition of the necessary supplies and
equipment;
G. Prepare an annual budget;
H. Be responsible for snow removal;
I. Maintain roads, parks and all public property in the Township;
J. Supervise the care and maintenance of public buildings and public
places;
K. Direct the Township recycling program as its primary supervisor with
the assistance of a recycling coordinator who shall report to the
municipal Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 2.28.040 CODE ADOPTION § 2.32.030
1.01:31
§ 2.32.030. Tenure. [Prior code § 2-11A.4; amended by Ord. 92-26]
A person holding office, position or employment as the full-time municipal
Superintendent of public Works in the Township, who has held the office,
position or employment continuously for five years or more shall continue
to hold the office, position or employment, during good behavior and
efficiency, and shall not be removed therefrom for political or other reasons
except for good cause upon written charges filed with the Municipal Clerk
and after a public, fair and impartial hearing. No municipal Superintendent
of Public Works shall obtain or be granted any rights of tenure hereunder
unless he or she meets the qualifications set forth herein and the Township
Committee passes an ordinance authorizing that tenure be granted to him
or her. The person may be retired when he or she shall have attained 70
years of age.
Chapter 2.36
CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIAL
§ 2.36.010. Appointment. [Prior code § 2-9.1; amended during 1999
codification; during 3-00 supplement]
The Township Committee shall appoint a Construction Code Official to serve
for a term of four years. Prior to his or her appointment, he or she shall be
qualified by training and experience in the duties of a Construction Code
Official.
§ 2.36.020. Duties. [Prior code § 2-9.2; amended during 1999
codification]
The Construction Code Official of the Township shall have the following
powers and duties in addition to duties specifically assigned to him or her
from time to time. He or she shall:
A. Enforce the provisions of the building code and of all other ordinances
of the Township and laws of the state relative to the construction,
maintenance, use or demolition of buildings and appurtenances
thereto;
B. Report to the Township Committee at the first regular meeting thereof
each month the number and nature of all permits issued by him or her
during the preceding month. The report shall be in writing and shall
include an itemized statement of all fees received by him or her during
the preceding month and delivered to the Township Treasurer, and
receipts therefor;
C. Promptly examine all applications for permits and all plans, drawings
and specifications submitted to him or her in connection therewith and
shall, upon payment of the required fee, promptly issue all permits for
work supposed to be done and shown to comply with all applicable
codes, ordinances, regulations and state laws;
§ 2.32.030 RARITAN CODE § 2.36.020
1.01:32
Chapter 2.40
LAND USE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
§ 2.40.010. Establishment. [Prior code § 2-24.6(a); amended during
1999 codification; Ord. 2016-26]
The office of Land Use Enforcement Officer is established separate and
apart from the Construction Code Official and as a division of the
Department of Engineering, Planning and Zoning.
§ 2.40.020. Qualifications and Requirements. [Prior code
§ 2-24.6(b); amended by Ord. 2016-26]
The Land Use Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Township
Committee upon his or her qualification involving administrative ability,
upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer, and with regard to
education, prior training and experience in land use matters, zoning matters
D. From time to time inspect all work being done under any permit issued
by him or her and revoke any such permit when the work covered
thereby shall not be prosecuted in accordance with the terms of the
permit and the approved plans and specifications, and he or she shall
likewise revoke forthwith any permit issued by him or her when the
work is prosecuted in violation of any of the terms or provisions of the
building code or any other ordinance of the Township or in violation of
the laws of the state of New Jersey. Revocation shall be subject to
appeal;
E. From time to time, as in his or her judgment occasion may require,
inspect any building or structure of any kind whatsoever, the safety of
which may appear to him or her to be doubtful, or the continued use of
which may appear to be dangerous to persons using or occupying the
same, and require the owner of such building or structure to make such
changes and take such precautions in and about the same as may be
required by law or by ordinance or as he or she may deem advisable for
the safety of persons using or occupying same; and he or she shall,
where he or she may deem it necessary in the interest of such buildings
or structures, direct;
F. Keep safely and in an orderly manner all applications for permits,
together with all plans and specifications accompanying the same, and
copies of all permits and notices issued by him or her; all such
applications, plans, specifications, and copies of permits and notices
shall be open to public inspection during established business hours.
In addition to his or her other duties, the Construction Code Official
shall be responsible for supervision of the repair and maintenance of all
public buildings and grounds.
§ 2.36.020 CODE ADOPTION § 2.40.020
1.01:33
and related fields of governmental enforcement of zoning and planning
ordinances.
§ 2.40.030. Duties and Responsibilities. [Prior code § 2-24.6(c);
amended by Ord. 2016-26]
The Land Use Enforcement Officer is responsible for enforcing the
provisions of the zoning ordinance, except where those duties are assigned
specifically to the Township Engineer in his capacity as the Township
Planner, and charged with the responsibility of the enforcing provisions
of the property maintenance ordinance and other such ordinances as
designated by ordinances, including those provisions established by the
Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment in their resolutions
approving development proposals and site plans regarding the issuance of
building permits and certificates of occupancy. The Land Use Enforcement
Officer shall also act as Deputy Zoning Permit Officer at such times as
directed by the Township Engineer. In addition to those duties, the Land Use
Enforcement Officer, from time to time, may be directed by the Township
Engineer or the Township Committee by ordinance specific duties and
responsibilities concerning the enforcement of provisions of the land
subdivision ordinance or other ordinances relating to planning and zoning.
§ 2.40.040. Compensation. [Prior code § 2-24.6(d); amended by Ord.
2016-26]
The Land Use Enforcement Officer shall be paid compensation for the
services performed in accordance with an agreement with the Township
Committee.
Chapter 2.44
(RESERVED)
Chapter 2.48
FINANCE OFFICER
§ 2.48.010. Established. [Amended by Ord. 89-10]
The Township establishes the position of Chief Financial Officer to perform
all duties of the position as enumerated in the Chief Financial Officer's job
description.
Chapter 2.52
INDEMNIFICATION OF MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS
§ 2.40.020 RARITAN CODE § 2.52.010
1.01:34
§ 2.52.010. Cost of Defense in Civil Actions — Township
Responsibility. [Prior code § 2-25.1]
Subject to the limitations set forth in Section 2.52.030, whenever any civil
action has been or shall be brought against the Mayor or any member of the
Township Committee, Board of Adjustment including alternate members or
Planning Board (including alternate members), or a person formerly holding
said office, for any action or omission arising out of or in the course of the
performance of the duties of such office, the Township shall defray all costs
of defending such action, including reasonable counsel fees and expenses,
together with costs of appeal, if any, and shall save harmless and protect
such persons from any financial loss resulting from the litigation.
§ 2.52.020. Indemnification Not Always Required. [Prior code
§ 2-25.2]
The municipality may defend and indemnify all other municipal officials and
employees for civil action to the same extent as the officials mentioned in
Section 2.52.010, but it is not required to do so.
§ 2.52.030. Township Not Responsible When. [Prior code § 2-25.3]
The Township Committee shall not be responsible to defend and indemnify
any of the officials mentioned in the Section 2.52.010 if it determines that:
§ 2.52.040. Inapplicability. [Prior code § 2-25.4]
This chapter shall not apply to any criminal action.
§ 2.52.050. Manner of Defense. [Prior code § 2-25.5]
If the Township Committee determines to provide a defense, it shall be done
by:
A. The act or omission complained of was not within the scope of
employment or authority;
B. The act or omission complained of was because of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice;
C. The municipality has obtained an insurance policy which insures the
officials, and the insurance company has agreed to defend the cause of
action and to indemnify the municipal official or officials and the
municipality. The municipality shall not be liable for any fees, expenses,
indemnification or costs other than any minimum deductible amount
which the insurance policy does not cover;
D. The municipal official has failed to deliver to the Business
Administrator, within 10 days of the time he or she is served with any
summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading, the original
or a copy of such document, or thereafter fails to cooperate with the
Township in the defense of the matter.
§ 2.52.010 CODE ADOPTION § 2.52.050
1.01:35
Chapter 2.56
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 2.56.010. Establishment — Composition. [Prior code § 2-8.1;
amended by Ord. 89-3]
The Police Department of the Township is established and shall consist of a
Chief of Police and employees as the Township Committee may from time to
time appoint including, but not limited to, captains, lieutenants, sergeants
and police officers, probationary police officers, police matrons, school
crossing guards, traffic control officers, secretaries and clerical personnel.
§ 2.56.020. Appointment. [Prior code § 2-8.2]
All members of the Police Department shall be appointed by the Township
Committee to hold office as provided by law. No person shall be appointed
Chief of Police unless he or she shall have served as a member of the
Department for a period of three years.
§ 2.56.030. (Reserved)2
§ 2.56.040. Promulgation of Rules and Regulations. [Prior code
§ 2-8.4]
The Township Committee may establish by resolution and may from time
to time amend and repeal by resolution such rules and regulations as it
may deem necessary for the government and efficient working of the entire
Department. The rules and regulations, when adopted, shall be posted by
the Police Chief within five days after their adoption in the room in the
municipal building assigned to the Police Department, and a copy thereof
delivered to each member of the Department.
§ 2.56.050. Qualifications. [Prior code § 2-8.5]
Each applicant shall have the qualifications prescribed by the laws of the
state of New Jersey pertaining thereto. No person shall be given or accept
a permanent appointment as a police officer in the Township unless such
person has first been given a probationary or temporary appointment to
such office for a period of not longer than one year, and has successfully
completed a police training course at a school approved and authorized by
A. The insurance company attorney;
B. Hiring an attorney of its choice and paying the fees directly;
C. Reimbursing the municipal official for reasonable attorney's fees
expended.
2. Editor’s Note: Former § 2.56.030, Public Safety Committee (§ 2-8.3 of the prior code), was
repealed 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-02.
§ 2.52.050 RARITAN CODE § 2.56.050
1.01:36
the Police Training Commission in the Department of Law and Public Safety
of the state of New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:17B-68.
§ 2.56.060. Oath or Affirmation of Allegiance. [Prior code § 2-8.6]
Each member of the Police Department shall, before entering upon the
performance of his or her duties, take and subscribe an oath or affirmation
to bear true faith and allegiance to the government established in this state,
to support the Constitutions of the United States of America and the state
of New Jersey and to faithfully, impartially and justly discharge and perform
all the duties of his or her office, which oath or affirmation shall be filed
with the Clerk.
§ 2.56.070. Chief of Police. [Prior code § 2-8.7; amended by Ord.
10-3; 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-02]
A. The Chief of Police shall be the executive head of the Police Department
and shall be responsible to the appropriate authority and, ultimately, to
the Township Committee for the efficiency and routine day-to-day
operations thereof. Should the Chief of Police be unavailable, the Chief
of Police shall designate an officer to carry out and be responsible for all
of the functions of the Chief of Police. If the Chief of Police is
unavailable and has not designated an officer to perform the Chief's
duties, the Township Committee shall designate an officer to carry out
and be responsible for all of the functions of the Chief of Police during
the period the Chief of Police is unavailable.
B. The control and discipline of the Police Department of the Township and
of its members shall be vested in the Chief of Police, and he or she shall
enforce all rules and regulations and any general and special orders or
instructions not inconsistent with those of the Township Committee
which he or she may from time to time promulgate. Should the Chief of
Police deem any violation by a member of the Department to be
sufficiently flagrant, he or she shall report it to the Township Committee
with his or her recommendations for the filing of charges.
C. The Chief of Police, with the assistance of the other members of the
Department detailed for the purpose, shall keep a complete record on
the work of the Department, and the Chief of Police shall report in
writing or in person to the Township Committee at its first regular
meeting in each month on all matters of importance pertaining to the
Department, making such recommendations as in his or her opinion will
increase the efficiency of the Department.
D. The Chief of Police shall recommend to the Township Committee from
time to time the purchase of new equipment or the repair or
rearrangement of such old equipment as will increase the efficiency of
the Department. He or she shall have full charge and control of all the
apparatus and equipment of the Department and its assignment and
use, and shall be held responsible for its care, cleanliness and
safekeeping.
§ 2.56.050 CODE ADOPTION § 2.56.080
1.01:37
§ 2.56.080. Duties of Department. [Prior code § 2-8.8]
The Police Department shall:
§ 2.56.090. Special Policemen. [Prior code § 2-8.9]
A. Preserve the public peace, protect life and property, prevent crime,
detect and arrest offenders against the penal laws and ordinances
effective within the Township, suppress riots, mobs and insurrections,
disperse unlawful or dangerous assemblages, and preserve order at all
elections and public meetings and assemblages;
B. Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct, control
and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the
use of the streets by vehicles and persons, to protect the safety and
facilitate the convenience of motorists and pedestrians, and to make
and enforce rules and regulations not inconsistent with the ordinances
and resolutions of the Township for such purposes;
C. Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public streets,
parks and other public places of the Township, inspect and observe all
places of public amusement or assemblage and all places of business
requiring any state or municipal license or permit and report thereon to
the appropriate department;
D. Provide proper police attendance and protection at fires;
E. Provide for the attendance of its members in court as necessary for the
prosecution and trial of persons charged with crimes and offenses, and
cooperate fully with the law enforcement and prosecuting authorities of
federal, state and county governments;
F. Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police
efficiency of the members of the department.
A. The Township Committee may appoint Special Policemen for a term not
exceeding one year, and revoke such appointments without cause or
hearing. Special Policemen shall carry out their duties and
responsibilities under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police, and
their powers, rights and duties shall be specifically defined by the Chief
of Police. Such powers, rights and duties, however, shall immediately
cease at the expiration of the term for which they were appointed, or
upon revocation of their appointment. Special Officers shall not carry
revolvers or other weapons at any time except as otherwise directed by
the Chief of Police. The resolution appointing Special Police officers
shall designate the rate of pay, if any.
B. No person shall be appointed as a Special Policeman unless he or she is
a citizen of the United States; is able to read, write and speak the
English language; is physically qualified and of good moral character,
and has not been convicted of any crime. Every Special Policeman shall
be fingerprinted and his fingerprints shall be filed with the Division of
§ 2.56.080 RARITAN CODE § 2.56.090
1.01:38
§ 2.56.100. Removal and Suspension. [Prior code § 2-8.10]
Each regular police officer shall hold his or her office and continue
employment during good behavior, and efficiency and no person shall be
removed from office or employment for any causes other than incapacity,
misconduct, neglect of duty, conduct unbecoming a police officer,
disobedience of the rules and regulations established and hereafter
established for the Department or absence from duty without just cause for
five days or more.
A member of the department may be suspended, removed, fined or reduced
from his office or employment for just cause only and upon due notice and
service of written charges and a hearing.
§ 2.56.110. through § 2.56.150. (Reserved)3
§ 2.56.160. Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 2016-06]
Police officers may work for outside persons or entities on their off-duty
hours with the approval of and provided the Chief of Police determines,
in his discretion, that there are sufficient police personnel available, that
the outside employment assignment will not interfere with the needs of
the Township, and that sufficient funds have been deposited in an escrow
account with the Township Chief Financial Officer to cover the anticipated
costs of such off-duty assignments. Such work shall hereinafter be referred
to as off-duty police services or employment.
§ 2.56.170. Outside Employment of Off-Duty Police Officers-
Application. [Amended by Ord. 2016-06]
the State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Reports shall
be made by the Chief of Police to the Township Committee concerning
the eligibility and qualifications of any person proposed to be appointed
a Special Policeman.
A. Any person, entity, contractor or utility wishing to employ an off-duty
police officer must apply to the Chief of Police, or his designee,
requesting off-duty police services. The written application shall
include the following information:
1. The dates that off-duty police services and, if appropriate, police
vehicle(s) will be needed.
2. The nature of the off-duty police services requested.
3. An estimate of the number of off-duty police officer(s), and an
estimate of the number of hours the person or entity anticipates
3. Editor’s Note: Former § 2.56.110, Director of Public Safety — Establishment — Term; §
2.56.120, Director of Public Safety — Qualifications; § 2.56.130, Director of Public Safety
— Duties; § 2.56.140, Removal of Director of Public Safety; and § 2.56.150, Director of
Public Safety — Residency Requirements (§§ 2-8.11 through 2-8.15 of the prior code,
respectively), were repealed 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-02.
§ 2.56.090 CODE ADOPTION § 2.56.170
1.01:39
§ 2.56.180. Outside Employment of Off-Duty Police Officers-Escrow
Account. [Amended by Ord. 2016-06]
§ 2.56.190. Outside Employment of Off-Duty Police Officers-
Compensation. [Amended by Ord. 2016-06; Ord. 2016-12]
needing such police officer(s) and, if appropriate, police vehicle(s).
The Chief of Police, or his designee, based upon the application,
will ultimately determine the number of police officer(s) and
number of hours of officers needed for each application, subject to
Section 2.56.190 below.
A. The funds to cover the cost of off-duty police services and use of any
Township vehicles, based on the estimated number of officers and hours
as determined by the Chief of Police, or his designee, shall be submitted
to the Chief of Police, or his designee, which shall be forwarded to the
Township's Chief Financial Officer, or his designee, before the start of
any off-duty employment in accordance with State and Division of Local
Government services regulations. An escrow account shall be
established for funds dedicated to the payment of off-duty police
officers for outside employment by private persons or entities. The
person, entity, contractor or utility shall deposit an amount sufficient to
cover the rates of compensation and administrative fees set forth herein
for the total estimated hours of service. All funds received for off-duty
police services shall be deposited and kept in this account. All payments
to the police officers for such services shall be made from the funds in
this account.
B. In the event the funds in such escrow account should become depleted,
the Chief of Police, or his designee, shall immediately notify the
responsible person or entity that the funds in the escrow account are
insufficient to pay for continued off-duty police services. The person,
entity, contractor or utility shall then either replenish the escrow
account with an amount sufficient to pay for continued services or the
Chief of Police, or his designee, shall immediately terminate provision
of the off-duty police services, unless the Chief of Police or his designee
determines such termination would be a danger to the safety and
welfare of the public.
C. If the estimated costs deposited in the escrow account exceed the
actual costs incurred, then the Township shall, upon proper notice to
the Township Chief Financial Officer, and certification from the Chief of
Police, or his designee, that the project is completed and no further
police services are needed, refund the remainder of the escrow
account.
A. Any off-duty police officer hired for outside employment shall be
compensated at the rate set forth in the "Outside Employment"
provision of the current PBA 337 and PBA 337A collective negotiations
agreements. The current rates for outside employment are $75 per
§ 2.56.170 RARITAN CODE § 2.56.190
1.01:40
hour for the Hunterdon County Regional High School District and the
Flemington-Raritan School District (K-8), and $90 per hour for all other
employment. [Amended 6-5-2019 by Ord. No. 19-18]
B. The person, entity, contractor or utility requesting such off-duty
employment shall also be responsible for payment of an administrative
fee to the Township as established by Resolution. Borough Resolution
13-129 establishes the current administrative fee for outside
employment at 24.81% of the hourly pay rate. This fee is in addition to
the cost per officer set forth in Subsection A.
C. Any off-duty police officer hired for outside employment shall be paid a
minimum of four hours regardless of the actual amount of time worked.
D. Any person, entity, contractor, or utility who commits to hiring a Police
Officer or Officers and cancels or reschedules the work within four
hours of the time scheduled to commence the work shall be required to
pay the officer(s) through the Township of Raritan for four hours at the
applicable hourly rate unless a natural disaster, state of emergency,
and/or any other force majeure act occurs or is declared.
E. Any off-duty police officer hired for outside employment shall be subject
to the Rules and Regulations, SOP's and General Orders of the Raritan
Township Police Department. Wages earned for outside employment
shall not be applied toward the pension benefits of the police officer so
employed, nor shall hours worked for outside employment be
considered in any way as compensable overtime payable by the
Township.
F. The person, entity, contractor or utility requesting such off-duty
employment shall assume any and all liability arising from such off-duty
police employment, including but not limited to liability arising from
travel to and from job locations and services rendered during the offduty
employment. The person, entity, contractor or utility requesting
such off-duty employment must sign, in advance, a hold harmless and
indemnification agreement stating that such person or entity will
release, defend and indemnify the police officer so employed, the Chief
of Police, the Raritan Township Police Department, Raritan Township,
and any agent, officer or employee thereof, and save them harmless
from and against any and all claims, actions, damages, liabilities, and
expenses, including but not limited to, court costs and reasonable
attorney's fees, in connection with such off-duty employment.
G. Prior to the commencement of any off-duty employment, the person,
entity, contractor or utility requesting such off-duty employment shall
deliver to the Township a Certificate of Insurance evidencing general
liability coverage in an amount of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence,
and Workers' Compensation with statutory limits, which shall be
reasonably satisfactory to the Township. The Certificate of Insurance
must name the Township of Raritan as additional insured. All policies of
insurance evidenced by any certificate filed hereunder shall be
§ 2.56.190 CODE ADOPTION § 2.56.190
1.01:41
§ 2.56.200. Appropriate Authority. [Added 2-19-2019 by Ord. No.
19-02]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Township Administrator of the
Township of Raritan is appointed the appropriate authority of the Police
Department.
§ 2.56.210. Class III Special Law Enforcement Officers. [Added
4-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-11]
maintained in full force and effect during the term of the outside
employment. Upon any change or renewal, a new Certificate must be
filed with the Township.
A. Appointment; Duties; Hours.
1. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10, the Township Committee may
appoint Class III Special Law Enforcement Officers to exercise full
powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly
appointed full-time police officer while providing security at a
public school premises during hours when the school is normally in
session or when it is occupied by students. The placement of Class
III Special Law Enforcement Officers shall be subject to any
agreement or inter-local services agreement with any school or
local unit and further subject to the direct supervision of the Chief
of Police.
2. A Class III Special Law Enforcement Officer shall only be employed
part-time, not to exceed, on average, 30 hours per week per
calendar year. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.16(9)(d), no Class
III Special Law Enforcement Officer shall be eligible for health care
benefits from the Township or enrollment in any state-administered
retirement system.
B. Term: Rate of Pay.
1. The Township Committee may appoint Class III Special Law
Enforcement Officers for a term not exceeding one year, and revoke
such appointments without cause or hearing. The number of Class
III Special Law Enforcement Officers shall be determined on an
annual basis by the Township.
2. The resolution appointing Class III Special Law Enforcement
Officers shall designate the rate of pay.
C. While on duty in the Township, a Class III Special Law Enforcement
Officer may respond to offenses or emergencies off school grounds if
they occur in the officer's presence while traveling to a school facility,
but said officer shall not otherwise be dispatched or dedicated to any
assignment off school property.
D. Qualifications; Fingerprinting.
§ 2.56.190 RARITAN CODE § 2.56.210
1.01:42
Chapter 2.60
MUNICIPAL COURT
1. No person shall be appointed as a Class III Special Law
Enforcement Officer unless he or she is:
a. A citizen of the United States;
b. Able to read, write and speak the English language;
c. Of good moral character, and has not been convicted of any
offense involving dishonesty or which could make him or her
unfit to perform the duties of his or her office;
d. Has successfully undergone the same psychological testing
that is required of all full-time police officers in the Township;
e. A bona fide retired law enforcement officer who is less than 65
years of age;
f. Has served as a duly qualified, fully trained, full-time officer in
any municipality or county of the State of New Jersey or as a
member of the State Police, interstate police force, state or
county corrections officer, state juvenile corrections officer, or
juvenile detention officer, or any other qualified, fully trained,
full-time law enforcement officer who had full powers of arrest
and was separated from that prior service in good standing,
within three years of appointment;
g. Physically capable of performing functions of the position,
determined in accordance with Police Training Commission
guidelines;
h. Possesses a New Jersey Police Training Commission Basic
Police Officer Certification or New Jersey State Police Officer
Academy Certification or has successfully completed training
at the Correction Officer's Training Academy of the
Department of Corrections or at a basic training program for
corrections officers and juvenile detention officers established
by a county;
i. Has completed the training course for Safe Schools Resource
Officers developed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-71.8.
2. Additionally, every Class III Special Law Enforcement Officer shall
be fingerprinted, and his or her fingerprints shall be filed with the
Division of the State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Reports shall be made by the Chief of Police to the Township
Committee concerning the eligibility and qualifications of any
person proposed to be appointed a Class III Special Law
Enforcement Officer.
§ 2.56.210 CODE ADOPTION § 2.60.010
1.01:43
§ 2.60.010. Establishment. [Prior code § 2-12.1; amended by Ord.
98-33]
A Municipal Court for the Township of Raritan in the county of Hunterdon
is established pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 2B:2-1 et seq.
§ 2.60.020. Judge — Appointment — Term. [Prior code § 2-12.2]
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court who shall serve for a term
of three years from the date of his or her appointment and until his or
her successor is appointed and qualifies who shall be appointed by the
Governing Body of the municipality.
§ 2.60.030. Municipal Court Administrator — Powers and Duties.
[Prior code § 2-12.3; amended during 3-00 supplement; Ord. 98-33]
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall have, possess and exercise all
such duties, powers and jurisdiction conferred upon the court by law, and
there shall be a Municipal Court Administrator and other necessary clerical
and other assistants for the Municipal Court as may be necessary. The
Municipal Court Administrator has charge of all phases of quasi-judicial,
administrative and clerical operations of the Municipal Court. The Township
is to provide for the compensation of the Municipal Court Administrator
and other personnel, and the Municipal Court Administrator shall post such
bond in any amount fixed by the Governing Body conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his or her duties and shall serve for a term of three
years from the date of his or her appointment and until a successor is
appointed and qualifies.
§ 2.60.040. Place of Court. [Prior code § 2-12.4]
The Municipal Court shall be held in a building designated by the Township
Committee within the boundaries of the Township as may be necessary for
the Judge to complete the calendar.
Chapter 2.64
MUNICIPAL PUBLIC DEFENDER
§ 2.64.010. Position and Appointment. [Amended by Ord. 97-47]
Pursuant to P.L. 1997 c.256, of the public laws of the State of New Jersey,
there is established in the Township the position of Municipal Public
Defender, whose duty it shall be to represent eligible, indigent defendants
charged in municipal court with a crime as specified in N.J.S.A. 2B:12-18,
or if in the opinion of the Municipal Court, there is a likelihood that the
defendant, if convicted, of any other offense will be subject to imprisonment
or other consequence of magnitude.
§ 2.60.010 RARITAN CODE § 2.64.010
1.01:44
The Municipal Public Defender shall be appointed by the Township
Committee and shall be an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey, duly
licensed and in good standing before the Supreme Court of New Jersey.
§ 2.64.020. Term and Residency. [Amended by Ord. 97-47]
The Municipal Public Defender shall serve for a term of one year from the
date of his or her appointment, and may continue to serve in office pending
reappointment or appointment of a successor, normally accomplished at the
reorganization meeting of the Township.
The Municipal Public Defender need not be a resident of the Township.
§ 2.64.030. Limitations on Practice and Compensation. [Amended
by Ord. 97-47]
The Municipal Public Defender may represent private clients in any
municipality, including the Township of Raritan where the Public Defender
serves as the Municipal Public Defender, subject to the Rules of Court
Governing the Conduct of Lawyers, Judges and Court Personnel.
The salary range of the position of Municipal Public Defender shall be
established in the salary ordinance of the Township, and the actual rate of
compensation shall be established by yearly resolution. The amount payable
to the Municipal Public Defender shall be for handling all phases of the
defense of an indigent defendant's matter before the Municipal Court, and
including any interlocutory appeals filed during the pendency of the matter
before the Municipal Court.
§ 2.64.040. Eligibility for Services — Application Fee. [Amended by
Ord. 97-47]
A defendant's eligibility for services of the Municipal Public Defender shall
be determined by the Municipal Court on the basis of the need of the
defendant, or if the defendant is under the age of 18 years, the eligibility for
services shall be determined on the basis of the financial circumstances of
the individual defendant and the financial circumstances of the individual's
parents or legal guardians.
A person applying to the court for representation by the Municipal Public
Defender shall pay simultaneously with the application, an application fee
to the municipality of $200. The Municipal Court may waive the required
application fee, in whole or in part, and in accordance with guidelines
promulgated by the supreme court, only if the court determines, in its
discretion upon clear and convincing showing by the applicant, that the
application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking
representation.
§ 2.64.010 CODE ADOPTION § 2.64.050
1.01:45
§ 2.64.050. Administration. [Amended by Ord. 97-47]
The position of municipal public defender and the providing of legal services
to indigent defendants before the Raritan Township Municipal Court shall
be administered in accordance with the provisions of P.L. 1997, c.256 of the
public laws of the state of New Jersey, and this chapter.
Chapter 2.68
UTILITIES AUTHORITY
§ 2.68.010. Establishment. [Prior code § 2-17.1]
Pursuant to the Municipal Utilities Authority Law, N.J.S.A. 40:14b-1 et seq.,
there is created a public body corporate and politic, as an agency and
instrumentality of the Township of Raritan in the county of Hunterdon and
state of New Jersey, under the name and style of the Raritan Township
municipal utilities authority.
§ 2.68.020. Powers and Duties. [Prior code § 2-17.2]
The municipal utilities authority is a utilities authority as contemplated and
provided for by the Municipal Utilities Authorities Law, and shall have and
exercise all of the powers and perform all of the duties provided for by
the Municipal Utilities Authorities Law and any other statutes heretofore
enacted and applicable thereto, and all amendments and supplements
hereafter enacted thereto.
§ 2.68.030. Composition and Compensation. [Prior code § 2-17.3;
amended by Ord. 89-14; Ord. 89-26; Ord. 95-10; Ord. 07-43;
4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-15]
Chapter 2.76
BOARD OF HEALTH
A. The Municipal Utilities Authority shall consist of five members, who
shall be appointed by resolution of the Township Committee in the
manner provided by law. Individuals serving as Township Committee
members may be allowed to serve as members of the Municipal Utilities
Authority.
B. Each member of the Municipal Utilities Authority shall receive
compensation for their services up to the maximum amount of $1,400
for a full year of service on such Authority. The Municipal Utilities
Authority, by resolution adopted by a majority of the fully authorized
membership, shall set the amount of compensation to be paid to each
regular member of the Authority and to the Chairperson, but in such
amount not greater than as authorized hereunder.
§ 2.64.050 RARITAN CODE § 2.76.010
1.01:46
§ 2.76.010. Established. [Prior code § 2-16; amended by Ord. 98-33;
12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-33]
There shall be a Board of Health of the Township consisting of five
members, pursuant to provision of N.J.S.A. 26:3-10.
§ 2.76.020. Appointment of Members — Vacancies — Terms. [Prior
code § 2-16.2; amended 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-33]
§ 2.76.030. Organization — Meetings. [Prior code § 2-16.3]
The Board of Health shall, on the day of its organization, appoint a place,
day and hour for the regular meeting of the Board for the hearing of
complaints, reports and general business and shall cause notice of the same
to be published in the legal newspaper of the Township. At least one regular
meeting of the Board shall be held each month. Special meetings may be
called at any time by the president or by three members of the Board, or by
the State Department of Health.
§ 2.76.040. Compensation. [Prior code § 2-16.4]
The members of the Board of Health shall receive no salary or compensation
for their services.
§ 2.76.050. Notification by Clerk. [Prior code § 2-16.5]
Upon the appointment and confirmation of the members of the Board, the
Township Clerk shall notify each appointee of his or her appointment to see
that he or she is properly inducted into office.
Chapter 2.80
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
A. The members of the Board of Health shall be appointed by the Township
Committee to serve for terms of three years on a staggered basis as
provided by law. Any appointment made to fill any vacancy caused in
any manner other than expiration of term shall be for the period of the
unexpired term only. All vacancies on the Board shall be filled by the
same method as for original appointments.
B. A member's position on the Board of Health shall be deemed vacant if a
member fails to attend and participate in any meetings of the Board of
Health for a period of four consecutive months without being excused
from attendance by a majority of the members of the Board of Health, at
the conclusion of such period; provided, however, that the Board of
Health may refuse to excuse only with respect to those failures to
attend and participate which are not due to legitimate illness.
§ 2.76.010 CODE ADOPTION § 2.80.010
1.01:47
§ 2.80.010. Establishment. [Prior code § 2-19.1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A an Environmental Commission is established
for the purpose of protecting and developing or using of natural resources,
including water resources, located within the territorial limits of the
Township.
§ 2.80.020. Composition. [Prior code § 2-19.2; amended by Ord.
03-8; Ord. 2017-37]
The Commission shall consist of not less than five nor more than seven
members and two alternate members appointed by the Mayor. At least one
member shall be a member of the Planning Board and all shall be residents
of the Township. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as
chair. Their terms of office, removal or vacancy shall be governed by N.J.S.A.
40:56A-1.
§ 2.80.030. Powers and Duties. [Prior code § 2-19.3]
The Commission shall keep an index for all open areas publicly or privately
owned including open marsh lands, swaps or other wetlands. They may
from time to time recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs
for inclusion in the municipal master plan and plans and programs for
development of such areas, and have other powers as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:56A-2.
The Commission may, subject to the approval of Township Committee,
acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the municipality by
gift, purchase or as otherwise specified in N.J.S.A. 40:56-3.
The Township Committee may appropriate funds for the anticipated
expenses of the Commission. Any purchase of property, any employment of
employees, and any other functions of the Commission shall be within the
limits of funds appropriated to it by the Township Committee and within
the limit of funds acquired by the Commission through gift, donation or
otherwise. All acquisitions of property and other expenditures shall be
within the limits of funds currently on hand and under no circumstance will
the Township Committee or the residents of the Township be held liable or
responsible for any purchase mad or any other expenses incurred beyond
the amount appropriated to the Commission by the Township Committee.
Chapter 2.88
OPEN SPACE ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND TRUST FUND
§ 2.88.010. Future for Open Space. [Amended by Ord. 97-13; Ord.
07-25]
There is established an account in the general capital fund which should
be noted and designated as the reserve for open space funds. Subject to
approval by the Township Committee, funds from the reserve for open space
§ 2.80.010 RARITAN CODE § 2.88.010
1.01:48
funds may be utilized to acquire any type of interests in real property
including, not by way of limitation, fee simple acquisitions, easements,
development acquisition and preservation, and such other purposes as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7.a.1.(a) to (f), as may be amended from
time to time. The acquisition of land shall mean undeveloped land as well
as land containing improvements at the time of acquisition provided the
principal purpose of the acquisition is to preserve open space. The Township
Committee shall have the option of either paying for land acquisitions with
improvements upon them solely through the reserve for open space funds
or by apportioning the cost thereof by charging the reserve for open space
funds for the land portions and the capital account for the improvement
portion. Acquisition may also occur via gift, purchase or by eminent domain
proceedings pursuant to N.J.S.A. 20:3-1 et seq.
§ 2.88.020. Funding of Open Space Trust Fund. [Amended by Ord.
97-13; Ord. 08-7; Ord. 2016-25; 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 19-36]
In 1997, a special tax rate shall be added to the total Township tax rate
in the amount of $0.02 per $100 of the 1997 assessed valuation and each
succeeding year's valuation with the funds raised therefrom to be deposited
in the reserve for open space funds. The special tax rate shall remain the
applicable tax rate to be applied for the reserve for open space funds in
succeeding years. Effective in the year 2008 the special tax rate shall be
$0.015 of said assessed valuation. Effective in the year 2017, the special tax
rate shall be modified as follows:
Year Special Tax Rate
2017 1.5 cents per $100 of said assessed valuation
2018 1.0 cents per $100 of said assessed valuation
2019 0.8 cents per $100 of said assessed valuation
2020 0.8 cents per $100 of said assessed valuation
2021 0.8 cents per $100 of said assessed valuation
§ 2.88.010 CODE ADOPTION § 2.88.020
1.01:49
The special tax rate shall remain the applicable tax rate to be applied for
the reserve for open space funds in succeeding years. The Chief Financial
Officer of the Township shall report annually to the fund's status, balances
and transactions.
The reserve for open space funds shall also be permitted to accept
donations and testamentary bequests. The funds accumulated within the
reserve for open space funds shall be utilized for the acquisition of real
estate and interests in real estate as more fully delineated in Section
2.88.010. In connection with such acquisition, the funds may also be
utilized for appraisals and other items of expense permitted by law in
connection with the acquisition or as a down payment for the issuance
of bonds or for debt service for the same purpose at the discretion of
the Township Committee. Any and all interest accruing on the funds shall
remain in the reserve for open space funds and may be utilized for the
above described purposes. In no eventuality, shall the Township pay more
than fair market value for the land to be acquired. The Township shall
obtain a minimum of two appraisals from certified appraisers plus the
evaluation of the Township Tax Assessor, as a guide to the fair market
value.
§ 2.88.030. Utilization of the Properties Acquired Through the Open
Space Trust Fund. [Amended by Ord. 97-13]
The land acquired through the reserve for open space funds shall be utilized
for all categories of open space including parks, passive and active
recreational areas, green ways, wild life habitats, and preservation of farm
land, with the concept of preserving open space.
§ 2.88.040. Sale of Property. [Amended by Ord. 97-13]
No real property or the interest therein acquired with funds from the
reserve for open space funds shall be sold, conveyed, leased or otherwise
alienated unless it is needed for another public use or otherwise furthers
the purposes of the trust. If such a sale, lease or conveyance is authorized
by the Township Committee, the moneys received shall be placed into the
reserve for open space funds for use in replacing the open space with
another property or similar interest in real estate. The deed of any property
acquired with funds from the reserve for open space funds shall contain a
specific notation reflecting that the property was acquired with funds from
the reserve for open space fund.
§ 2.88.050. Open Space Advisory Committee Established. [Amended
by Ord. 97-13]
There is established an Open Space Advisory Committee to review and
recommend parcels of land and interests therein for acquisition and
preservation as open space within the Township.
§ 2.88.020 RARITAN CODE § 2.88.060
1.01:50
§ 2.88.060. Open Space Advisory Committee-Membership.
[Amended by Ord. 97-13; Ord. 01-1; Ord. 14-01]
§ 2.88.070. Open Space Advisory Committee — Duties and
Functions. [Amended by Ord. 97-13]
A. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall consist of nine members to
be appointed by the Township Committee. The membership in the Open
Space Advisory Committee shall include:
1. One member of the Township's Environmental Commission;
2. The Township Planner;
3. Two members of the Township Committee;
4. One member of the Planning Board of the Township who shall not
be an elected official;
5. Four residents of the municipality.
B. The Planning Board and environmental Commission members shall
have terms which correspond with the terms of their respective
appointive offices. The Township Planner shall serve as member of the
Open Space Advisory Committee as long as he or she is employed by the
Township in the capacity of Township Planner. Resident members shall
be appointed for a term of three years. The Township Committee
members shall be appointed annually.
A. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall annually review, update and
submit to the Township Committee the open space plan for the
Township. It shall review and update the inventory of open space
properties within the Township and reevaluate and prioritize such open
space properties through the criteria established by the Environmental
Commission and Greenways Committee. It shall review, update and
recommend to the Township Committee the parcel ranking as well as
make recommendations concerning the nature of the interests in such
real estate to be acquired and for the purposes for which such land
should be utilized.
B. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall assist the Township in the
establishment of an open space tracking program to catalog the state of
privately owned open space in the Township and record the Township's
progress with respect to open space preservation.
C. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall provide guidance and
support to the Township Committee and Planning Board on issues and
matters of open space.
D. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall periodically review its
functions and submit recommendations to the Township Committee as
to whether additional duties should be assigned or delegated to the
advisory committee.
§ 2.88.060 CODE ADOPTION § 2.88.070
1.01:51
§ 2.88.080. Termination of Chapter Provisions. [Amended by Ord.
97-13; Ord. 97-32; Ord. 01-42; Ord. 06-32; Ord. 11-22; Ord.
2016-25]
This chapter shall be effective for a limited period to and until December
31, 2021, at which time this chapter shall terminate and be repealed, unless
prior thereto, the Township Committee conducts a public review of the
open space acquisition and funding program, and the Township Committee
amends this chapter to extend its lifespan.
Chapter 2.92
PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 2.92.010. Inspection of Public Records. [Prior code § 2-21.1]
§ 2.92.020. Fee for Copies. [Prior code § 2-21.2; amended during
1999 codification]
See the Schedule of Fees following Title 3 of this code.
E. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall select from among its
members a chairperson and a vice-chairperson to serve as the presiding
officer in the absence of the chairperson. The Committee shall also
select a secretary whose function shall be to maintain minutes of the
Committee's meetings and records of the proceedings of the
Committee.
A. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-3, all records which
are required by law to be made, maintained or kept on file by any board,
body, agency, department, commission, authority or official of the
Township shall be deemed to be public records. Every citizen of the
state shall have the right to inspect such records during regular
business hours maintained by the custodian of the records. During such
regular business hours and under the supervision of a representative or
the custodian, every citizen of the state shall also have the right to copy
such records by hand, and to purchase copies of the records. Copies of
records shall be made available upon the payment of the price as
established by law.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, where it
shall appear that the records which are sought to be examined pertain
to an investigation in progress by any body, agency, commission, board,
authority or official, the right of examination may be denied if the
inspection, copying or publication of the records is inimical to the
public interest; provided that this provision shall not be construed to
prohibit any body, agency, commission, board, authority or official from
opening such record or records for public examination if not otherwise
prohibited by law.
§ 2.88.070 RARITAN CODE § 2.92.030
1.01:52
§ 2.92.030. Copying by Person Requesting Documents. [Prior code
§ 2-21.3]
Where the document in question is more than 100 pages in length, the Clerk
may permit the person requesting copies to use his or her own copying
machine, provided that there is no risk of damage or mutilation of the
documents and it would not be incompatible with the transaction of public
business. Such determination shall be completely within the discretion of
the Clerk. The fee in such case shall be $15 per day.
Chapter 2.94
DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM
§ 2.94.010. Positions Eligible to Participate in the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program. [Amended by Ord. 08-22]
§ 2.94.020. Positions Exempt From Defined Contribution
Retirement Program. [Amended by Ord. 08-22]
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
1. Township Administrator.
2. Fire Official.
3. Treasurer.
4. Municipal Court Administrator.
5. Municipal Engineer.
6. Municipal Prosecutor.
7. Municipal Court Judge.
8. Appointed members of the Municipal Utilities Authority (subject to
N.J.S.A. 40A:5A-1 et seq.)
A. Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
1. Tax Collector,
2. Chief Financial Officer;
3. Construction Code Official;
4. Tax Assessor;
5. Municipal Planner;
§ 2.92.030 CODE ADOPTION § 2.94.020
1.01:53
§ 2.94.030. Implementation. [Amended by Ord. 08-22]
This Ordinance No. 08-22 shall be implemented, construed and subject to
the aforesaid Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.)
as amended from time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents
from the Local Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 2.94.040. Severability of Provisions. [Amended by Ord. 08-22]
Should any part or parts of this Ordinance be held to be invalid by any
competent court of law, such invalidity shall only affect the part or parts
held to be invalid, and all other parts shall remain in effect.
§ 2.94.050. Ordinance to Be Filed With the State. [Amended by Ord.
08-22]
A copy of this ordinance shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
Chapter 2.96
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 2.96.010. General Policies Governing Personnel. [Prior code
§ 2-6.1]
The Township Committee shall from time to time promulgate rules and
regulations governing personnel policies by the adoption of a resolution
establishing the personnel policies and modifying, changing and adding to
those policies from time to time.
§ 2.96.020. Grounds for Rejection of an Applicant. [Prior code
§ 2-6.2]
An applicant for Township Employment may be rejected if he or she:
6. Registered Municipal Clerk;
7. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
8. Superintendent of Public Works.
A. Is not qualified for appointment to the position for which he or she has
applied;
B. Is physically unfit to perform the duties of the position for which he or
she has applied;
C. Is addicted to the habitual or excessive use of drugs or intoxicants;
D. Has been convicted of any crime or offense, involving moral turpitude,
including persons offenses;
§ 2.94.020 RARITAN CODE § 2.96.020
1.01:54
§ 2.96.030. Personnel File. [Prior code § 2-6.3]
Until such time as a Township Administrator is appointed, the Township
Clerk shall initiate a personnel file for each new employee of the Township
and all records of such employee concerning qualification, permanent
status, work history, accumulated vacation and sick leave, leave time and
the like shall be maintained for such employee in such file. The Township
Clerk shall make such files available for inspection by the employee on a
reasonable basis.
§ 2.96.040. Causes of Disciplinary Action. [Prior code § 2-6.4;
amended during 1999 codification]
The causes for which disciplinary action may be invoked are the following:
E. Has received other than an honorable discharge from the Armed
Services of the United States;
F. Has been dismissed from previous employment for delinquency,
insubordination or misconduct;
G. Has practiced or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in his or
her application, or in furnishing other evidence of eligibility for
appointment;
H. Is not within age limits that have been established for the position for
which he or she seeks appointment.
A. Neglect of duty;
B. Absence without leave or failure to report after authorized leave has
expired, or after such leave has been disapproved or revoked; provided
that any regular member or officer of the Police Department who shall
be absent from duty without just cause for a term of five days
continuously and without leave of absence shall, at the expiration of
such five days, cease to be a member of the Police Department as
provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122, as amended;
C. Incompetency or inefficiency;
D. Incapacity, certified by a physician, due to mental or physical disability;
E. Insubordination or serious breach of discipline;
F. Intoxication while on duty;
G. Conviction of a criminal act;
H. Disobedience of a rule or regulation of the Township;
I. Conduct unbecoming a public employee.
§ 2.96.020 CODE ADOPTION § 2.96.050
1.01:55
§ 2.96.050. Meritorious Actions. [Prior code § 2-6.5]
It is declared to be the policy of the Township to recognize and encourage
meritorious actions on the part of its officers and employees. To this end,
letters of commendation concerning Township employees from their
superiors and from members of the public with whom they deal shall be
directed to the attention of the Township Committee, and then recorded in
the employee's personnel file. In addition, the Township Committee may, of
its own motion, commend the work of particular officers and employees and
cause such commendation to be inserted in their personnel files.
§ 2.96.060. Reimbursement for Lost Wages Due to Testimony. [Prior
code § 2-6.6]
The members of the volunteer fire company and any other persons
appointed to any agencies or commissions of the Township who are
subpoenaed and required to give testimony in court or in answer to
depositions and such other discovery procedures as are allowed by the
court involving Township matters, shall be entitled to be reimbursed for any
loss of wages resulting from the time devoted in response to the subpoena.
A voucher shall be submitted by such persons seeking reimbursement of
loss of wages and an affidavit shall be attached to the voucher from the
employer stating that the person seeking reimbursement was not paid his or
her regular usual wages from his or her employer during the time required
to respond to the subpoena. The amount of actual lost wages shall be set
forth in the affidavit.
Chapter 2.98
ETHICAL STANDARDS AND CODE OF CONDUCT
§ 2.98.010. Creation of Ethical Standards and Code of Conduct.
[Amended by Ord. 07-44]
A Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards is necessary to ensure the public
trust and confidence of the citizens of the Township in the fair and impartial
decision-making of the Township's elected and appointed officers,
representatives, professionals and employees. In order to bolster public
confidence, help Township officials and employees avoid unintended ethical
dilemmas, and put in place a mechanism which assists those providing
goods and services to the Township to avoid the embarrassment and
potential economic harm that results from inadvertent improper or
unethical behavior, this chapter sets forth the ethical standards and code
of conduct which must be adhered to by all elected and appointed officials,
professionals and employees within the Township. Inquiries, advisory
opinions, violations, complaints and penalties of Chapter 2.98 shall be
processed by the Local Finance Board in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:9-22.7 through 22.10.
§ 2.96.050 RARITAN CODE § 2.98.020
1.01:56
§ 2.98.020. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 07-44]
As used in this act:
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, partnership, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union or other
legal entity.
EMPLOYEE — Any person, whether compensated or not, whether part-time
or full-time, employed by or serving the Township who is not a Township
officer, but shall not mean any employee of a school district.
GOVERNING BODY — The Township Committee of Raritan Township, as
defined in Chapter 2.08, as may be amended from time to time.
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits,
assets or stock of a business organization but shall not include the control
of assets in a nonprofit entity or labor union.
MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY — The spouse or dependent child of a
Township officer or employee residing in the same household.
TOWNSHIP OFFICER — Any person whether compensated or not, whether
part-time or full-time: (1) elected to any office of a Township agency; (2)
serving on a Township agency which has the authority to enact ordinances,
approve development applications or grant zoning variances; (3) who is a
member of an independent municipal authority; or (4) who is a managerial
executive or confidential employee of a Township agency, as defined in
Section 3 of the "New Jersey Employer-Employee Relations Act," P.L. 1941,
c.100 (C.34:13A-3), but shall not mean any employee of a school district or
member of a school board;
TOWNSHIP OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — A Raritan Township officer or
employee.
§ 2.98.030. General Ethical Standards for Elected and Appointed
Officers and Employees. [Amended by Ord. 07-44]
All elected and appointed officers or employees of the Township shall
comply with the following provisions:
A. No Township officer or employee or member of his immediate family
shall have an interest in a business organization or engage in any
business, transaction, or professional activity, which is in substantial
conflict with the proper discharge of his duties in the public interest;
B. No Township officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his official
position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself or
others;
C. No Township officer or employee shall act in his official capacity in any
matter where he, a member of his immediate family, a relative as
defined in Section 2.98.070a, or a business organization in which he has
an interest, has a direct or indirect financial or personal involvement
§ 2.98.020 CODE ADOPTION § 2.98.030
1.01:57
that might reasonably be expected to impair his objectivity or
independence of judgment;
D. No Township officer or employee shall undertake any employment or
service, whether compensated or not, which might reasonably be
expected to prejudice his independence of judgment in the exercise of
his official duties;
E. No Township officer or employee, member of his immediate family, or
business organization in which he has an interest, shall solicit or accept
any gift, favor, loan, political contribution, service, promise of future
employment, or other thing of value based upon an understanding that
the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise, or other thing of
value was given or offered for the purpose of influencing him, directly
or indirectly, in the discharge of his official duties. This provision shall
not apply to the solicitation or acceptance of contributions to the
campaign of an announced candidate for elective public office, if the
Township officer has no knowledge or reason to believe that the
campaign contribution, if accepted, was given with the intent to
influence the Township officer in the discharge of his official duties;
F. No Township officer or employee shall use, or allow to be used, his
public office or employment, or any information, not generally available
to the members of the public, which he receives or acquires in the
course of and by reason of his office or employment, for the purpose of
securing financial gain for himself, any member of his immediate family,
a relative as defined in Section 2.98.070a, or any business organization
with which he is associated;
G. No Township officer or employee or business organization in which he
has an interest shall represent any person or party other than the local
government in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or
other matter pending before any agency in the Township. This provision
shall not be deemed to prohibit one Township employee from
representing another Township employee where the Township is the
employer and the representation is within the context of official labor
union or similar representational responsibilities;
H. No Township officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions if,
by reason of his participation in the enactment of any ordinance,
resolution or other matter required to be voted upon, no material or
monetary gain accrues to him as a member of any business, profession,
occupation or group, to any greater extent than any gain could
reasonably be expected to accrue to any other member of such
business, profession, occupation or group;
I. No elected Township officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry
for information on behalf of a constituent, if no fee, reward or other
thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer or a
member of his immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in
return therefor; and
§ 2.98.030 RARITAN CODE § 2.98.030
1.01:58
§ 2.98.040. Prohibition Against Receipt of Unlawful Gifts.
[Amended by Ord. 07-44]
J. Nothing shall prohibit any Township officer or employee, or members of
his immediate family, from representing himself, or themselves, in
negotiations or proceedings concerning his, or their, own interests.
A. Unlawful gift. An unlawful gift is any gift, whether in the form of cash,
loans, services, commissions, tips, rewards, discounts, entertainment,
meals, trips, transportation, lodging, honoraria, reimbursement of
expenses, full or partial forgiveness of indebtedness, a thing of
economic value in any form, or the promise of a gift, in excess of $100
on an annual calendar year basis, from any person, firm, corporation,
lobbyist, or other entity, which is intended to influence the action or
decision-making of any Township elected or appointed officer,
professional or employee with regard to Township business.
B. Prohibition. No Township Committee member; board member,
including but not limited to planning, zoning and health boards;
commission member; RTMUA authority member; agent; salaried
officer; employee; or any member of their immediate family, shall
accept any gift which to his knowledge is an unlawful gift intended to
influence that individual's actions or decision-making with regards to
Township business.
C. Disclosure of Violation. Violations of this section shall be fully and
publicly disclosed by the Township no later than 30 days after
discovered.
D. Penalty for Violation.
1. Elected Public Official. Any violation of this section by an elected
public official shall result in a fine payable to the Township of three
times the value of the gift, the value of which is to be determined in
the Township's sole discretion.
2. Unelected Individual. Any violation of this section may result in
dismissal or other appropriate sanctions as determined by the
appointing authority of the unelected individual committing such
violation and shall result in a fine payable to the Township of twice
the value of the gift, the value of which is to be determined in the
Township's sole discretion.
E. Payment of Expenses. Where a public official participates in an event
which bears a reasonable relationship to the public official's office and
when appearing in an official capacity, where prior approval has been
given, if applicable, the Township shall pay all reasonable incurred
expenses which shall be fully and publicly disclosed no later than 30
days after incurred.
§ 2.98.030 CODE ADOPTION § 2.98.050
1.01:59
§ 2.98.050. Filing of Annual Financial Disclosure Statement
Required. [Amended by Ord. 07-44]
A. Requirement. All Township elected and appointed officers and
professionals must annually file a financial disclosure statement with
the Township Clerk. These statements are required to be filed on or
before April 30th each year.
B. Form of statement. The Township Clerk shall obtain the annual form of
financial disclosure statement which is provided by the Local Finance
Board, and shall make the form available to Township elected and
appointed officers and professionals serving the municipality. All
financial disclosure statements filed pursuant to this section shall be on
the form provided by the Township Clerk, and shall include the
following information which shall specify, where applicable, the name
and address of each source and the individual's job or title in the
Township:
1. Each source of income, earned or unearned, exceeding $2,000
received by the individual, or any member of his immediate family,
or any adult living in the individual's household, during the
preceding calendar year. Individual client fees, customer receipts
or commissions on transactions received through a business
organization need not be separately reported as sources of income.
If a publicly traded security is the source of income, the security
need not be reported unless the individual or member of his
immediate family has an interest in the business organization;
2. Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregate amount
exceeding $250 from any single source for personal appearances,
speeches or writing received by the individual or a member of his
immediate family during the preceding calendar year;
3. Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses having
an aggregate value exceeding $400 from any single source,
excluding relatives, received by the individual or a member of his
immediate family during the preceding calendar year;
4. The name and address of all business organizations in which the
individual or a member of his immediate family had an interest
during the preceding calendar year; and
5. The address and brief description of all real property in the State in
which the individual or a member of his immediate family held an
interest during the preceding calendar year.
C. Disclosure. All financial disclosure statements filed with the Township
Clerk by elected and appointed Township officials and professionals
shall be public records and disclosable to members of the public upon
written request, in accordance with the Township's usual and
customary public records request procedures.
§ 2.98.050 RARITAN CODE § 2.98.060
1.01:60
§ 2.98.060. Prohibition Against Township Committee Members
Holding Conflicting Dual Offices. [Amended by Ord. 07-44]
It shall be unlawful for an elected Township Committee member
simultaneously to hold any other elective state, county or municipal office.
§ 2.98.070. Prohibition Against Nepotism. [Amended by Ord. 07-44]
A person who is a relative of a Township employee as defined below, or
residing with a Township employee, may not be hired as an employee,
promoted, transferred, demoted or reassigned, if such employment action
would result in the creation of a prohibited relationship.
A. Definitions.
LIVING WITH — A living arrangement among unmarried persons
substantially similar to that of a marital relationship, regardless of
either person's gender.
RELATIVE — Includes spouse, parent, stepparent, child, stepchild,
sibling, step sibling, step sibling, half-sibling, father-in-law, mother-inlaw,
sister-in-law, brother-in-law, grandparent, grandchild, aunt, uncle,
niece, nephew and cousin.
B. Prohibited Relationship. A prohibited relationship is created when:
1. One person would have the authority to supervise (directly or
indirectly), appoint, remove, discipline, evaluate or otherwise
affect the work or employment of the other person.
2. One person would be responsible for auditing the work of the other
person.
3. Other circumstances exist which would place the persons in a
situation of actual or reasonably foreseeable conflict between the
Township's interest and their own.
C. Required Disclosure.
1. Prior to employment or appointment, all persons shall submit an
official disclosure statement, disclosing to the Township the names
of relatives who work for the Township or who are elected or
appointed Township officials. The disclosure statement shall be
maintained in the individual's application folder or personnel
folder.
2. When two incumbent Township employees marry, commence living
together, or become related, both employees must disclose this
information to the Township Administrator as soon as practicable,
but in no event later than 30 calendar days before the employees
marry, commence living together, or become related.
§ 2.98.060 CODE ADOPTION § 2.98.070
1.01:61
§ 2.98.080. Code of Conduct; Specific Ethical Standards for Elected
and Appointed Officers and Employees. [Amended by Ord. 07-44]
3. An individual's failure to disclose such information may result in
rejection of the employment application or the termination of
employment.
D. Incumbent Employees. Incumbent employees who marry, commence
living together, or become related may continue in their employment if
such continued employment does not result in the creation of a
prohibited relationship. When continued employment results in the
creation of a prohibited relationship, the Township will explore
potential accommodations, including the reassignment of one or both
employees to available positions for which the employees are qualified.
If the Township determines that an acceptable accommodation cannot
be made, the Township will notify the individuals that one of the
employees must separate their employment with the Township within
60 calendar days. In the event the employees do not agree as to which
one shall resign, the Township will terminate the employee it deems
most appropriate to terminate.
E. This section shall apply to full-time employment positions only, and shall
not be applicable to part-time, seasonal or per diem employment
positions.
F. A Township elected official is prohibited from Township employment for
a period of one year after conclusion of elected office, but can be
appointed by the Township Committee to a board, commission, or
independent authority, provided any compensation for the appointment
is less than $1,500.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a method of
assuring that the standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure
requirements shall be clear, consistent, uniform in their application,
and enforceable.
B. Guidelines for all Board Members and Township Officials. No Board
Member shall act on a matter where his employer, employee, partner, or
a corporation in which he is a shareholder or has a financial interest, or
has any business or contractual relationship, in or with the applicant.
All Board Members, when acting in their official capacity, must adhere
to the following additional ethical standards:
1. Direct Financial Interest.
a. If a Board Member, a Board Member's spouse or other adult
member of the Board Member's household, or a relative of the
Board Member has a direct employment relationship with the
applicant or any of the applicant's professionals, disclosure
and recusal is required.
§ 2.98.070 RARITAN CODE § 2.98.080
1.01:62
b. If an adult relative, living outside the Board Member's home,
has a direct employment relationship with the applicant or any
of the applicant's professionals, the Board Member is required
to make full disclosure regarding the relationship, but may act
on the application if he or she believes that he or she can do so
without conflict.
c. If a Board Member directly owns over $10,000 of stock in a
publicly traded corporation with an application before the
Board, recusal is required. If the stock has a value less than
$10,000, only disclosure is required.
d. If a Board Member, a Board Member's spouse or other adult
member of the Board Member's household, or a relative of the
Board Member has any other formal, not casual, business or
contractual relationship with the applicant or any of
applicant's professionals, recusal is required.
e. If a Board Member had a business, employment or contractual
relationship which has been discontinued, recusal is required
for an additional two years after termination and disclosure for
an additional three years.
f. If a Board Member's spouse or adult member of the Board
Member's household, or a relative of a Board Member had a
business, employment or contractual relationship with the
applicant which has been discontinued, disclosure is required
for two years after termination, but recusal is not mandated.
2. Indirect Financial Interest.
a. When an applicant is in direct competition with a Board
Member's business, his or her spouse's business or either of
their employers' business, recusal is required.
b. If a Board Member resides or owns property within the
200-foot notice area of an application, recusal is required.
3. Direct Personal Interest.
a. If the applicant or the applicant's professional is a family
member of a Board Member within 3° of consanguinity,
disclosure and recusal is required.
b. When a Board Member is otherwise related to an applicant, an
applicant's professional or to an individual who works with the
professional on the application, that relationship must be
disclosed.
c. If a Board Member has a close personal or social relationship
with an applicant, an applicant's professional or an objector,
disclosure is required.
§ 2.98.080 CODE ADOPTION § 2.98.080
1.01:63
4. Indirect Personal Interest.
a. If a Board Member is an active member of a church, temple,
mosque or social organization (i.e. Elks, etc.) which is
appearing before the Board as an applicant or objector, recusal
is required.
5. Applicant's Professionals.
a. If a Board Member has an ongoing business relationship with
an applicant's professional, recusal is required.
b. If a Board Member, a Board Member's spouse or other adult
member of the Board Members household, or a relative of a
Board Member has a direct employment relationship with a
professional engaged by applicant in connection with the
application, recusal is required.
c. If a Board Member or a Board Member's spouse, or a relative
of a Board Member had a prior relationship with the
applicant's professional, recusal is required for three years
from the date of the last professional contact. Disclosure is
required for another two years by the Board Member and the
applicant.
d. If any other member of the immediate family of a Board
Member, or a relative of a Board Member had a prior
relationship with the applicant's professional, disclosure is
required by the Board Member and the applicant for three
years after termination, but recusal is not mandated.
e. When an applicant's professional is in direct competition with a
Board Member's business or his or her spouse's business,
recusal is required.
f. When an applicant's professional is in direct competition with a
Board Member's employer or a Board Member's spouse's
employer, disclosure is required by the Board Member and the
applicant.
g. Where any of the applicant's professionals has a formal (not
casual) business or contractual relationship with a board
professional or a municipal professional, that relationship must
be disclosed by the applicant.
h. Any known relationship, present or past, between any family
member of a Board Member with an applicant and/or an
applicant's professional or an affiliate of the applicant or the
applicant's professional, must be disclosed by the Board
Member and the applicant.
6. Relationships with Objectors. The foregoing standards apply as if
the objector were the applicant.
§ 2.98.080 RARITAN CODE § 2.98.080
1.01:64
Chapter 2.100
MISCELLANEOUS FEES
§ 2.100.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 95-11]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a schedule of miscellaneous
fees for a variety of duties, services and materials that are performed or
provided by Township officials to the public and not otherwise established
in this code.
§ 2.100.020. Establishment of Fees. [Amended by Ord. 92-7; Ord.
95-11; Ord. 01-35; Ord. 06-14; Ord. 07-2; Ord. 10-10; Ord. 10-24]
The following fees are established and shall be paid by the applicant for
such service or materials:
7. Board and Township Professionals. Board or Township
professionals, including, but not limited to, the Township Planner,
the Board Attorney, the Board Engineer or Township Engineers,
doing business elsewhere, must disclose all relationships with an
applicant or the applicant's professionals and recuse themselves if
they are currently doing work for any of those individuals or
entities or have done so within the year preceding the application.
8. Nature of Recusal or Disclosure. When a Board Member recuses
him or herself, he or she must disclose only the nature of the
relationship requiring recusal, i.e., family, business, social. When
disclosure is required in lieu of recusal, full detail regarding the
nature of the relationship and the person with whom the
relationship exists or existed must be disclosed on the public
record.
C. Consultation with Board Counsel or Township Attorney. Board Members
and Township Officials are encouraged to consult counsel if he or she is
unclear as to whether recusal or disclosure is required. If counsel is
consulted and a Board Member follows counsel's advice, he or she shall
be deemed to be in compliance with this Code of Ethical Conduct.
A. Notices — Agenda (by Mail).
1. Annual notice of regular meetings (or revisions thereto): $0.05 per
page.
2. Forty-eight hour advance written notice of non-regular meetings:
$0.05 per page.
3. Notice of special, rescheduled or emergency meetings: $0.05 per
page.
4. Agendas: $0.05 per page.
§ 2.98.080 CODE ADOPTION § 2.100.020
1.01:65
B. Copies (In Person and by Mail).
1. Official minutes of regular and special open meetings (or revisions
thereto): $0.05 per page.
2. All other copies (except oversized documents or documents
requiring outside copying or special handling): $0.05 cents per
page.
3. The fee for any oversized documents or documents requiring
outside copying or special handling shall be the actual cost of
copying, plus applicable postage and handling not to exceed 10% of
the actual copying charge or $10, whichever is greater.
4. Map copies:
a. Historic Reproduction of 1850 Map of Raritan Township: $25
per map plus the cost of postage and handling.
b. Twenty-four inches by 36 inches; $5 per page plus the cost of
postage and handling; all other sizes: $1 per square foot plus
postage and handling.
5. The fee for computer disk copies of recordings of Township
meetings: $1 per disk.
C. Searches.
1. Assessment search (per block and lot): $10.
2. Tax search (per block and lot): $10.
3. Continuation search (per year up to three years from the date of
the original search: $2 per year.
D. Police Reports.
1. Motor vehicle accident reports:
a. In person: no charge up to two pages for requests made by the
vehicle owner or driver, over two pages or other parties: see
Subsection (B)(2) of this section for actual copy charges.
b. By mail: $0.05 per page plus postage.
c. Accident investigations involving photo's, transcripts, etc.,
charges shall be as shown in appropriate category.
2. Investigation/incident reports subject to and in accordance with
Raritan Township Police policy for release of information.
a. Victims: In person: no charge. By mail: $0.05 per page plus
postage.
§ 2.100.020 RARITAN CODE § 2.100.020
1.01:66
3. Noncurrent information: general research of public of subpoenaed
information or noncurrent information and comments and/or
information to be reviewed and copies (applicant to be advised in
advance and deposit will be required based on estimated time and
cost): $20 per hour (with a one-hour minimum), plus actual copy
costs.
4. Duplicates.
a. Audio duplicate of CD: $3 per CD.
E. Certification of Documents. Per certification (with the exception of
certified copies of records of the Registrar of Vital Statistics): $1.
F. Duplicates.
1. Tax Bills.
a. First duplicate copy: $5.
b. Each additional duplicate copy which may be requested in the
same tax year: $25.
The above set forth fees to be charged, may, at the discretion of the
tax collector, be assessed to a mortgagee, servicing organization or
property tax processing organization as such terms are defined in P.L.
1990, Chapter 69, N.J.S.A. 54:4-64d., and upon such request for said
duplicate tax bill made in writing to the tax collector.
2. Photographs, standard print (four inches by six inches): $10 each.
Other enlargements: actual cost plus $10 per print.
G. Certified Property Owners List. Within 200 feet of a single block and lot:
$10.
H. Miscellaneous Documents and Research.
1. Zoning map: $5.
2. Development ordinance: $25.
3. Master plan or Master Plan Draft: $30.
4. Stormwater Management Plan: $30.
5. Environmental Resource Inventory: $30.
6. Housing Element: $10.
I. Returned Checks.
1. In accordance with the applicable provisions of P.L. 1990, c. 105,
there is established a service charge of $20 per check or other
written instrument returned for insufficient funds, and
§ 2.100.020 CODE ADOPTION § 2.100.020
1.01:67
a. The service charge shall be paid in cash immediately;
b. The service charge shall be added to any account owing to the
Township if payment tendered on the account was by a check
or other written instrument which was returned for insufficient
funds; or
c. Whenever an account owing to the Township is for a tax or
special assessment, the service charge shall be included on any
list of delinquent accounts prepared for the enforcement of the
lien.
2. The service charge authorized by this subsection shall be collected
in the same manner prescribed by law for the collection of the
account for which the check or other written instrument was
tendered. The Township, through the Chief Financial Officer, may
require future payments to be tendered in cash or by certified or
cashier's check.
J. Subpoena of Township employees (where Township or employee is not
party to the suit):
1. All payments required hereunder shall be made in advance of the
actual date of the appearance. Payments shall be made for an
entire day's appearance without any pro-rating for the actual hours
spent in travelling to or from the place of appearance or the actual
time spent in depositions, court appearances, etc.
2. Any subpoena which is issued and places an employee on call shall
be billed and paid in advance at the same rate as though an actual
appearance was required.
3. In the event that advance payment has not been made for an actual
or on call appearance, the employee shall not be scheduled nor be
available for the appearance noticed, and a copy of the
requirements of this provision shall be provided to any party
making an inquiry or issuing a subpoena.
a. Police Officers: (appearances shall be subject to availability of
sufficient back-up officers so as to insure Township police
coverage to protect public health, safety and welfare), the
party issuing the subpoena shall pay to the Township, a sum
equal to 1 1/2 times the Police Officer's total daily
compensation for each day, or part thereof, of the Officer's
appearance.
b. All other Township employees: the party issuing the subpoena
shall pay to the Township, a sum equal to the Township
employee's total daily compensation for each day, or part
thereof, of the Township employee's appearance.
§ 2.100.020 RARITAN CODE § 2.100.020
1.01:68
§ 2.100.030. Statutory Fees to Prevail. [Amended by Ord. 95-11]
When any fees herein described are at any time at variance with fees for
said services or materials as prescribed by the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey, the fees prescribed by the Statute shall govern.
Chapter 2.102
LEAVE POLICY FOR CERTAIN EMPLOYEES
§ 2.102.010. Intent. [Amended by Ord. 11-7, adopted 4-5-20114;
3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-8]
It is the intent of this Chapter 2.102, adopted by Ordinance No. 11-7 and as
amended by Ordinance No. 18-8, to establish the policy for sick, vacation,
personal and compensatory leave for employees not covered by collective
negotiation agreements.
§ 2.102.020. Accumulated Leave Benefits as of the Effective Date of
Ordinance No. 11-7. [Amended by Ord. 11-7; 3-6-2018 by Ord. No.
18-8]
As of the effective date of Ordinance No. 11-7, employees of the Township of
Raritan who are not covered by collective negotiation agreements shall be
paid for sick, vacation, personal and compensatory leave on the following
basis:
K. Facsimiles. A charge of $1 per page shall be paid in advance or by
invoice to the requesting party, in addition to any other charges
established in this section.
L. Transcripts. Transcript fees: $5 per page of original transcript
document; copies of original transcript shall be in accordance with
Subsection (B)(2) of this section.
M. Noncurrent information. General research of public or subpoenaed
information and documents, and/or information to be reviewed and
copies (applicant to be advised in advance and deposit will be required
based on estimated time): $20 per hour (with a one-hour minimum),
plus actual copy costs.
A. Sick Leave.
1. At retirement, employees shall be paid 35% of the daily rate of pay
in effect and for the number of days accumulated on the effective
date of Ordinance No. 11-7 for each accumulated day up to a
maximum of 200 days.
4. Editor's Note: This ordinance amends Ordinance No. 02-13 which was not codified.
§ 2.100.020 CODE ADOPTION § 2.102.020
1.01:69
§ 2.102.030. Leave Benefits. [Amended by Ord. 11-7; 3-6-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-8]
After the effective date of this Ordinance No. 18-8, the sick, vacation,
personal and compensatory leave policy for employees of the Township of
Raritan who are not covered by collective negotiation agreements is as
follows:
2. At other separation of employment, except in the case of firing,
employees shall be paid 25% of the daily rate of pay in effect and
for the number of days accumulated on the effective date of
Ordinance No. 11-7 for each accumulated day up to a maximum of
200 days.
B. Vacation Leave. At separation of employment, employees shall receive
payment for accumulated vacation leave. The calculation for the
current year will be prorated based upon the number of months worked
in the year and the allotment for that year.
C. Personal Leave. At separation of employment, employees shall receive
payment for accumulated personal leave. The calculation for the
current year will be prorated based upon the number of months worked
in the year and the allotment for that year.
D. Compensatory Leave. At separation of employment, employees may
receive payment for accumulated compensatory leave and/or use
accumulated compensatory leave until the date of separation. Only the
following titles shall accrue compensatory time and at the limits
established by separate agreements or by other policies established by
the Township Committee: Chief of Police, Superintendent of Public
Works, Assistant Superintendent of Public Works, Township Engineer
and Public Works Foreman. The use of accumulated compensatory
leave at separation shall be at the discretion of the Township
Committee in accordance with the personnel needs of the Township.
E. Statutory Limit on Compensation. Payment for accumulated sick and
vacation leave shall not exceed the statutory amounts set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-10.2 and N.J.S.A. 40A:9-10.3.
A. Sick Leave. Unused sick leave shall accrue year to year.
B. Vacation Leave. Vacation leave shall be used in the year in which it is
accrued and may not be carried to the succeeding year. However, a
Township employee who does not take all of the annual vacation leave
that accrues after the effective date of this ordinance because of
Township business demands may be allowed to carry up to 1/2 of the
accrued annual allotment of vacation leave only during the next
succeeding year and upon the employee's written request to and
written approval of that request by the Township Administrator. In the
event that a medical condition restricts the use of vacation leave and
would prohibit the employee from using at least 1/2 of the vacation
§ 2.102.020 RARITAN CODE § 2.102.030
1.01:70
§ 2.102.040. Effect on Current Employees. [Amended by Ord. 11-7;
3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-8]
§ 2.102.050. Severability. [Amended by Ord. 11-7]
If any section, subsection, paragraph or clause of this Ordinance shall be
judged invalid by any Court of competent jurisdiction or by any subsequent
law or rule, such judgment, law or rule shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of this Ordinance and to this end the provisions of this Ordinance
are hereby declared to be severable.
leave allotment, the employee, upon request to and approval of the
Administrator, may carry over more than 1/2 of the annual allotment
into the succeeding year. Any vacation leave carried into the succeeding
year because of medical conditions must be used no later than June 30,
or lost.
C. Personal Leave. Personal leave shall be used in the year in which it is
accrued and may not be carried to the succeeding year.
D. Compensatory Leave. Only the following employees shall accrue
compensatory time and at the limits established by separate
agreements or by other policies established by the Township
Committee: Chief of Police, Superintendent of Public Works, Assistant
Superintendent of Public Works, Township Engineer and Public Works
Foreman. The use of accumulated compensatory leave at separation
shall be at the discretion of the Township Committee in accordance with
the personnel needs of the Township.
E. Statutory Limit on Compensation. Payment for accumulated sick and
vacation leave shall not exceed the statutory amounts set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-10.2 and N.J.S.A. 40A:9-10.3.
A. This Ordinance No. 11-7, as amended and supplemented by Ordinance
No. 18-8, fixes accumulated sick, vacation, personal and compensatory
leave for Township employees as of the effective date of this ordinance.
For those employees subject to § 2.102 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Raritan, the ability to accumulate sick
leave shall only commence upon the effective date of Ordinance No.
18-8 and is not retroactive.
B. This ordinance will not serve to alter, modify or reduce the sick,
vacation, personal or compensatory leave an employee accrued prior to
the effective date of Ordinance 11-7.
C. After the effective date of Ordinance 11-7, as amended and
supplemented by Ordinance 18-8, sick, vacation, personal and
compensatory leave will not accrue unless otherwise stated in this
ordinance.
§ 2.102.030 CODE ADOPTION § 2.102.060
1.01:71
§ 2.102.060. Effective Date. [Amended by Ord. 11-7]
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its final passage and publication
according to law.
Chapter 2.104
LOCAL HISTORIANS COMMITTEE
§ 2.104.010. Establishment — Composition. [Amended by Ord. 01-5;
Ord. 99-21]
§ 2.104.020. Powers and Duties. [Amended by Ord. 99-21]
The Local Historians Committee shall have the following powers, duties and
responsibilities:
A. There is established a Local Historians Committee for the purpose of
preserving the Township's heritage and increasing the education,
appreciation and communication of such heritage for the enrichment of
the citizens of the Township and neighboring communities.
B. The Local Historians Committee shall be composed of nine members,
one of whom shall be a member of the Township Committee, and one of
whom shall be a member of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
The representative member of the Planning Board, if any, may be a
member of the Township Committee where said Township Committee
member is a member of the Planning Board. [Amended 3-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-07]
C. Of the members first appointed to the Committee, two shall be
appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, and one
for a term of three years from the date of annual reorganization of the
Township commencing in January, 2000. The Township Committee
person shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Township Committee. Prior to that date, the five persons appointed
to the committee shall serve until the annual reorganization in January,
2000.
D. Annually thereafter, appointments of members whose term expire shall
be for a term of three years from the date of such expiration with the
exception of the Township Committee person whose term shall be one
year. Vacancies in the membership of the Committee, occurring from
another cause shall be promptly filled by the Township Committee, for
the unexpired term thereof. Members shall serve for their respective
terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified.
A. To compile and update an inventory of historic structures, places and
things within the Township;
§ 2.102.060 RARITAN CODE § 2.104.020
1.01:72
Chapter 2.108
AGRICULTURE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 2.108.010. Establishment — Composition. [Amended by Ord.
99-26]
There is established a municipal Agriculture Advisory Committee for the
purpose of identifying project areas of multiple farms that are reasonably
contiguous and located in an agriculture development area authorized
pursuant to the Agriculture Retention and Development Act, P.L. 1983, c.32
(C.4:1C-11 et seq.).
The Municipal Agriculture Advisory Committee shall be composed of five
members, appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the municipal
Governing Body, and the
Committee shall report to the municipal Planning Board. The Committee
shall be composed of at least three, but not more than five, members
who shall be residents of the municipality, with a majority of the members
actively engaged in farming and owning a portion of the land they farm. The
term of office of each member shall be one year.
Annually thereafter, appointments of members shall be made at the annual
reorganization of the municipality. Vacancies in the membership of the
Committee shall be promptly filled by the Township Committee, for the
unexpired term thereof. Members shall serve for their respective terms and
until their successors are appointed and qualified.
B. To implement a historical educational program, including but not
restricted to collecting, or preserving and making available to persons,
schools, and organizations, materials related to the history of the
Township of Raritan;
C. To recommend and assist in projects of commemoration, and including
the erection of monuments, historical markers and guide signs;
D. To maintain such appropriate records, and compile and submit to the
Township Committee an annual report and recommendations by the
first of December of each year.
E. To provide opportunities and recommend programs and/or materials
which will increase the education, appreciation and communication of
our Township heritage;
F. To elect from among its members, a chairperson, who in addition to the
traditional functions associated with such position, shall insure that
minutes of the meeting are maintained in accordance with the
Township policy.
§ 2.104.020 CODE ADOPTION § 2.108.020
1.01:73
§ 2.108.020. Powers and Duties. [Amended by Ord. 99-26]
The municipal Agriculture Development Committee shall have the following
powers, duties and responsibilities:
Chapter 2.109
CABLE TELEVISION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 2.109.010. Establishment and Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 01-2]
A Cable Television Advisory Committee is hereby established for the
purpose of assisting the Township Committee in its review of the
performance and application for renewal of any cable company which has
received Municipal Consent from the Township and the planning of future
cable related needs for the Township.
§ 2.109.020. Composition. [Amended by Ord. 01-2]
The Cable Television Advisory Committee shall be composed of seven
members who are Township citizens, and appointed by the Township
Committee and shall report directly to the Township Committee. The
Township Committee shall appoint one of its members to be a liaison to the
Cable Television Advisory Committee. The term of office of each member
shall be one year.
Chapter 2.110
LOCAL HISTORIAN
§ 2.110.010. Establishment.
There is hereby established the position of Local Historian for the Township
of Raritan. The position of Local Historian shall be a yearly appointment of
the Township Committee from among the members of the Local Historians
Committee. A vacancy of this position shall be promptly filled by the
Township Committee for the unexpired term thereof. The Local Historian
A. To compile and update an inventory of farms within the Township;
B. To give advice for the planning and implementation of a farmland
preservation plan element pursuant to paragraph (13) of Section 19 of
P.L. 1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-28) as amended by A-1869;
C. To compile and submit to the Township Committee an annual report and
recommendations by the first of December of each year;
D. To elect from among its members, a chairperson, who in addition to the
traditional functions associated with such position, shall insure that
minutes of the meeting are maintained in accordance with the
Township policy.
§ 2.108.020 RARITAN CODE § 2.110.010
1.01:74
shall serve without compensation and the Governing Body may annually
appropriate such funds as may be necessary to reimburse a Local Historian
for expenses incurred in the performance of the duties and responsibilities
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:10.
§ 2.110.020. Powers and Responsibilities of the Local Historian.
[Amended by Ord. 03-2]
The Local Historian shall have the following powers and responsibilities
with the advice and approval of the Local Historians Committee:
Chapter 2.111
COMMUNITY EMERGENCY RESPONSE TEAM
A. To carry out a historical program, including but not restricted to the
history of the local unit. The Local Historian shall store such materials
in such manner as to insure their preservation, and shall notify the
State Archivist, New Jersey Historical Commission, county local
historian and local governing body of any materials which should be
acquired for preservation. All materials and records and reports will be
in the sole possession of the Raritan Township Clerk and stored in the
Archives of the Township.
B. The Local Historian, in association and with the approval from the Local
Historians Committee, shall make an annual report to the chief
executive officer and Governing Body of the Township stating all work
performed and accomplished during that year. This report shall be
transmitted by the Local Historian to the New Jersey Historical
Commission. The New Jersey Historical Commission may advise the
municipal historian who shall then inform the Local Historians
Committee of general guidelines along which the local historical
program may be implemented;
C. The Local Historian in conjunction with the Local Historians Committee
may research, write and cause to have published a municipal history,
and may recommend appropriate historical materials for publication;
D. The Local Historian shall assist the Local Historians Committee as well
as the Governing Body concerning the acquisition, administration, use
and disposition of any landmark or historic site, including such places in
the Township included on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places.
Such advice may be furnished to the Historic Sites Section, Department
of Environmental Protection; and
E. The local historian shall assist in projects of commemoration, including
the erection of the monuments, historic markers and guide signs.
§ 2.110.010 CODE ADOPTION § 2.111.010
1.01:75
§ 2.111.010. Established. [Amended by Ord. 12-15]
A Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) is hereby established
in the Township of Raritan. The Community Emergency Response Team
shall be under the supervision and control of the Township Emergency
Management Coordinator or designee.
§ 2.111.020. Mission, Organization and Purpose. [Amended by Ord.
12-15]
The mission, organization and purpose of the Township CERT program is
to provide volunteer services in the areas of natural and other disasters
under the direction of the Township Emergency Management Coordinator
to supplement and assist police, fire and emergency management services
response to a disaster. Further to provide support to the Township of
Raritan and the Township's designated Emergency Services agencies
throughout the year.
§ 2.111.030. Membership. [Amended by Ord. 12-15]
CERT volunteers shall be approved by the Township Committee upon
recommendation of the Emergency Management Coordinator. To be
considered eligible, a volunteer must be 18 years of age and reside or work
within the Township or surrounding communities.
§ 2.111.040. Training. [Amended by Ord. 12-15]
As the field of emergency service is every changing it is incumbent upon
all members to participate in formal CERT sponsored training and through
independent initiatives.
Chapter 2.112
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 2.112, Wildlife Management Advisory Committee, as
amended by Ord. 2016-15, was repealed 3-3-2020 by Ord. No. 20-10.]
Chapter 2.113
RECREATION DEPARTMENT
A. Training hours may include:
1. Participation in classes conducted by CERT.
2. Participation in classes conducted by other agencies - with prior
approval of the CERT or OEM Coordinator.
3. Participation in Raritan Township exercises.
4. FEMA independent study courses.
§ 2.111.010 RARITAN CODE § 2.113.010
1.01:76
§ 2.113.010. Creation. [11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 19-29]
There is hereby created the Department of Recreation (also referred to
as the "Recreation Department"). The Department shall provide for
recreational opportunities of the citizens of Raritan Township and other
persons who wish to participate under the ultimate direction of the
Township Committee.
§ 2.113.020. Director. [11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 19-29]
There is hereby created the positions of Director and Co-Director of the
Department of Recreation. The Director shall:
§ 2.113.030. Co-Director. [11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 19-29]
The Co-Director shall:
§ 2.113.040. Fees. [11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 19-29]
The Township Committee shall set forth the fees associated with the
programs of the Recreation Department, from time to time as it sees fit,
through the adoption of a resolution. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Director shall create and manage a program that would permit the indigent
to participate in the programs of the Recreation Department for a lesser
amount.
Title 3: Revenue and Finance
Chapter 3.04
FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY
§ 3.04.010. Budget. [Prior code § 2-7.2]
A. Administer all aspects of the recreation function, according to the
Township budget, personnel and recreation policies and contracts or
agreements.
B. Enforce the rules and regulations, as adopted, governing use of
recreational facilities.
C. Report to the Township Administrator in all duties.
D. Recommend for appointment and supervise all recreation program
staff.
E. Coordinate or delegate to subordinates all volunteer or community
group efforts to provide recreational programming as they relate to
Township facilities or calendar.
A. Assist the Director with all functions of the Recreation Department.
§ 2.113.010 CODE ADOPTION § 3.04.010
1.01:77
§ 3.04.020. Payroll Account. [Prior code § 2-7.4]
A. Preparation. The municipal budget shall be prepared by the Township
Committee with the assistance of the Township Clerk, until such time as
a Township administrator is appointed. During the month of November
in each year, all department heads shall submit requests for
appropriations for the ensuing budget year and appear before the
Township Committee on the various requests.
B. Document. Upon the basis of the departmental requests, its analysis of
the needs and resources of the municipality, and such policy guides as
may be prescribed the Township Committee, with the assistance of the
Township Auditor, shall prepare its recommended budget in the form
required by general law for municipal budgets.
A. The Raritan Township Treasurer shall present twice a month to the
Raritan Township Committee for approval, warrants drawn to the order
of the Township payroll account as follows:
1. In advance for all employees whose salaries are on an annual, or
weekly basis, when such salaries are due and payable prior to the
next regular meeting of the Township Committee;
2. In advance for all employees whose compensation is on an hourly
basis, when the compensation has been approved by some
responsible designated official and the Chairman of the appropriate
committee, and has been certified to the Treasurer;
B. At the first meeting of the Township Committee in January of each year
there shall be approved an account to be designated the Township
payroll account, and from time to time the Township Treasurer, upon
receipt of a warrant for the amount due such payroll account, shall
deposit the same to the credit of the payroll account, charging the
appropriate budgetary accounts therewith. The Township Treasurer
shall thereafter draw checks on the payroll account to the employees
entitled to payment therefrom.
C. At each regular meeting of the Township Committee, the Township
Treasurer shall submit for the approval or ratification as the case may
be the necessary payrolls for the amount due the several officials and
employees for compensation. The payroll shall be considered by the
Township Committee in due course and approved, if found to be
correct. In case of error or adjustment in the payroll, the Township
Treasurer shall, and it shall be his or her duty to, see that such error or
adjustment is properly corrected and appropriate record made thereof.
D. The Township Treasurer is authorized to sign checks drawn in favor of
the payroll account upon due notice that the appropriate payrolls have
been approved by the proper committee and by the proper certifying
authorities.
§ 3.04.010 RARITAN CODE § 3.04.030
1.01:78
§ 3.04.030. Travel Expenses. [Prior code § 2-7.5]
Itemized claims, supported by receipts where available, shall be presented
in order to obtain reimbursement for expenses incurred by local officials
were authorized to travel by the Township Committee.
Chapter 3.08
PURCHASING
§ 3.08.010. Purchasing Generally. [Prior code § 2-7.1; amended by
Ord. 98-33]
All purchases made and contracts awarded from any supplies, materials,
equipment or contractual services shall be pursuant to a written requisition
from the head of the department against which the appropriation will be
charged and the certification of the Chief Financial Officer that a sufficient
balance of appropriation is available to pay therefore.
§ 3.08.020. Joint Purchasing. [Prior code § 2-7.6]
A. Categories of Work, Materials and Supplies Authorized to be Acquired.
A joint purchasing program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-10 et seq. shall
be authorized for the acquisition of all services, materials and supplies
necessary for the operation of the public works departments and the
maintenance of the buildings and grounds of the Township of Raritan
and the Flemington-Raritan Regional School District as well as the
completion of any public works projects in the aforesaid agencies.
B. Manner of Advertising for Bids. A single advertisement for bids with
materials, services and supplies to be purchased shall be placed on
behalf of the participants hereunder desiring to purchase any item set
forth above by a single advertisement by one of the three participants.
The advertising shall be placed by the participants, agreed upon by all
participants and the responsibility for such advertising shall alternate
from time to time.
C. Manner of Awarding Contracts. The participant selected to advertise
for bids shall receive the bids on behalf of all participants. Following the
receipt of bids, copies of bids shall be forwarded to each participant
who, after review and approval of same, shall make separate awards to
the lowest responsible bidder for each separate item. The bid surety
shall be posted and retained by the designated receiving participant
until authorized to release same by the interested participant. It shall
then be the responsibility of each participant to secure individual
contracts.
D. Payment for Services, Materials and Supplies. After the award of bids,
each municipality shall order the materials, work and supplies in the
quantity or quantities required. Successful bidders shall bill the
municipalities separately for materials, services and supplies received,
§ 3.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 3.08.020
1.01:79
Chapter 3.10
ENERGY AGGREGATION PROGRAM
§ 3.10.010. Township Intent Declared. [Amended by Ord. 14-14]
The Township publicly declares its intent to become an aggregator of
electric power on behalf of its residential and non-residential users of
electricity pursuant to the Government Energy Act of 2003, N.J.S.A.
48:3-93.1 to -98, and implementing regulations.
§ 3.10.020. Selection of Supplier; Options for Participation.
[Amended by Ord. 14-14]
The Township will utilize Gabel Associates, Highland Park, New Jersey
pursuant to the NJ E-PROCUREMENT Pilot program (P.L. 2001, c.30) under
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs. The sealed electronic bid
auction will seek bids from licensed and appropriate third party suppliers. If
such winning bid is selected and agreement executed, individual residential
consumers would retain the option not to participate and to choose any
alternatives they desire, while non-residential ratepayers would also have
the right to participate.
§ 3.10.030. Authorization. [Amended by Ord. 14-14]
The Mayor and Township Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to
execute any documents necessary to carry out the purpose of Ordinance No.
14-14.
Chapter 3.12
DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS
§ 3.12.010. Claims — Recording and Payment. [Prior code § 2-7.3;
amended by Ord. 90-12]
and payment shall be made directly to the bidder by each such agency.
No participant in the program shall be responsible for payment for any
materials to be used by any other participant.
A. Any person claiming payment from the Township shall present at least
seven days prior to a Township Committee meeting, a signed voucher
copy of the purchase order issued by the Township along with a detailed
invoice with the claimants certification on the voucher signed by the
party claiming payment certifying that it is correct, and the goods and/
or services have been provided.
B. It shall be the duty of the Chief Financial Officer to see that there
appears on every claim, the signature of the department head, ordering
§ 3.08.020 RARITAN CODE § 3.12.010
1.01:80
Chapter 3.14
HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX
the goods and/or services, and certifying that the goods have been
received by or the services rendered to the Township.
C. Upon receiving the certification from the vendor that the payment
claimed is correct and certification from the department head that the
goods have been received by and/or the services have been rendered to
the Township, the Chief Financial Officer shall schedule the claim for
payment, prepare a claims list and duly certify that funds are available
in all budget appropriations to cover the claims scheduled for payment.
D. The claims list along with the vouchers supporting the payments to be
approved shall be presented to the Township Committee. Claims shall
be considered by the Township Committee and they shall approve same
except that the Township Committee may reject any claim presented to
it stating the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved claim shall be
referred back to the Township Administrator with such instructions as
the Township Committee may give at the time of disapproval.
E. It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk to record all claims in the
official minutes indicating that the Township Committee has by formal
action approved the same with appropriate record as to any claims
disapproved or rejected.
F. It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk to indicate on the claims list
along with the Chief Financial Officer, Treasurer and Mayor that the
claims have been approved for payment.
G. After the claims list has been duly certified that the claims have been
approved for payment, the Clerk shall forward a copy of same to the
Chief Financial Officer, who shall forthwith arrange for the preparation
of the necessary checks in payment of the claims; which checks shall be
signed by the Mayor and thereafter countersigned by the Treasurer or
Assistant Treasurer.
H. In the case of payrolls, the Assistant Treasurer, shall prepare the
necessary payrolls for all employees, which payrolls shall be duly
authorized by the Township Administrator certifying that the services
have been rendered and the amount specified is in fact due and owing
the employee, and further certified by the Chief Financial Officer that
funds are available in all budget appropriations to cover the payrolls on
that date.
I. In the case of reimbursement for actual and necessary travel expenses
itemized claims supported by receipts where available shall be
presented in order to obtain reimbursement for expenses incurred by
local Township Officials were previously authorized by the Township.
§ 3.12.010 CODE ADOPTION § 3.14.010
1.01:81
§ 3.14.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 03-29]
It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003,
c. 114, which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1%
on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but before
July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy
on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation
pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3)
which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the
occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 3.14.020. Established. [Amended by Ord. 03-29]
There is hereby established a Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax in the
Township of Raritan which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of
1% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Raritan on or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and
3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Raritan on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel
subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.
40 N.J.S.A. 54:32B (sales tax).
§ 3.14.030. Tax in Addition. [Amended by Ord. 03-29]
The Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 3.14.040. Exemption. [Amended by Ord. 03-29]
The Hotel and Motel Occupancy Tax authorized herein shall not be imposed
on the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user or consumer is an entity
exempt from the tax imposed on the rent for an occupancy under the "Sales
and Use Tax Act" pursuant to Subsection (a) of Section 9 of P.L. 1966, c.30
(C.54:32B-9).
§ 3.14.050. Regulations, Penalty. [Amended by Ord. 03-29; Ord.
06-03]
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c.114:
A. All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the purchaser;
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this chapter.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
§ 3.14.010 RARITAN CODE § 3.14.050
1.01:82
§ 3.14.060. Collection of Tax. [Amended by Ord. 03-29]
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected on behalf of the Township
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each
person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable
for the tax imposed collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any
such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a
customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time;
provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall be joined as
a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
Chapter 3.16
FEE EXEMPTIONS FOR ACTIVE POLICE, FIRE AND RESCUE
MEMBERS, AND VETERANS
§ 3.16.010. Intent. [Amended by Ord. 08-6; Ord. 2017-08; Ord.
2017-24]
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be as per
Section 1.08.010 for each offense.
A. The fees for the following permits, approvals, licenses, certifications
and copies shall be waived for all Exempt Residents of Raritan
Township, as that term is defined in Subsection B of this chapter,
provided however, that said waiver shall only be for the personal use
and benefit of the individual receiving said waiver:
1. Alarm Systems.
a. Change or reregister for new owners.
b. Registration.
2. Board of Health.
a. Licenses:
i. Application to alter existing water supply (includes cost of
inspection)
ii. Construction of new water supply (includes cost of
inspection).
iii. Reinspection of water supply or part caused by failure of
permittee to locate and construct or alter in accordance
with permit terms.
§ 3.14.050 CODE ADOPTION § 3.16.010
1.01:83
b. Vital Statistic Fees:
i. Certified copies of birth, marriage, civil union, and
domestic partnership certificates.
ii. Certified copies of death certificates.
iii. Marriage, remarriage, civil union, domestic partnership
licenses.
c. Certification of documents.
d. Certified list of names from current tax duplicates, requires to
give notice on hearing an application for development.
e. Certified property owners list.
f. Community Garden Fee.
g. Construction or curb alteration permit.
h. Dog/cat license/registration:
i. Not spayed, neutered.
ii. Spayed, neutered.
iii. Duplicate license registration tag.
iv. Renewal after 5/31, late fee.
v. Replacement license/registration tab.
i. Driveway construction or alteration permit.
j. Excavation:
i. House connection.
ii. Opening in road pavement shoulder or bank.
iii. Permit application.
k. Non-recycling permits:
i. Regular permit (6 drop-offs)
ii. Replacement permit (2 drop-offs- 2 replacement only)
l. Recycling permits:
i. Regular Recycling Permits (up to 3 stickers).
ii. Replacement Recycling Permits (1 to 3 stickers)
m. Tax bills, photographs, duplicates.
n. Tent erection:
§ 3.16.010 RARITAN CODE § 3.16.010
1.01:84
i. Below 10,000 cubic feet.
ii. Above 10,000 cubic feet.
o. Toilets, portable chemical:
i. Permit application.
ii. Permit.
iii. Renewal.
p. Zoning permits:
i. For decks, fences, sheds, finished basements, interior
renovations, oil tanks, A/C units, and other accessory
structures.
q. For additions:
i. Single-family residential (new structure)
ii. Multi-family/attached residential (new structure).
B. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings.
1. EXEMPT RESIDENT OF RARITAN TOWNSHIP — A person whose
primary place of residence is located within Raritan Township and
who, through use of documentation can demonstrate that he or she
is (i) an active voluntary member in the Raritan Township Fire
Company, the Flemington-Raritan First Aid and Rescue Squad, or
the Flemington Borough Fire Department, or a member of the
Raritan Township Community Emergency Response Team
("CERT"), as demonstrated through an identification card or other
form of documentation, or (ii) a member of the Raritan Township
Police Department as demonstrated through an identification card
or other form of documentation, or (iii) a United States Veteran as
defined by this section. [Amended 2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-03]
2. PERSONAL USE AND BENEFIT — For the use and benefit of the
person requesting a waiver pursuant to this chapter only. The term
shall, in no way include commercial uses or benefits that accrue
due to commercial uses.
3. UNITED STATES VETERAN — Shall be defined as an individual
who, through the possession of a DD-214 form or Active Military
identification card, Reserve identification card, Dependent
identification card, Retired identification card, Veteran
identification card, Honorable Discharge Certificate, General
Discharge Certificate, and satisfies any one or more of the
following criteria:
§ 3.16.010 CODE ADOPTION § 3.16.010
1.01:85
Chapter 3.999
FEE SCHEDULE
§ 3.999.010. Fee Schedule.
Fee Schedule
Description Section Number Amount
Alarm system 8.04.040(D)
Change or reregister for new
owners
$10
Registration $10
Alcoholic beverage control licenses 5.08.030(B)
Club $188 per year
Hotel/motel $2,500 per year
Plenary retail consumption $2,500 per year
Plenary retail distribution $2,500 per year
Board of Health licenses 17.08.050
Application to alter existing water
supply (includes cost of inspection)
$10
Construction of new water supply
(includes cost of inspection)
$40
a. A person currently serving in the United States Army, Navy, Air
Force, Marines or Coast Guard, or their reserve components,
or the Army National Guard or the Air National Guard; or
b. A person having served in the United States Army, Navy, Air
Force, Marines or Coast Guard and having received a general
discharge or higher; or
c. A person having served in any combination of United States
Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines or Coast Guard, or their
reserve components, or the Army National Guard or the Air
National Guard and having received a general discharge or
higher;
d. A "veteran" as that term is defined pursuant to the laws of the
State of New Jersey.
C. This chapter does not, in any way, limit other lawful statutory fee or
license exemptions.
§ 3.16.010 RARITAN CODE § 3.999.010
1.01:86
Description Section Number Amount
Reinspection of water supply or
part caused by failure of permittee
to locate and construct or alter in
accordance with permit terms
$5
Vital statistics fees
Certified copies of birth, marriage
and civil union and domestic
partnership
$25 each
Certified copies of death
certificates
$10 each
Marriage, remarriage, civil union
license
$28 each
Domestic partnership license $28 each
Schedule 17.44.030 See § 17.44.030
Business license transfers 5.04.070 $5
Certification of documents See § 2.100.020
Certified list of names from current
tax duplicates, required to give
notice of hearing on an application
for development
16.08.050(A)(3) $0.25 per name
or $10
whichever is
more
Certified property owners list See § 2.100.020
Coin-operated amusement device,
operator
5.16.050 $50 per year
Community garden fee
For 1 year Ord. 12-4 $30
Senior citizens (65 years or older) $20
Schools and non-profit
organizations
No fee
Conditional use application 16.08.090(G) $100 plus
appropriate
Construction Code 15.04.030 See Section
15.04.030
Computer disk copies of Township
minutes
Ord. 10-23 $1 per disk
Copies — in person and by mail See § 2.100.020
Curb construction or alteration
permit
12.20.010 $20
Disposal of tires at recycling center Ord. 04-37 $5 for car size
Ord. 04-37 $7 for truck size
§ 3.999.010 CODE ADOPTION § 3.999.010
1.01:87
Description Section Number Amount
Documents and research,
miscellaneous
See § 2.100.020
Dog/cat license/registration 6.04.020
Not spayed, neutered Ord. 07-4 $15 per year
Spayed, neutered Ord. 07-4 $12 per year
Duplicate license registration tag $0.50
Renewal after 5/31, late fee Ord. 06-16 $25
Replacement license/registration
tab
$0.50
Driveway construction or alteration
permit
12.20.010 $20
Excavation
House connection 12.24.050(S) $50 per
opening
Opening in road pavement shoulder
or bank
12.24.050(R) $50 per
opening up to 5
feet
Permit application 12.24.040 $2
$10 per
additional foot
Grading permit for certification of
soil erosion and sediment control
plans
16.82.140 $50
Facsimiles See § 2.100.020
Floodplain certificate 16.84.100 $15
Food establishment, retail 17.49.030
Permanent
Food establishments $250
Supermarkets $350
Temporary
One- to three-day event $110
Over three-day event $160
Information, noncurrent See § 2.100.020
Junkyard license 5.20.020 $25 per year
Kennel, annual fee 6.04.030(B)
10 animals or less $10
§ 3.999.010 RARITAN CODE § 3.999.010
1.01:88
Description Section Number Amount
More than 10 animals $25
Life hazard uses permit 8.16.040
Type 1 $25
Type 2 $100
Type 3 $200
Type 4 $300
Type 5 $1,000
Newsrack
Application 12.36.040(A) $30
Renewal 12.36.040(B) $15 per year
Non-recycling permits (6 drop-offs) Ord. 06-35 $30 per year
Replacement (2 drop-offs-1
replacement only)
Ord. 09-6 $30
Ord. 10-11
Notices — agenda by mail See § 2.100.020
Outside employment of off-duty
police officers
2.56.190 $75 per hour
(Hunterdon
County
Regional High
School District
and
Flemington-
Raritan School
District (K-8))
$85 per hour-all
other
employment
Pet shop, annual fee 6.04.030(B) $10
Pig, application to keep 17.32.040 $25
Police reports See § 2.100.020
Pool or billiard table 5.28.050 $50 each per
year
Public assembly
License application 8.28.030 $300
License 8.28.080 $50 for each
100 people
Public records, copies, off-site 2.92.030 $15 per day
Recreation area 12.48.040
§ 3.999.010 CODE ADOPTION § 3.999.010
1.01:89
Description Section Number Amount
Baseball/softball, soccer at Lenape
Park
Non-Township resident/
organization
$100 per field,
per game
$2,000 per
field, per
season
Township resident/organization $15 per field,
per game $300
maximum per
season
Basketball
Township resident/organization
non-Township resident/
organization cannot reserve
$100 per court,
per season 2
hour max $100
per court, per
season 2 hour
max
Baseball, softball, & soccer fields at
Mine Brook Park
Ord. 06-37
Township resident/organization Ord. 06-37 $15 per field,
per game $300
per field, per
season
Non-Township residents/
organizations
Ord. 06-37 $30 per field,
per game $600
per field, per
season
Recycling permits-yearly (up to 3
stickers)
Ord. 06-35 $5
Replacement recycling permits for
1 to 3 stickers
Ord. 10-12 $5
Reproduction of the historical film -
"A Man & His Land"
Ord. 03-23 $4 per disk
Ord. 10-23
Returned checks See § 2.100.020
Searches See § 2.100.020
Sign permits:
Ground sign $30
Temporary sign $10
Wall sign $30
§ 3.999.010 RARITAN CODE § 3.999.010
1.01:90
Description Section Number Amount
Site plan review and inspection 16.20.050 See § 16.20.050
Soil log testing, permeability 17.40.020 See § 17.40.020
Special events application 5.36.040 $50
Special meeting request 16.08.090(J) $1,000
Special road event application 8.32.020 $50
Subdivision
Application 16.18.050 See § 16.18.050
Approval certificate copies 16.08.090(H) $10
Subpoena of Township employees See § 2.100.020
Subsurface sewage disposal 17.44.030 $35
Swimming pool operation license 17.36.060 $25 per year
Tax bills and photographs, duplicates See § 2.100.020
Tent erection 15.08.090
Below 10,000 cubic feet $3
Above 10,000 feet $5
Toilets, portable chemical 17.16.030
Permit application $20
Permit $5 each toilet
Renewal $20 and $5
each toilet
Towing
Application 5.44.040
Initial $150
Renewal $100
Rates 5.44.080, Ord.
07-38
Basic towing services, first mile
or less
Days (8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.) $80 first mile or
less
Nights, weekends and N.J.
state holidays
$95 first mile or
less
Each additional mile $4 (loaded)
Storage: not to exceed 30 days Ord. 07-38
Inside storage per 24 hours (must
be requested)
$40
§ 3.999.010 CODE ADOPTION § 3.999.010
1.01:91
Description Section Number Amount
Outside storage per 24 hours $30
Other services: see Section
5.44.080
Ord. 07-38
Transcripts See § 2.100.020
Transient merchant
Application 5.24.080 $40 — 1 year or
part
Bond 5.24.070 $500
$25 — renewal
for 1 year or
part
Transportation Improvement District
1
16.16.070 See § 16.16.070
Variance application 16.78.050 See § 16.78.050
Vehicle impoundment (Police lot) 8.20.080 $6 per day of
storage
Vending machines, food and
beverage
17.28.060
License $10 per
machine per
year
Permit $10 per year
Zoning permits:
For decks, fences, sheds, finished
basements, interior renovations, oil
tanks, A/C units, and other
accessory structures;
$30
For Additions: 16.08.090(I) $50
For Single Family Residential
(new structure)
$150
For Multi-Family/Attached
Residential (new structure)
$100/unit
For Commercial - nonresidential
(new structure)
$250
Certificate of reoccupancy 16.08.090(K) $20
§ 3.999.010 RARITAN CODE § 3.999.010
1.01:92
Title 4: (Reserved)
Title 5: Business Licenses and Regulations
Chapter 5.04
LICENSES GENERALLY
§ 5.04.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 4-1.1; amended by Ord. 2017-41]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a uniform set of procedures for
administering the issuance, renewal, and revocation of all licenses issued
by the Township, except alcoholic beverage licenses, dog licenses, massage
therapy establishments and bodywork therapy establishment licenses, and
taxicab licenses.
§ 5.04.020. License — Application. [Prior code § 4-1.2]
All applications for licenses under this Title shall be made to the Township
Clerk on forms provided by him or her, and shall contain the following
information:
A. Name and permanent and local address of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its registered agent;
B. If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address
and description of the premises;
C. If a vehicle is to be used, its description, including the license number;
D. If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the
employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship;
E. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted;
F. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property or
services to be sold or supplied;
G. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or the violation of any municipal ordinance other than traffic
offenses and, if so, the date and place of conviction, the nature of the
offense, and the punishment or penalty imposed;
H. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant so that an investigator may properly
evaluate his or her character and responsibility.
§ 3.999.010 CODE ADOPTION § 5.04.020
1.01:93
§ 5.04.030. Investigation of Applicant. [Prior code § 4-1.3]
Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police or a Police Officer
designated by him or her, who shall immediately institute whatever
investigation of the applicant's business responsibility, moral character and
ability to properly conduct the licensed activity as he or she considers
necessary for the protection of the public. He or she shall communicate
his or her findings in writing to the Township Clerk within a reasonable
time after the application has been filed. If the investigator decides that the
applicant's character, ability or business responsibility is unsatisfactory, or
the products, services or activity are not free from fraud, he or she shall
disapprove the application and the Clerk shall refuse to issue the license
and so notify the applicant. Otherwise, the Clerk shall issue the license
immediately, provided the required license fees have been paid, except in
cases where approval of the Township Committee is required. In the case of
an application for a solicitor's, peddler's or canvasser's license, the license
may be issued immediately subject to investigation. In the event of the
denial of a license, the applicant may appeal to the Township Committee
for a hearing. The appeal must be filed, in writing, with the Township Clerk
within 14 days after notification of denial. The Committee shall hold the
hearing within 10 days thereafter, and its decision shall be final.
§ 5.04.040. License — Contents. [Prior code § 4-1.4]
Licenses shall be in a form which the committee shall prescribe by
resolution, and shall contain the following information:
The applicant shall be fingerprinted if the chief of police determines that
fingerprints are necessary for proper identification. Fingerprint records shall
be immediately processed for classification and identification.
Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners with the
information required by this section supplied in detail as to each partner,
and application of corporations shall have attached individual statements
containing all of the information required by this section relating to each
employee or agent who shall engage in the licensed activity, and shall be signed
by each employee or agent.
The applicant shall affix to the application two photographs, not over one year
old and of a minimum size of 1 1/2 inches by 1 1/2 inches, showing applicant's
face, front and profile.
A. The name and address of the licensee;
B. The number and type of the license and the nature of the licensed
activity;
C. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted, if the activity is
carried on at a fixed location;
D. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and
license number of the vehicle;
§ 5.04.020 RARITAN CODE § 5.04.040
1.01:94
§ 5.04.050. License Records. [Prior code § 4-1.5]
The Township Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this
chapter. The record shall be in a form prescribed by resolution of the
committee and shall contain the same information as is required by Section
5.04.040 to be contained in the license. It shall also indicate the amount
of the fee paid for each license, the date on which payment was received,
the date of issuance of the license, whether the license is new or is a
renewal, and any other information which the Township Committee require
by resolution.
§ 5.04.060. License Display. [Prior code § 4-1.6]
When the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location, or from a vehicle,
the license shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle.
In all other cases the license shall have the license in his or her possession
at all times and shall display it on the request of a Police Officer or any
person with whom he or she is doing business.
§ 5.04.070. License Transferability. [Prior code § 4-1.7]
Each license shall apply only to the person to whom it was issued and
shall not be transferable to another person. Licenses may be transferred
from place to place, in cases where the licensed activity is conducted at
a fixed location, but only with the approval of the Township Committee by
resolution. The fee for the transfer of a license from place to place shall be
$5.
§ 5.04.080. License Expiration Date Renewal Proration of Fees.
[Prior code § 4-1.8]
§ 5.04.090. Revocation of License. [Prior code § 4-1.9]
Any license or permit issued by the Township may be revoked by the
Committee after notice and a hearing for any of the following causes:
E. The expiration date of the license;
F. Any other appropriate information which the Township Committee may,
by resolution, require.
A. Except where expressly provided otherwise, all licenses shall expire on
December 31st of the year of issue at 12:00 midnight. Applications for
the renewal of licenses shall be made not later than December 1st of the
year of issue.
B. When an application for a license is made during the course of any
calendar year, the fee shall be prorated to the nearest month. Any
period of time greater than 1/2 a month shall be considered a full month
for this purpose.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or license;
§ 5.04.040 CODE ADOPTION § 5.04.090
1.01:95
§ 5.04.100. Notice of Hearing. [Prior code § 4-1.10]
Notice of hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be given
in writing by the Township Clerk. The notice shall specifically set forth the
grounds on which the proposed revocation is based and the time and place
of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a copy to the licensee at his or
her last known address, by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least
five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 5.04.110. Hearing Determination. [Prior code § 4-1.11]
At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to
be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his or her own behalf,
to cross-examine opposing witnesses, and to have a permanent record made
of the proceedings at his or her own expense. The Committee shall revoke
or suspend the license if they are satisfied by a preponderance of the
evidence that the license is guilty of the acts charged.
§ 5.04.120. Reinstatement of Revoked Licenses. [Prior code
§ 4-1.12]
The Committee may issue another license to a person whose license has
been revoked or denied as provided in this chapter if, after hearing, they
are satisfied by clear and convincing evidence that the acts which led to
the revocation or denial will not occur again; otherwise, no person whose
license has been revoked or denied, or any person acting for him or her,
directly or indirectly, shall be issued another license to carry on the same
activity.
§ 5.04.130. Promulgation of Rules and Regulations. [Prior code
§ 4-1.13]
The Township Committee may, by resolution, make rules and regulations
which interpret or amplify any provision of this Title or for the purpose of
B. Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity;
C. A violation of any provision of this Code;
D. Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor or disorderly person's offense involving moral turpitude;
E. Conduct of the licensed activity, whether by the licensee or his or her
agents or employees, in an unlawful manner or in a manner that
constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or general welfare;
F. Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon application,
pending the results of the investigation, it may be summarily revoked if
the result of the investigation is such as would have resulted in denial of
the license.
§ 5.04.090 RARITAN CODE § 5.04.130
1.01:96
administering the provision of this Title or making them more effective. No
regulation shall be inconsistent with or alter or amend any provision of this
Title, and no regulation shall impose any requirement which is in addition
to or greater than the requirements that are expressly or by implication
imposed by any provision of this Title.
§ 5.04.140. Site Plan Required, When. [Prior code § 4-1.14;
amended by Ord. 82-10]
All licensees whose proposed use in the Township is such that the proposed
use is not presently being conducted in or on the premises intended to
be used under the provisions of a license, the licensee must comply with
the site plan ordinance concerning the submission of a plat and securing
Planning Board approval as a condition precedent to the issuance of a
license. This requirement shall also apply to any accessory permitted uses
where a license is also required to be issued by the municipality.
Chapter 5.08
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 5.08.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 5-1]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township in accordance with the provisions of an act
of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1993, its
supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 5.08.020. Definitions. [Prior code § 5-2]
For the purpose of this chapter words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 5.08.030. Licenses Generally. [Prior code § 5-3; amended by Ord.
03-34; Ord. 83-8; Ord. 84-4; Ord. 86-10; Ord. 87-18; Ord. 88-12;
Ord. 89-8; Ord. 90-7; Ord. 91-34; Ord. 97-34; Ord. 05-1]
A. Laws Applicable. It is unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages
in the Township other than in the manner or pursuant to the authority
provided in this chapter or in the act referred to in Section 5.08.010.
B. License Fees: Maximum Number. The annual license fees and maximum
number of licenses authorized pursuant to Statute in accordance with
the population of the Township and for the sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages in the Township shall be as follows:
§ 5.04.130 CODE ADOPTION § 5.08.030
1.01:97
§ 5.08.040. Licenses Regulation. [Prior code § 5-4; amended by Ord.
91-34; Ord. 97-34; Ord. 98-22; Ord. 98-30]
Class of License
Annual License
Fee Number of Licenses
Plenary Retail
Consumption
License
$2,500 6
Club License* $188 6*
Plenary Retail
Distribution
License
$2,500 2
Hotel/Motel
License*
$2,500 1*
* The qualifications for the issuance of such license shall be governed
by Statute and the Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
The holders of the above licenses shall be entitled to such privileges
and be subject to such obligations as are prescribed by the Act and the
Rules and Regulations made pursuant thereto.
C. Grant of License. No more than one retail license, whether it be
consumption, distribution or hotel/motel, shall be granted to any
person, business association or corporation (in which any current
licensee in the Township shall own 10% or more of shares in the
corporation) in the Township. The licensee, or one of the majority
stockholders (a shareholder owning more than 10% of the stock), or
member of a limited liability company, or general partner of a
partnership shall be actively involved in the management and
supervision of the license.
A. Hours of Sale.
1. Monday through Saturday.
a. Plenary Retail Consumption and Club Licenses. No plenary
retail consumption or club licensees shall sell, serve or deliver
or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service, delivery or
consumption of any alcoholic beverages between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
b. Plenary Retail Distribution Licensees. Plenary retail
distribution licensees may only sell or deliver alcoholic
beverages on weekdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.
2. Sunday Sales.
§ 5.08.030 RARITAN CODE § 5.08.040
1.01:98
§ 5.08.050. Revocation of Licenses. [Prior code § 5-5]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 5.08.060. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) Warning Signs. [Prior
code § 5-6; amended by Ord. 92-19]
a. Plenary Retail Consumption and Club Licensees. All plenary
retail consumption and club licensees shall be permitted to
sell, serve and deliver alcoholic beverages on Sundays between
the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m.
b. Plenary Retail Distribution Licensees. Plenary retail
distribution licensees may only sell or deliver alcoholic
beverages on Sundays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m.
B. Determination of Hours. The hours previously specified shall be eastern
standard time, except when daylight saving time is in effect, in which
the daylight saving time shall be observed.
C. Closed Premises. During the hours sales of alcoholic beverages are
hereinabove prohibited, the entire licensed premises shall be closed,
and no person shall be admitted or permitted to remain thereon except
the licensee or bona fide employees of the licensee.
D. Location. No license (conducted for pecuniary profit) shall be issued for
the sale of alcoholic beverages within 500 feet of any church or public
schoolhouse or private schoolhouse. The 500 feet shall be measured in
the normal way that a pedestrian would properly walk from the nearest
entrance of the church or school to the nearest entrance of the
premises sought to be licensed.
A. Display. All licensees under this chapter who sell alcoholic beverages
within the Township, shall prominently post and display on their
premises, a warning sign advising of the potential dangers to the
unborn children of women who consume alcoholic beverages while
pregnant.
B. Signs. The nature and type of warning signs shall be determined by the
Township Clerk in consultation with the Township Committee, who
§ 5.08.040 CODE ADOPTION § 5.08.060
1.01:99
Chapter 5.12
AMUSEMENT GAMES
§ 5.12.010. Fair Grounds. [Prior code § 4-4.3; amended by Ord.
98-42]
It is declared and found that the Township contains a place known as
Flemington Fair Grounds, Route 31, Raritan Township, Hunterdon County,
State of New Jersey, where an agricultural fair and exhibition is held by
an association organized for the purpose of holding agricultural fairs and
exhibitions which is subject to approval by the State Department of
Agriculture.
§ 5.12.020. License Required. [Prior code § 4-4.1; amended by Ord.
98-42]
It is unlawful for any person to operate within the Township any amusement
game or games pursuant to N.J.R.S. 5:8-101 et seq., without first having
obtained a license to do so from the State Amusement Games Control
Commissioner after the application is first approved by the Township
Committee, and the license shall be issued subject to the provisions of
N.J.R.S. 5:8-101 et seq.
§ 5.12.030. License Fee. [Prior code § 4-4.2; amended by Ord.
98-42]
The fee for the license, which shall accompany the application, shall be in
the amount established by state statute, as amended from time to time for
each license. A separate license shall be required for each game.
§ 5.12.040. Games of Chance on Sundays. [Prior code § 4-5]
Organizations, societies and associations duly licensed to hold and operate
legalized games of chance under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-50, et seq.,
are authorized to hold, conduct and operate authorized games of chance in
the Township on Sundays.
Chapter 5.16
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES
shall, prepare and distribute the warning signs to all licensees under
this chapter.
C. Violations. Any licensee violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine as provided for in Chapter 1.08 of this Code.
§ 5.08.060 RARITAN CODE § 5.16.010
1.01:100
§ 5.16.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 4-10.4; amended by Ord. 82-4]
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the licensing and use of coincontrolled
amusement devices to preserve and protect the public good,
welfare and morals of the community.
§ 5.16.020. License Required. [Prior code § 4-10.1; amended by Ord.
82-4]
No person, partnership, corporation, organization shall operate a coincontrolled
amusement device within the Township without first having
obtained a license for each device from the Township Clerk and paid the
required fee therefor.
§ 5.16.030. Exceptions. [Prior code § 4-10.2; amended by Ord. 82-4]
The provisions of this chapter concerning coin-controlled amusement
devices and requiring an operator's license shall not apply to any church,
fraternal or veteran's organizations or other religious groups, charitable
or nonprofit organizations which operate any coin-controlled amusement
devices for the use of its members and their guests and on premises owned
or controlled by it.
§ 5.16.040. Definitions. [Prior code § 4-10.3; amended by Ord. 82-4;
Ord. 95-36]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-CONTROLLED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — All automatic amusement
games of the type commonly known and designated as bagatelle, baseball
or pinball games or similar electronic or computer devices operated,
maintained, used or actuated by means of a coin, token or similar object
for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which, a fee is
charged.
OPERATOR — Any person who owns a coin-controlled amusement device
or any person in whose place of business one or more such coin-controlled
amusement devices, or electronic, or computerized devices, or amusement
machines are placed or kept for operation by the public.
§ 5.16.050. License Fees. [Prior code § 4-10.5; amended by Ord.
82-4]
All fees specified in and required by this chapter are imposed to defray the
cost of regulation and for revenue where such is permitted by state law. All
licenses under this chapter shall be issued subject to state law, this chapter
and other applicable ordinances of the Township and police regulations as
duly promulgated.
An operator shall be charged a fee of $50 per annum per license, which fee
shall be submitted with the application for the operation of the premises.
§ 5.16.010 CODE ADOPTION § 5.16.050
1.01:101
A separate license shall be obtained for each coin-controlled amusement
device and shall be affixed thereto by the licensee.
The check shall be delivered to the Township Clerk, who shall issue a
receipt to the applicant and a copy of the receipt to the Chief of Police.
§ 5.16.060. License Term. [Prior code § 4-10.6; amended by Ord.
82-4]
All licenses shall commence on July 1st of each year and expire on June 30th
of each year.
§ 5.16.070. License Transferability. [Prior code § 4-10.7; amended
by Ord. 82-4]
No operator's license shall be transferable from operator to operator nor
from place to place by any operator of coin-controlled amusement devices.
It shall be valid only at the place and by the operator designated on each
license.
§ 5.16.080. Regulations. [Prior code § 4-10.8; amended by Ord.
82-4; Ord. 98-42]
§ 5.16.090. Inspection of Premises. [Prior code § 4-10.9; amended
by Ord. 82-4]
The Chief of Police shall be responsible for inspecting or causing an
inspection of any place or building in which any such device or devices
A. The devices to be used under the license shall be so arranged as to
permit a clear view of the interior of the room or rooms involved from
the exterior at all times.
B. No operation of the devices shall be permitted between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless, the premises are otherwise licensed
and under the terms of other license the hours of operation are to
continue beyond 11:00 p.m. and in that case, the operation may
continue so long as the hours are permitted under that license.
C. No operator shall offer or permit to be offered any prizes or awards,
whether cash or otherwise, as an inducement to use such amusement
games and devices.
D. The operator shall not permit any activity on the licensed premises
which is illegal or which creates an unusual amount of noise or a breach
of the peace occurring therefrom.
E. The serial numbers of each of the machines on the premises shall be
listed in each application form and in the event that a machine is sold or
replaced, the serial number of the replacement shall be presented to
the Township Clerk and the Chief of Police within three days after the
machine is placed upon the premises.
§ 5.16.050 RARITAN CODE § 5.16.090
1.01:102
are operated as well as to test any such device on reasonable occasions to
determine their compliance with this chapter.
§ 5.16.100. Suspension of License. [Prior code § 4-10.11; amended
by Ord. 82-4]
In the event that the Construction Code Official, Fire Marshal, Zoning
Officer or Health Official shall issue a written notice concerning an alleged
violation and the operator acknowledges such violation or is found guilty in
Court, then during the term of time that the violation continues, the license
shall be suspended until such time as the violation is removed. The Chief of
Police shall give written notice of a suspension in accordance with Section
5.04.100.
§ 5.16.110. Violations; Penalties. [Prior code § 4-10.10; amended by
Ord. 82-4; Ord. 06-03]
Any operator violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
fine as stated in Section 1.08.010 for each offense, and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation or
failure to comply continues or occurs.
Chapter 5.20
JUNKYARDS
§ 5.20.010. License Required. [Prior code § 4-8.1]
No person shall engage in the business of keeping a junkyard, i.e., keep and
maintain a yard, covered or uncovered, space or place, in the Township for
the purpose of buying and selling, exchanging or storing rags, old metals,
old bottles, old glassware, old tinware, old paper, old plumbing fixtures,
dismantled old automobiles or parts thereof, motor vehicle junk or any other
old material commonly called junk, without being licensed to do so by the
Township Committee. This shall not prohibit the storage of old material to
be used by the person, storing the same for manufacturing purposes.
§ 5.20.020. License Expiration Date Fee. [Prior code § 4-8.2]
All licenses shall expire on January 31st of each year. The fee for such
license shall be $25 per annum, imposed for revenue.
§ 5.20.030. Application for License. [Prior code § 4-8.3; amended by
Ord. 15-3]
In addition to the provisions of Chapter 5.04, the following shall apply.
A. Application for a license shall be made to the Township Committee in
writing and the committee shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing.
§ 5.16.090 CODE ADOPTION § 5.20.030
1.01:103
§ 5.20.040. Maintenance of Junkyard. [Prior code § 4-8.4]
No junkyard shall be kept and maintained unless the premises has a suitable
enclosure not less than eight feet in height and constructed in such manner
that the interior of the yard and the contents thereof shall not be visible
from the outside. The licensee shall at all times maintain the premises in
a safe and sightly manner with due regard to the public health and safety
of persons and property in the vicinity in which the junkyard is located No
material shall be placed or kept by the licensee on the sidewalk or street
or any part thereof or on or above the fence or between the fence and any
building. No junkyard shall be operated by any licensee in any space not
specifically licensed, nor shall the licensee conduct his or her junkyard to
occasion any moral hazards to the residents of the neighborhood or any
traffic hazards on adjoining highways.
§ 5.20.050. Record Book. [Prior code § 4-8.5]
Every licensee of a junkyard shall provide and keep a book on the licensed
premises in which shall be written at the time of each purchase a
description of the articles purchased, the name and residence of the person
from which the purchase was made and the date of purchase. The book
shall at all reasonable times be opened to the inspection of any State Police
Officer or Police Officer of the Township or of the County.
§ 5.20.060. Stolen Goods; Purchases From Minors. [Prior code
§ 4-8.6]
Chapter 5.24
B. The applicant shall publish notice of his or her intention to apply for a
license in a newspaper published in the county seat of Hunterdon
County, which publication shall be inserted in two issues of the paper,
and the last publication shall not be more than 10 days preceding the
date of hearing.
C. The applicant shall by affidavit present satisfactory proof to the
Township Committee, at least two days prior to the hearing that the
notices have been published. Upon the hearing, any party may appear
in person or by agent or by attorney.
A. No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the
crime of receiving stolen goods or to any corporation which includes a
stockholder, director or officer who has been convicted of such crime.
B. No licensee shall receive or purchase any goods, articles, merchandise
or vehicles from any person under the age of 18 years.
C. The Township Committee may suspend or revoke any license, after
notice and hearing, where the licensee has been convicted of the crime
of receiving stolen goods or where he or she violates any of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 5.20.030 RARITAN CODE § 5.20.060
1.01:104
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, AND TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS
§ 5.24.010. Purpose. [3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-95]
The operations of transient merchants, peddlers, solicitors and canvassers
raises valid public concerns related to public safety, public health, crime
and fraudulent business practices. It is the purpose of this chapter to
regulate these activities for the benefit of the residents of the Township of
Raritan.
§ 5.24.020. Definitions. [3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Every person who has applied for a license to peddle, solicit
and canvass in the Township or act as a transient merchant.
CANVASS — Going from door to door, or from place to place, by traveling
on the streets and roads, or standing within the streets and roads or public
rights-of-way, for the purpose of obtaining the views of any person upon any
economic or social question or project or for the purpose of distributing
literature, leaflets, pamphlets, advertisements, circulars, samples, door
hangers or other written material for the purposes of information and/or
advertising.
COMMERCIAL PURPOSES — For the purpose of selling goods, services
or wares or advertising goods, services or wares with the intent of profitmaking.
However, no peddling, canvassing, or soliciting by nonprofit or
charitable organizations shall be considered a "commercial purpose."
MERCHANDISE — Any and all goods or wares which are ordinarily the
objects of trade and commerce. Merchandise shall also mean and refer to
orders or contracts for a service, home improvement or alteration.
NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSES — Those purposes which are not
commercial.
PEDDLE — Going from door to door, or from place to place, by traveling
on the streets and roads, or standing within the streets and roads or public
rights-of-way, in an effort to take orders for present or future delivery of
merchandise, as defined herein.
SOLICIT — Going from door to door, or from place to place, by traveling
on the streets and roads, or standing within the streets and roads or public
rights-of-way, to plead or ask for contributions or donations, monetary or
otherwise, for any person, group, association or corporation.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — A person, corporation or partnership who
engages in a merchandising business in New Jersey with intent to close out
5. Editor’s Note: This ordinance repealed former Ch. 5.24, Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient
Merchants, adopted as §§ 4-2.1 through 4-2.11 of the prior Code, as amended.
§ 5.20.060 CODE ADOPTION § 5.24.020
1.01:105
or discontinue the business in the Township within one year from the date
of commencement and, for the purpose of carrying out such business, hires,
leases or occupies any building or structure for the exhibition and sale of
goods. Transient merchants who also lease or occupy motel facilities for
the conduct of their business shall be deemed as intending to temporarily
be located within Raritan Township for less than one year. Operating as a
transient merchant is, presumptively, a commercial purpose, pursuant to
this Chapter 5.24 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Raritan.
§ 5.24.030. License required. [3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
§ 5.24.040. Persons exempt from licensing requirements. [3-6-2018
by Ord. No. 18-9]
A. Any person desiring to peddle, solicit, canvass, or operate as a transient
merchant for a commercial purpose within the Township must apply for
and receive, prior to such activity taking place, a license from the
Township Clerk.
B. A separate application shall be required for each entity or person
peddling, soliciting, canvassing or operating as a transient merchant.
Applications shall be filed pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.04
of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan. Each
application shall be accompanied by a fee of $200. This fee shall not be
prorated.
C. Licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter 5.24 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Raritan shall expire on December 31 of
the calendar year in which the license is issued.
D. Exhibition of license. Each license holder shall prominently display the
license whenever soliciting, canvassing or peddling in the Township so
that same is observable to any person addressed by the licensee.
E. Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Raritan, no license to solicit, canvass,
peddle, or act as a transient merchant shall be issued unless:
1. The applicant provides the Raritan Township Police Department
with a fingerprint criminal background check.
2. The applicant provides a $2,000 bond to the Township of Raritan in
a form approved by the Township Attorney. Such bond may be
subject to forfeiture upon proof of:
a. Falsification in the application for a license; or
b. Willful violation of a Township ordinance or a state or federal
law.
§ 5.24.020 RARITAN CODE § 5.24.040
1.01:106
§ 5.24.050. General Regulations. [3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
A. The following entities are exempt from the requirements of this Chapter
5.24 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan:
1. Any person honorably discharged from the military services of the
United States possessing a peddler's license issued in conformity
with N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10.
2. Any person who is an exempt fireman of a volunteer fire
department as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10, possessing
a license in conformity with said law.
3. Any public utility or its employees, which public utility is subject to
regulation by the State Board of Public Utility Commissioners;
provided, however, such employees shall display the identification
badge or card issued by their employer. Third-party suppliers of
electrical services are not exempt under this provision.
4. Any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise
or other articles or things, in the regular course of business, to the
premises of persons who had previously ordered same or were
entitled to receive same by reason of a prior agreement.
5. Any person soliciting snow shoveling services within 24 hours of a
snowstorm.
6. Any person soliciting, peddling or canvassing for a noncommercial
purpose.
B. The exemptions provided for by this section shall not be applicable to
any person operating as a transient merchant.
A. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser that is subject to the licensing
requirements of this Chapter 5.24 of the Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Raritan shall peddle, solicit or canvass before 9:00 a.m.
or after 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday or before 10:00 a.m. or after
3:00 p.m. on Saturdays. All other peddlers, solicitors or canvassers that
are not subject to the licensing requirements pursuant to this Chapter
5.24 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan shall
only peddle, solicit or canvass between 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any
given day.
B. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser, whether or not subject to the
licensing requirements of this Chapter 5.24 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Raritan, shall solicit, canvass or peddle
upon premises whereupon a sign is posted which indicates that the
peddler's, solicitor's or canvasser's activities are not welcome. Such a
sign may, but is not required to, state: "No Peddlers, Solicitors, or
Canvassers Invited."
§ 5.24.040 CODE ADOPTION § 5.24.050
1.01:107
§ 5.24.060. Penalties. [3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
Any violation of this Chapter 5.24 of the Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Raritan shall be punishable by a fine of $2,000 and/or
imprisonment as prescribed in Chapter 1.08 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Raritan.
Chapter 5.25
REGULATION OF FOOD CARTS, FOOD TRUCKS, AND OTHER
VEHICLE-BASED COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES
§ 5.25.010. Purpose. [3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
The operation of food carts, food trucks and other vehicle-based commercial
activities within the Township creates valid public concerns related to
public safety, public health, crime and fraudulent business practices. It is
the purpose of this chapter to regulate these activities for the benefit of the
residents of the Township of Raritan.
C. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser, whether or not subject to the
licensing requirements of this Chapter 5.24 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Raritan, shall walk upon front yards or
backyards to move from property to property or building to building
unless invited to do so by the property owner.
D. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser, whether or not subject to the
licensing requirements of this Chapter 5.24 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Raritan, shall enter or attempt to enter
the house or apartment of any resident of the Township without an
express invitation from an occupant thereof.
E. All literature, leaflets, pamphlets, advertisements, circulars, samples,
door hangers or other written material being canvassed or peddled
shall be handed to an occupant of the property or left in a secure place
thereon.
F. (Reserved)
G. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser that is subject to the licensing
requirements of this Chapter 5.24 of the Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Raritan shall peddle, solicit or canvas on the street,
roadway, or public right-of-way in the same place, i.e., stationary, for
more than eight hours.
H. No, peddler, solicitor or canvasser, whether or not subject to the
licensing requirements of this Chapter 5.24 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Raritan, shall substantially impair the
ability of the public to use the Township's rights-of-way.
§ 5.24.050 RARITAN CODE § 5.25.020
1.01:108
§ 5.25.020. Definitions. [3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD CART — A small hand-pushed mobile kitchen or small hand-pushed
cart used for the sale of food, drink, ice cream, frozen desserts, fresh
vegetables or fruit.
FOOD TRUCK — A large wheeled vehicle from which food is prepared and/
or served that does not allow more than two persons, a principal operator
and one assistant, to operate within.
NONPROFIT AND CHARITABLE EVENT — An event that will take place
within Raritan Township that is organized by a nonprofit entity and which
is not considered a "special event" pursuant to Chapter 5.36 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan.
OTHER COMMERCIAL VEHICLE-BASED ACTIVITY — The sale of nonedible
goods and products from a truck or cart.
REGULATED ACTIVITY — The operation of food carts, food trucks and other
vehicle-based commercial activities.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any event that has been authorized pursuant to Chapter
5.36 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan.
§ 5.25.030. License Required. [3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
§ 5.25.040. Regulations Applicable to Each Regulated Activity.
[3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
A. Any person desiring to engage in any regulated activity must apply for,
and receive, prior to such activity taking place, a license pursuant to
this chapter.
B. A separate application shall be required for each entity or person
wishing to engage in a regulated activity. Applications shall be made
pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Raritan. Each application shall include a fee of $100.
Notwithstanding the preceding, food carts and food trucks are exempt
from the $100 fee.
C. The term of a license issued pursuant to this Chapter 5.25 of the
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan is event-specific
and shall be concurrent with the length of each individual specific event
listed in Subsection A.2 and Subsection B.2 of § 5.25.040 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan.
D. Exhibition of License. Each license holder shall prominently display the
license whenever engaging in a regulated activity in the Township.
A. Food Carts and Food Trucks.
§ 5.25.020 CODE ADOPTION § 5.25.040
1.01:109
1. Food carts and food trucks shall be licensed in the Township of
Raritan subject to the restrictions of this section.
2. Food carts and food trucks shall only be allowed to operate at
nonprofit and charitable events, and special events.
3. Prior to being issued a license pursuant to this Chapter 5.25 of the
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan allowing
the use of a food cart or food truck in the Township, said food cart
or food truck must be inspected by the Hunterdon County Health
Department and found to be in compliance with all applicable rules
and regulations of the County of Hunterdon, the Township of
Raritan and the State of New Jersey.
4. Food carts and food trucks must not remain stationary in any one
location for more than eight hours.
5. If a food cart or food truck is parked along the public right-of-way,
business may only be transacted from the curb side of the vehicle.
6. No food cart or food truck shall double-park along the public rightof-
way.
7. No food truck shall have its engine running if parked along the
public right-of-way.
8. Any food truck or food cart which offers to sell, displays for sale or
sells fruits, vegetables and farm products shall, at all times, keep
all fruits, vegetables and produce of any kind and nature
completely screened and covered with satisfactory materials in
order to avoid and eliminate the accumulation of flies or any other
insects from alighting around or upon any and all merchandise.
9. Any food truck or food cart which offers to sell, displays for sale or
sells seafood, meats, poultry or dairy products shall transport the
same solely in refrigerated compartments, and all such products
shall remain refrigerated at all times up to the time of sale. The
refrigerated compartments, during the use thereof, shall be
maintained at a properly low temperature to completely safeguard
all products from a health and sanitary standpoint to the fullest
reasonable extent possible as determined by the Hunterdon County
Department of Health for the safety and welfare of the public.
10. No operator of any food truck or food cart shall allow any debris,
waste material, rotting produce or merchandise of any kind or any
unfit produce to remain in or upon his vehicle, unless contained in a
leakproof metal container having a properly fitted metal cover.
11. No operator of any food truck or food cart shall permit any waste
materials or parts of produce or any other merchandise to remain
in or upon any street, roadway, curbs or walks, and he or she shall
at all times remove any debris that may have fallen from said
§ 5.25.040 RARITAN CODE § 5.25.040
1.01:110
§ 5.25.050. (Reserved) [3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
§ 5.25.060. Authority of Township Committee. [3-6-2018 by Ord. No.
18-9]
The Township Committee of the Township of Raritan may, by resolution,
waive any limitations or requirements of this Chapter 5.25 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan upon a demonstration by
the licensee or prospective licensee that same will not negatively impact the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township.
§ 5.25.070. Persons Exempt from Licensing Requirements.
[3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
vehicle so that the same is immediately placed in a leakproof metal
container as provided for in Subsection A.10 of this section.
B. Other Commercial Vehicle-Based Activities.
1. Other commercial vehicle-based activities shall be licensed in the
Township of Raritan subject to the restrictions of this section.
2. Other commercial vehicle-based activities shall only be allowed to
operate at nonprofit and charitable events, and special events.
3. Vehicles used for other commercial vehicle-based activities must
not remain stationary in any one location for more than eight hours.
4. If a vehicle used for other commercial vehicle-based activities is
located along the public right-of-way, business may only be
transacted from the curb side of the vehicle.
5. No vehicle used for other commercial vehicle-based activities shall
double-park along the public right-of-way.
6. No vehicle used for other commercial vehicle-based activities shall
have its engine running if parked along the public right-of-way.
7. No operator of a vehicle used for other commercial vehicle-based
activities shall display for sale outside the vehicle any goods or
products, including, but not limited to, furniture, pictures,
paintings, or rugs.
A. The following persons are exempt from the licensing requirements of
this Chapter 5.25 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Raritan:
1. Any person honorably discharged from the military services of the
United States possessing a peddler's license issued in conformity
with N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10.
§ 5.25.040 CODE ADOPTION § 5.25.070
1.01:111
Chapter 5.28
POOL AND BILLIARD ROOMS
§ 5.28.010. License Required. [Prior code § 4-6.1]
It is unlawful to maintain, conduct, operate or engage in, or carry on, the
business of maintaining, conducting or operating any pool room or billiard
room or place in which pool or billiards shall be played for gain, hire or
reward in the Township without first having obtained a license therefore
from the Township Committee.
§ 5.28.020. License Application. [Prior code § 4-6.2]
Application for a license shall be filed in accordance with Chapter 5.04. The
following additional information shall be required:
§ 5.28.030. License Issuance, Term. [Prior code § 4-6.3]
The licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk only after a resolution of
the Township Committee has been adopted approving the application and
only after the payment of the license fee. All licenses shall be valid from the
first day of July of the year in which the license is issued, until the thirtieth
day of June next after the same is issued, unless sooner revoked.
§ 5.28.040. License Transfer. [Prior code § 4-6.4; amended by Ord.
91-32]
The license shall not be transferable by the holder to any other person,
but it may be transferred by the holder to another address, provided that
the licensee makes written application for the transfer to the Clerk, and
2. Any person who is an exempt fireman of a volunteer fire
department as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10, possessing
a license in conformity with said law.
B. Regardless of the foregoing, the persons listed in Subsection A above
must comply with the substantive health and safety requirements of
§ 5.25.040 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Raritan.
A. In the case of a corporation, the names and addresses of all the officers,
directors and all stockholders presently holding stock and all who for
six months prior to the making of an application have been officers,
directors or stockholders;
B. In the case of clubs or associations, it shall state the names and
addresses of all officers;
C. The number of pool tables and billiard tables to be located upon the
premises to be licensed.
§ 5.25.070 RARITAN CODE § 5.28.040
1.01:112
the transfer is approved by resolution of the Township Committee. In the
event that the business is sold, the prospective purchaser shall apply for the
issuance of a new license in accordance with the terms of this chapter and
the payment of the fees as set forth hereinafter.
§ 5.28.050. Fees. [Prior code § 4-6.5; amended by Ord. 91-32]
The annual fees to be paid for the license are fixed at $50 for each pool or
billiard table located upon the premises to be licensed.
§ 5.28.060. Revocation and Suspension of License. [Prior code
§ 4-6.6]
In addition to the grounds stated in Section 5.04.090, a license may be
suspended or revoked for permitting or suffering any activity upon the
licensed premises which is or may be detrimental to the public health,
safety, welfare or morals.
§ 5.28.070. Regulations. [Prior code § 4-6.7; amended by Ord.
91-32; Ord. 98-42]
The following regulations shall apply.
A. In the event any license is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall not
be permitted to the return of any portion of the license fee.
B. Any premises which shall be declared to be unsafe as a result of the
written report of the building subcode official, or declared to be or pose
a fire hazard as result of the written report of the fire marshal, shall be
deemed to be ineligible for a license or renewal thereof.
C. No license shall be issued for the operation of any pool or billiard room
which is located within 200 feet of any school, church of publicly owned
building.
D. The hours of operation of such pool or billiard room shall be between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. midnight on Mondays through
Thursdays; 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays, and 1:00
p.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Sundays.
E. Age Regulations. No person under the age of 14 shall be admitted to or
permitted to play pool or billiards in any licensed premises or to
frequent or lounge or congregate or gather in any such room or place
unless accompanied by his or her parent or adult guardian. Further, no
person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to play or remain in the
licensed premises beyond the hour of 11:00 p.m. regardless of whether
such child is accompanied by his or her parent or adult guardian,
F. In no event shall card playing be permitted on premises licensed under
this chapter, even if such card playing is for social purposes.
§ 5.28.040 CODE ADOPTION § 5.28.070
1.01:113
§ 5.28.080. Attendants. [Prior code § 4-6.8; amended by Ord. 91-32]
The licensee shall provide a minimum of one qualified, adult attendant on
duty at all times within the premises and during the hours the billiard or
pool room is open to the public, who shall supervise the premises to see
that order is maintained, that disorderly or improper conduct is prevented,
that such licensed area is kept free from congestion, and to insure that the
provisions of this chapter and the rules governing the use of the billiard or
pool tables are observed.
Chapter 5.32
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 5.32.010. License Required. [Prior code § 4-3.1]
It is unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a retail food
establishment, as defined in and governed by the Retail Food Establishment
Code of New Jersey (1965) established by ordinance of the local Board of
Health dated July 29, 1971, without first having procured a license from
the local Board of Health to do so or without complying with any or all
G. All premises in which the games of pool and billiards are played shall be
on the street floor of any building, and shall be so arranged and shall be
so lighted that a full view of the interior may be had from the public
thoroughfare or from adjacent rooms to which the public is admitted at
all hours.
H. This chapter shall not apply to any religious, charitable, benevolent or
nonprofit association or corporation which operates or maintains any
pool or billiard table solely for the recreation and amusement of its
members, provided the organization is bona fide in character and is not
intended as a means or device for evading the terms and provisions of
this chapter, nor shall this chapter apply to the keeping of any pool or
billiard table in private residences.
I. There shall be conspicuously posted and displayed in any premises
licensed under this section the following:
1. The license issued pursuant to this chapter;
2. A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter which shall be
supplied to the licensee by the Township Clerk;
3. A minimum of two signs conspicuously placed in the pool or billiard
area of the premises with clear, bold lettering (lettering shall be a
minimum of six inches in height indicating "No Gambling";
4. A minimum of two signs conspicuously placed in the pool or billiard
area of the premises giving notice of the hours of operation with
regard to persons under the age of 18 years.
§ 5.28.070 RARITAN CODE § 5.32.010
1.01:114
of the provisions concerning operation and maintenance of the same as
contained in the aforementioned Retail Food Establishment Code of New
Jersey (1965).
§ 5.32.020. (Reserved)
§ 5.32.030. Suspension or Revocation of License. [Prior code
§ 4-3.3]
Any license issued under the terms and provision of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the local Board of Health for the violation of the
licensee of any provision of this chapter or the Retail Food Establishment
Code of New Jersey (1965) or whenever it shall appear that the business,
trade, calling, profession or occupation of the person, firm or corporation
to whom such license was issued is conducted in a disorderly or improper
manner or in violation of any federal, state or municipal law, or that the
person conducting the retail food establishment is of an unfit character to
conduct the same, or that the purpose for which the license has been issued
is being abused to the detriment of the public, or is being used for a purpose
foreign to that for which the license was issued.
§ 5.32.040. Hearing. [Prior code § 4-3.4]
A license issued under the terms and provision of this chapter shall not be
revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have been
had by the Board of Heath. Written notice of the time and place of the
hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior to the
date set for the hearing. The notice shall also contain a brief statement
of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or suspending
the license. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the
person to be notified or be deposited in the United States Post Office in a
sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at
the business address appearing upon the license. At the hearing before the
Board of Health, the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer
and may thereafter be heard; and, upon due consideration and deliberation
by the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed; or, if the Board of
Health concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated,
it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the licensee.
§ 5.32.050. New License. [Prior code § 4-3.5]
If any license has been revoked, neither the holder thereof nor any person
acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to another license to
carry on the same business within the Township unless the application for
the license shall be approved by the Board of Health.
§ 5.32.010 CODE ADOPTION § 5.32.060
1.01:115
§ 5.32.060. Interstate Commerce. [Prior code § 4-3.6]
No provision on this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
Chapter 5.36
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 5.36.010. Special Events Defined. [Prior code § 3-11.1; amended
by Ord. passed 2-27-1984; 3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SPECIAL EVENTS — Any cultural, religious, artistic or commercial events
which are located in Raritan Township with attendance open to the general
public.
§ 5.36.020. Required Conditions. [Prior code § 3-11.2(b); amended
by Ord. passed 2-27-1984]
Special events may be permitted in any nonresidential zone in the Township
by the Police Chief and Construction Official, subject to the following
conditions:
§ 5.36.030. Time Limit. [Prior code § 3-11.2(c); amended by Ord.
passed 2-27-1984]
Not more than 10 days of special events may be held on a property during
a single calendar year.
§ 5.36.040. Application. [Prior code § 3-11.2(d); amended by Ord.
passed 2-27-1984]
Separate copies of the special events application must be submitted to the
Police Chief and Construction Official at least 30 days prior to the date of
the proposed event. The application to the Construction Official must be
accompanied by an application fee of $50. The application will be deemed
A. The proposed site contains a minimum of two acres;
B. The proposed site is more than 500 feet from the nearest property used
for residential purposes;
C. The special event would have no adverse impact on the health, safety or
welfare of the neighborhood or the municipality;
D. Adequate parking is provided;
E. Adequate sanitary facilities are provided.
§ 5.32.060 RARITAN CODE § 5.36.040
1.01:116
denied unless both officials give written approval within 10 days after the
application is submitted.
§ 5.36.050. Permitted Sign. [Prior code § 3-11.2(e); amended by
Ord. passed 2-27-1984]
A single sign no larger than four feet by eight feet shall be permitted on the
site for five days prior to the special event and during the special event.
§ 5.36.060. Exemptions. [Prior code § 3-11.6; amended by Ord.
passed 2-27-1984]
Exempted from this chapter are events held at churches, temples,
synagogues, schools, YMCA's, YWCA's and the Flemington Fair Grounds.
Chapter 5.40
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES
§ 5.40.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 95-18]
As used in this chapter:
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product made from the tobacco plant or
containing tobacco leaf, for the purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling or
other personal use, including but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff and dipping tobacco.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE — Any mechanical, electrical or electronic
self-service device, which, upon insertion of moneys, tokens or any other
form of payment, dispenses tobacco or tobacco products, either exclusively
or as one kind of an available item.
§ 5.40.020. Prohibition. [Amended by Ord. 95-18]
In view of the indiscriminate sales of tobacco products to minors through
tobacco vending machines, all tobacco vending machines are prohibited in
the Township. It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association
to possess, own, operate, rent or permit the use of, or operation of, a
tobacco vending machine in, on, or about the premises under his or her
ownership, control or management, or to sell, or offer to sell, any tobacco
product through a tobacco vending machine in the Township.
§ 5.40.030. Violations; Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 95-18; Ord.
06-03]
Any person, firm, corporation or association, violating Section 5.40.020
shall be subject to a fine per Section 1.08.010 and such other fines and
penalties within the discretion of the Court for second and subsequent
violations. Each day on which such machine owned, operated, rented or
permitted on the premises of the person, firm, corporation or association
§ 5.36.040 CODE ADOPTION § 5.40.030
1.01:117
shall be deemed a separate violation and shall be subject to an additional
fine as herein set forth.
Chapter 5.44
TOWING
§ 5.44.010. License Required. [Amended by Ord. 98-24]
§ 5.44.020. Exceptions Owner Requested Service. [Amended by Ord.
98-24]
No tow operator license shall be required for the on-site repair, and/or the
towing or storage of any vehicle when the request is received by the towing
operator from the motor vehicle owner/operator prior to a police request, or
if the owner/operator of a motor vehicle requests the Police contact a tow
company of the owner/operator's choice for towing and/or storage under the
direction and control of the owner/operator.
§ 5.44.030. License Term. [Amended by Ord. 98-24]
A. No towing operator on or after October 1, 1998, shall operate within
the Township for Police-requested towing services and/or storage
services unless the towing operator has obtained a license issued by the
Township.
B. The requirement for an initial license under this chapter shall
commence on October 1, 1998, and the initial license shall expire on
September 30, 1999. Thereafter, the license shall be issued on an
annual basis for the period of October 1st through September 30th of
the following year.
C. There shall be no limitation on the number of licenses issued and in
effect at one time, so long as each licensee meets the requirements of
this chapter and complies with the tow operators rules/regulations and
guidelines established by the Township.
D. The application for a license under this chapter shall be upon forms
made available through the Office of the Township Clerk.
A. Upon the ordinance codified in this chapter becoming effective,
applications for the initial license shall be available from and must be
received by the Township Clerk on or before August 14, 1998.
Thereafter, for a new license or renewal thereof, the applications must
be received by the Township Clerk prior to September 1st of each year
for processing prior to October 1st of the license year.
B. The Township Clerk will forward all complete applications to the Chief
of Police within five days of receipt. The Chief of Police will conduct, or
cause to be conducted, an investigation of each application to verify the
information contained in the application, background check, survey of
§ 5.40.030 RARITAN CODE § 5.44.030
1.01:118
§ 5.44.040. Application Fees. [Amended by Ord. 98-24]
All application fees submitted to the Township are nonrefundable and shall
be utilized to offset the cost of processing of the application and license.
§ 5.44.050. Investigation and Inspection. [Amended by Ord. 98-24]
equipment, compliance with established rules and regulations, and
such other pertinent matters related to potential licensing or renewal.
Upon concluding the review, the Chief of Police will return a copy of
the application to the Township Clerk, along with a recommendation
for approval or disapproval of a license, and the reasons, if any, for
disapproval. The Township Clerk shall issue a tow operator license to
each qualified applicant, and thereafter, the licensee's name shall be
placed on the Township Police Department licensed tow operator's list.
The Clerk shall forward to any person rejected for a license, a copy of
his or her application with the reasons for disapproval.
C. The term of the license shall be for one year commencing October 1st
and expiring on the next succeeding September 30th, and shall list the
name of the tow operator business and each employee licensed
thereunder.
D. Each licensee shall be required to maintain in full force and effect
during the term of its license, insurance coverage including garage
liability and garage keeper's liability insurance, comprehensive
automobile liability insurance, and worker's compensation insurance
with limits of not less than those set forth in the tow operators rules/
regulations and guidelines, and provide proof of such coverages to the
Township Clerk at the time of filing of its license application.
E. In the event of any disapproval, suspension or revocation of a license
for failure to comply with this chapter or the tow operator's rules/
regulations and guidelines, no refund of application fees shall be given,
and payment of another initial application fee shall be required upon
applying for reinstatement.
A. Initial application fee $150.
B. Renewal application fee $100.
A. The Police Department of the Township may conduct a thorough
background check of the licensee, its officers, principals, and
employees prior to the granting of a license. A conviction for high
misdemeanor and/or a motor vehicle record evidencing unsafe driving
habits or a disregard for the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Laws, will be
considered ample reason to disqualify any applicant or a particular
employee. Each prospective licensee shall furnish with its application,
executed background check waivers for all officers, principals and
employees, in the form provided by the Chief of Police.
§ 5.44.030 CODE ADOPTION § 5.44.050
1.01:119
§ 5.44.060. License, Disapproval, Suspension or Revocation, Appeal.
[Amended by Ord. 98-24]
§ 5.44.070. Rules and Regulations, Amendments. [Amended by Ord.
98-24]
The Chief of Police is directed to monitor, and from time to time, recommend
to the Township Committee, amendments to the tow operators rules/
B. Each licensee shall submit the names of all employees newly hired
during the term of the license for a review and background check,
which may be performed by the Township Police Department prior to
such individual being added to the license and performing any services
as described in this chapter. The license shall be subject to revocation
for failure to submit employees to such a background check.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the right, in his or her sole discretion, to
disapprove and suspend or revoke any license issued under this
chapter, upon investigation and the determination that there has been a
violation of the tow operators rules/regulations and guidelines and/or
this chapter by the licensee or its employees.
B. The Chief of Police shall be the sole administrator of the Police
Department's licensed tow operator's list. All complaints concerning
any licensed tow truck company/operator shall be forwarded to the
Chief of Police for review and investigation.
C. Any license suspension or revocation shall cause the tow company to be
removed from the tow operator's list. A licensed tow company which
has been suspended or revoked may reapply in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter to be placed on the list as of October 1st of
the year after the suspension or revocation.
D. An applicant or licensee shall have the right to appeal the decision of
the Chief of Police to disapprove, suspend or revoke its license. Any
aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police by
providing a written statement of appeal containing the facts and
supporting documentation to the Township Administrator within seven
days of the date of such disapproval, suspension or revocation. Within
14 days of the receipt of the appeal, the Township Administrator shall
investigate the matter and issue a written report thereon, with copies to
the aggrieved party, the Chief of Police and the Township Clerk.
In the event that the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the
aggrieved party, then the aggrieved party may request a final review
of such action by the Township Committee, by filing a written request
with the Office of the Township Clerk within seven days of the date of
the Administrator's written report. Thereafter, the Township Committee
will conduct a review of the matter and issue a final determination
no later than the second regular Township Committee meeting next
following the receipt of the written request by the Township Clerk.
§ 5.44.050 RARITAN CODE § 5.44.070
1.01:120
regulations and guidelines for consideration and enactment by formal
resolution of the Township Committee at a public meeting. Prior to the
adoption of any amendment to these initial tow operators rules/regulations
and guidelines, the Chief of Police shall provide to each tow operator
licensed under this chapter, a copy of such proposed amendment at least
five days in advance of the public meeting at which the Township Committee
will consider such recommendations.
§ 5.44.080. Towing and Storage Rate Schedule. [Amended by Ord.
02-55; Ord. 04-43; Ord. 06-35; Ord. 07-38; Ord. 2017-03]
A. The Police Chief shall recommend to the Township Committee a rate
schedule for towing and storage, which rates shall be established by the
Township Committee by resolution. A tow operator may only charge the
fees established by resolution of the Township Committee, not
exceeding the limits set forth therein. No additional fees are permitted
other than as set forth below.
B. Fees may be charged for the following:
1. Basic tow, which shall be a flat fee; and
2. In the case of a motor vehicle involved in an accident, the following
additional services, if actually performed:
a. Waiting time in excess of 15 minutes, which shall be calculated
based upon each 15 minutes spent at the site from which a
motor vehicle will be towed, with fewer than 15 minutes
rounded up to 15;
b. Brush cleaning, including collection of debris that can be
picked up by hand, which shall be a flat fee;
c. Site cleanup, which shall be based upon each bag of absorbent
used;
d. Winching/uprighting, which shall be based upon each hour
spent performing winching; [Amended 7-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-21]
e. The use of window wrap, which shall be a flat fee;
f. Tarping, which shall be a flat fee;
g. Transmission disconnect, a flat fee, which shall be charged
only if a motor vehicle is locked and the tow operator is unable
to obtain the keys for the motor vehicle;
h. Use of a flatbed tow truck, a flat fee, which shall be charged if a
motor vehicle can be transported only by a flatbed tow truck;
i. Use of special equipment other than the first tow truck to
recover a motor vehicle that cannot be recovered by winching
§ 5.44.070 CODE ADOPTION § 5.44.080
1.01:121
or pieces of a motor vehicle that cannot be moved by hand,
which may be both a labor and equipment charge billed in halfhour
increments;
j. Decoupling;
k. Storage at a tow operator's storage facility;
l. More than three trips to the motor vehicle in storage, which
may be invoiced as an administrative fee, which shall be a flat
fee;
m. Releasing a motor vehicle from a tow operator's storage facility
after normal business hours or on weekends, which shall be a
flat fee.
n. Extra man and truck; [Added 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-21]
o. Administration fee. [Added 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-21]
C. A tow operator that engages in private property or other nonconsensual
towing shall not charge for the use of a flatbed tow truck if a motor
vehicle can safely be towed in an upright position by another type of
tow truck, even if the private property tow operator chooses to use a
flatbed tow truck for the tow.
D. If a licensed tow operator tows a vehicle at the request of the Police
Department, and it is determined by the Police that the vehicle is
abandoned, then the Police will direct that the vehicle will then be
towed to the Police Impound Yard. The Township will only pay the Basic
tow rate. All other fees will not apply.
E. A tow operator that engages in private property or other nonconsensual
towing shall calculate storage fees based upon full twenty-four-hour
periods a motor vehicle is in the storage facility. For example, if a motor
vehicle is towed to a storage facility at 7:00 p.m. on one day and the
owner of the motor vehicle picks the motor vehicle up before 7:00 p.m.
the next day, the tow operator shall charge the owner of the motor
vehicle only for one day of storage. If a motor vehicle is stored for more
than 24 hours, but less than 48 hours, the tow operator may charge for
two days of storage.
F. For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
1. Basic tow shall mean private property towing and other nonconsensual
towing as defined in this section and other ancillary
services that include the following: arriving at the site from which a
motor vehicle will be towed; 15 minutes waiting time; hooking a
motor vehicle to, or loading a motor vehicle onto, a tow truck;
transporting a motor vehicle to a storage facility; unhooking or
unloading a motor vehicle from the tow truck; and situating the
motor vehicle in the space in which it will be stored. "Basic tow"
§ 5.44.080 RARITAN CODE § 5.44.080
1.01:122
§ 5.44.090. Indemnification. [Amended by Ord. 98-24]
All licensees, by applying for and accepting a tow operator's license under
this chapter, agree to and shall indemnify and hold the Township and
its officers and employees harmless from any liability, expense or costs
of suit, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs, arising out of or
resulting from any action of the tow operator in performing towing and
storage services in the Township as a licensee under this chapter. This
indemnification clause shall be included as part of the application for a
license and shall also be printed on the applicant's license.
§ 5.44.100. Violations; Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 06-03; Ord.
98-24]
Any person or entity who shall be found to have violated any section of
this chapter, or to have submitted a false or misleading application, shall
in addition to penalties hereinafter provided in this chapter, be subject to
removal from the tow operator's list and/or suspension or revocation of their
license. Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, the person or entity
shall be punishable by a fine see Section 1.08.010.
Chapter 5.46
TAXICABS
§ 5.46.010. Statutory Authority; Title. [Amended by Ord. 07-37]
This chapter is created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq. and shall be
known as the "Township of Raritan Taxicab Ordinance".
§ 5.46.020. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 07-37]
As used in this section:
also includes issuing documents for the release of a motor vehicle
to its owner or other person authorized to take the motor vehicle;
issuing an itemized bill; three trips to the motor vehicle in storage,
which, if applicable, include making a vehicle available to an
insurance adjuster or appraiser; issuing documents for the release
of a motor vehicle to its owner or other person authorized to take
the motor vehicle; and retrieving a motor vehicle from storage
during the hours in which the storage facility is open.
2. Non-consensual towing shall mean the towing of a motor vehicle
without the consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle,
including the towing of a motor vehicle when law enforcement
orders the vehicle to be towed whether or not the owner or
operator consents.
§ 5.44.080 CODE ADOPTION § 5.46.020
1.01:123
BASED IN A MUNICIPALITY — A person who operates or drives for a
taxicab business or causes such business to be operated is based in a
municipality if the business:
BASED IN THE TOWNSHIP — A person who operates or drives for a
taxicab business or causes such business to be operated is based in Raritan
Township if the business:
CRUISING — The driving of an empty taxicab back and forth along a
public street at a slow rate of speed for the obvious purpose of soliciting
passengers.
PERSONS — Includes a firm, copartnership, association, corporation and
limited liability company or partnership, and the singular or plural and
the masculine, feminine or neuter thereof, unless the contrary is clearly
expressed.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle used in the business of transporting persons
for hire, from or to points within the Township, including taxicabs,
limousines and other vehicles hired by call, charter or special contract,
whether the fare or price is agreed upon in advance or not.
§ 5.46.030. License Required. [Amended by Ord. 07-37]
Has its principal office or principal place of business in that
municipality; "principal place of business" means, in reference to a
municipality, (a) the location of the main place of business of the taxicab
service in the municipality where taxicab service is conducted, (b)
where taxicabs are dispatched, or (c) where taxicab drivers report for
duty;
1.
Maintains a telephone listing that tends to identify the listing with a
particular municipality or locale in a municipality;
2.
Advertises itself in a manner that states or suggests it is located in the
municipality; or
3.
With respect only to a person who works for but does not operate a
taxicab business, the business has a license or certificate from that
municipality to operate a taxicab business.
4.
Has its principal office or principal place of business in Raritan
Township; "principal place of business" means, in reference to the
Township, (a) the location of the main place of business of the taxicab
service in Raritan Township where taxicab service is conducted, (b)
where taxicabs are dispatched, or (c) where taxicab drivers report for
duty.
1.
Maintains a telephone listing that tends to identify the listing with
Raritan Township; or
2.
Advertises itself in a manner that states or suggests it is located in
Raritan Township.
3.
§ 5.46.020 RARITAN CODE § 5.46.030
1.01:124
§ 5.46.040. Public Convenience and Necessity. [Amended by Ord.
07-37]
Before the Township Committee shall issue any license for a taxicab, other
than the renewal of an existing license, it shall be satisfied that public
convenience and necessity so require.
§ 5.46.050. Application. [Amended by Ord. 07-37]
Every application for a license shall be filed with the Township Clerk on
a form to be furnished by the Township, and no application shall be
considered unless the same is fully and completely filled out and is
accompanied by the required fee. Every application shall include a
statement, to be signed by the applicant, consenting to the Township's
obtaining copies of the applicant's driving record and record of criminal and
disorderly persons convictions and domestic violence proceedings from the
official public agencies which maintain such records. The applicant shall
be fingerprinted by the Chief of Police since fingerprints are necessary
to determine proper identification, which fingerprint record shall be
immediately processed for classification and identification. Every applicant
who is required to submit to fingerprinting under this subsection shall pay
to the Township Clerk the administrative cost of taking and processing
the applicant's fingerprints, which shall be in addition to the license fees
specified by this section for taxi licenses.
§ 5.46.060. Requirements for Licensing. [Amended by Ord. 07-37]
A. No person who is based in the Township, as that term is defined in
Subsection 5.46.020, shall operate or drive a taxicab or cause any
taxicab to be operated or driven in the Township without having first
obtained a license, issued by the Township Clerk with the consent of the
Township Committee, for every operator and every vehicle to be so
operated.
B. No person who is not based in the Township shall operate or drive a
taxicab or cause any taxicab to be operated or driven in the Township
without first having obtained the license or certificate, if any, that is
issued to or required of persons wishing to engage in such activities by
the municipality in which such person is based, as that term is defined
in Subsection 5.46.020.
C. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the operation of a taxicab
within the Township solely for the purpose of bringing passengers from
points outside the Township to destinations within the Township.
D. The obtaining of a license under this section shall not relieve the
licensee of the obligation to comply with any applicable provisions of
Title 16, Land Development, of these Revised General Ordinances.
A. An applicant for a taxicab license shall be the owner of the vehicle and
shall be at least 18 years of age. In passing upon any application for a
§ 5.46.030 CODE ADOPTION § 5.46.060
1.01:125
§ 5.46.070. License Regulations. [Amended by Ord. 07-37]
§ 5.46.080. Rules of Conduct for Licensees. [Amended by Ord.
07-37]
taxicab license, the Township Committee may consider any information
which has relevance to the applicant's moral character, business
reputation or ability to properly conduct a taxicab business in an honest
and responsible manner or which may reflect upon the safety of the
proposed vehicle for use as a taxicab. Approval of any application for
a taxicab license shall not be given unless at least one proposed driver
named in the application holds a current Township taxicab driver's
license or is approved for such license at the same time the application
for the taxicab license is considered. Before a license is issued or
renewed, the applicant must file with the Township Clerk an insurance
policy and a power of attorney, as required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 and
48:16-5, as amended from time to time.
B. An applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall be at least 18 years of
age. In passing upon any application for a taxicab driver's license, the
Township Committee may consider any information which has
relevance to the applicant's moral character, judgment, business
reputation or ability of the applicant to transport passengers for hire in
a safe, honest and businesslike manner, including but not limited to
records relating to the applicant's driving history, convictions for any
moving violation and convictions for any crime or disorderly persons
offense involving any matter which reflects upon such matters, and
whether the applicant has been subject to a restraining order in any
domestic violence matter.
A. Every person when operating a taxicab shall have a valid taxicab
driver's license or certificate and the name of the issuing municipality
in his possession and shall exhibit the same upon request to any public
officer, taxicab passenger or other duly authorized agent of the
Township.
B. Any police officer of the Township may inspect any taxicab at any time.
C. Every licensed taxicab shall exhibit a card containing the name of the
owner of the vehicle, the number of the owner's license and the rates of
fare to be charged.
D. Every licensed operator shall, on demand, give to any passenger a
receipt indicating the name of the owner, the driver's license number
and the fare charged.
A. No person other than the licensed driver of the taxicab shall drive or sit
in the compartment of the taxicab reserved for the driver, nor shall the
driver engage in cruising as defined in Subsection 5.46.020; nor shall
any driver or owner invite or permit loitering within or near his taxicab.
§ 5.46.060 RARITAN CODE § 5.46.080
1.01:126
§ 5.46.090. Prices Not to Exceed Fixed Rates. [Amended by Ord.
07-37]
§ 5.46.100. Annual License Fees, Expiration and Revocation.
[Amended by Ord. 07-37]
Chapter 5.48
LIMOUSINE LICENSE
§ 5.48.010. Statutory Authority; Title.
This chapter is created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq. and shall be
known as the Township of Raritan Limousine Ordinance.
§ 5.48.020. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOCAB — Limousine.
B. Smoking shall not be permitted in any taxicab without the permission of
the passenger.
A. The prices that may be charged by the owners or drivers of taxicab
equipped with taxi meters, for the transportation of passengers for hire,
shall not exceed the rates filed with the Township Clerk, and may not be
changed or modified without written approval from the Township
Committee.
B. All prices charged shall be subject to a 25% discount for persons over
the age of 62.
A. All taxicab licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk and shall be
issued to expire December 31st, next exceeding the date of issuance
unless it is sooner suspended or revoked by the director of the
department of public safety.
B. Every applicant for a license under this section shall pay to the
Township Clerk for the use of the Township annual license fees as
follows:
1. For each licensed taxicab: $250.
2. For each taxicab driver other than the owner thereof: $100.
C. Changes in ownership or title to any taxicab licensed under this chapter
shall automatically revoke the license for such vehicle or vehicles. The
purchaser of such vehicle must apply for a license authorizing the
operation of the vehicle as heretofore set forth.
§ 5.46.080 CODE ADOPTION § 5.48.020
1.01:127
LIMOUSINE — Any automobile or motor car used in the business of
carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger
transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter
basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating capacity
in no event of more than 14 passengers, not including the driver, provided,
that such a vehicle shall not have a seating capacity in excess of four
passengers, not including the driver, beyond the maximum passenger
seating capacity of the vehicle, not including the driver, at the time of
manufacture. Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed to
include taxicabs, hotel buses or buses employed solely in transporting
school children or teachers or autobuses which are subject to the
jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation, or interstate autobuses
required by Federal or State law or regulations of the Department of
Transportation, to carry insurance against loss from liability imposed by law
on account of bodily injury or death.
LIMOUSINE OR LIVERY SERVICE — The business of carrying passengers
for hire by limousines.
PERSON — Any individual, copartnership, association, corporation or joint
stock company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court
whatsoever.
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway, or other public
place.
§ 5.48.030. License Required.
No person shall operate a limousine service utilizing the Township of
Raritan as its principal place of business as expressed in N.J.S.A. 48:16-18,
without having first obtained a limousine license from the Township Clerk.
Such license shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance and
shall be renewable annually and shall be non-transferable. Each limousine
vehicle shall be required to have its own limousine license.
§ 5.48.040. Qualifications.
A. The Township Clerk shall issue a "Limousine License" in duplicate, after
satisfactory compliance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-14 to and
including 48:16-22.2 and the provisions of the Township of Raritan
General License Provisions as set forth in Chapter 5.04 (unless herein
modified in this chapter), and
1. Any insurance policy from a company duly licensed to transact
business under the insurance laws of the State of New Jersey in the
sum of $1,500,000 against loss by reason of the liability imposed by
law upon every limousine owner for damages on account of bodily
injury or death suffered by any person as a result of an accident
occurring by reason of the ownership, maintenance or use of the
limousine upon any public street.
§ 5.48.020 RARITAN CODE § 5.48.040
1.01:128
§ 5.48.050. Form and Content of License.
Upon the paying of the license fee as hereinafter established, the Township
Clerk shall issue in duplicate a license to operate showing that the owner
of the limousine has complied with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
In addition to the basic information on the identity of the license holder,
the license shall recite the name of the insurance company, the number
and date of expiration of the required insurance policy, a description of
every limousine insured thereunder, and the registration number of each
limousine. The duplicate license shall be filed with the Division of Motor
Vehicles before any such car is registered as a limousine.
§ 5.48.060. Fee.
The annual fee for a limousine license in duplicate shall be $50 per license.
Chapter 5.49
CHARITABLE CLOTHING BINS
§ 5.49.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 09-1]
For the purpose of this chapter only, the terms "solicitation" or "solicit"
shall mean the request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit, property,
financial assistance, or other thing of any kind or value. Solicitation shall
include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of canisters, cards,
receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money or other thing of
value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the person making the
solicitation receives any contribution.
2. A copy of the insurance policy with proof of payment of premium
throughout the license period shall be filed with the Clerk of the
Township of Raritan.
3. The owner of the limousine shall execute and deliver a Power of
Attorney to the Division of Motor Vehicles concurrently with the
filing of the insurance policy with the Township Clerk, appointing
the Director as its lawful Attorney to acknowledge service of
process.
4. The owner of the limousine shall equip each limousine vehicle in
accordance with the minimum standards established by the
Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:16-22.1.
5. Prior to the operation of any limousine the owner shall cause the
driver (operator) thereof to conduct a general examination of the
condition of the vehicle in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.2.
6. The owner of the limousine shall satisfy the minimum inspection
requirements as outlined in N.J.S.A. 39:8-1 and 48:16-22.2.
§ 5.48.040 CODE ADOPTION § 5.49.020
1.01:129
§ 5.49.020. Requirements for Placement, Use of Clothing Bins for
Solicitation Purposes. [Amended by Ord. 09-1]
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person
shall place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin within the Township
of Raritan, for solicitation purposes, without obtaining a permit from the
Municipal Clerk, which is approved by the Township Committee. Permits
are renewable on an annual basis during the month of January.
§ 5.49.030. Permit Fee. [Amended by Ord. 09-1]
The annual permit fee of $25 per bin and will be used to offset the costs
involved in enforcing this chapter.
§ 5.49.040. Application Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 09-1]
The application for obtaining a permit shall include:
§ 5.49.050. Renewal Application Requirements. [Amended by Ord.
09-1]
In addition to the above application requirements, renewal applications
must include:
A. The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as possible;
B. The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and
the method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent;
C. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any person or
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, at which such person can be reached during
normal business hours. For the purposes of this subsection, an
answering machine or service unrelated to the person does not
constitute a bond fide office; and
D. Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his
property.
A. A statement on the manner in which the person has used, sold, or
dispersed any clothing or other donation collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have been
allocated or spent, and any changes the person anticipates it may make
in these processes during the period covered by the renewal;
B. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any entity
which shared or profited from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, and of any entities which may do so during the period
covered by the renewal; and
§ 5.49.020 RARITAN CODE § 5.49.050
1.01:130
§ 5.49.060. Placement of Bins. [Amended by Ord. 09-1]
The Township of Raritan shall not grant an application for a permit to
place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin if it determines that the
placement of the bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall
include, but not be limited to, the placement of a donation clothing bin
within 100 yards of any place which stores large amounts of, or sells,
fuel or other flammable liquids or gases; or the placement of a bin where
it interferes with vehicular or pedestrian circulation. The person placing,
using or employing a donation clothing bin shall maintain the bin and
the area surrounding the bin such that there shall be no accumulation of
clothing or other donations outside the bin.
§ 5.49.070. Display of Permit. [Amended by Ord. 09-1; 12-18-2018
by Ord. No. 18-30]
§ 5.49.080. Receipt, Investigation of Complaints Relative to
Donation Clothing Bin. [Amended by Ord. 09-1]
C. If the location of the bin is to be moved, the new location where the bin
is to be situated, as precisely as possible and written consent from the
property owner of the new location.
A. The name and address of the registered person that owns the bin, and
any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or
donations collected via the bin;
B. The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if applicable,
the telephone number of the bona fide office of any other entity which
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin;
C. In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin may
share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin, a notice, written in clear and easily understandable manner,
indicating that clothing or other donations collected via the bin, their
proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given to, an entity other than the
person who owns the bin, and identifying all such entities which may
share or profit from such donations; and
D. A statement, consistent with the information provided to the Township
in the most recent permit renewal application, indicating the manner in
which the person anticipates any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and the method by which
the proceeds of the collected donations will be allocated or spent.
A. The Zoning Officer shall receive and investigate, within 30 days, any
complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears to the
Zoning Officer that a person has engaged in, or is engaging in any act or
practice in violation of this chapter, the person who placed the bin shall
be issued a warning, stating that if the violation is not rectified or a
§ 5.49.050 CODE ADOPTION § 5.49.080
1.01:131
§ 5.49.090. Additional Penalties, Remedies. [Amended by Ord. 09-1]
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of
this State, any person who violates any provision of this chapter or the
provisions of P.L. 2007, c.209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60, et seq.) which results in
seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
Chapter 5.50
MASSAGE, BODYWORK OR SOMATIC THERAPY
ESTABLISHMENTS
hearing with the Township of Raritan Township Committee is not
requested within 45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at the
expense of the person who placed the bin, and any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin will be sold at public auction or
otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means used to notify the
person who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed to the exterior
of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, the Township of Raritan may seize the bin, remove it, or have
it removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell at
public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations
collected via the bin shall be paid to the chief financial officer of the
Township.
A. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Township of
Raritan may bring this action in the Township of Raritan Municipal
Court or the Superior Court of New Jersey as a Summary proceeding
under the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, P.L. 1999, c.274 (N.J.S.A.
2A:58-10 et seq.) and any penalty monies collected shall be paid to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Township; and
B. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to this chapter and P.L. 2007, c.209
(N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) may apply to the Township Committee of
the Township of Raritan to have that person's eligibility restored. The
Township Committee may restore the eligibility of a person who:
1. Acts within the public interest; and
2. Demonstrates that he made a good faith effort to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and P.L. 2007, c.209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60
et seq.) and all other applicable laws and regulations, or had no
fraudulent intentions.
§ 5.49.080 RARITAN CODE § 5.50.010
1.01:132
§ 5.50.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY OF THE RARITAN TOWNSHIP BOARD OF
HEALTH or ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The entity acting as the
enforcement and compliance agent of the Raritan Township Board of
Health.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK OR SOMATIC THERAPIES — Any systems of
activity of structured touch which include, but are not limited to, holding,
applying pressure, positioning and mobilizing soft tissue of the body by
manual technique and use of visual, kinesthetic, auditory and palpating
skills to assess the body for the purpose of applying therapeutic massage,
bodywork or somatic principles. Such applications may include, but are
not limited to, the use of therapies such as heliotherapy or hydrotherapy,
bodywraps, the use of moist hot or cold external applications, external
applications of herbal or topical preparations not classified as prescription
drugs, movement and neuromyofacial education and education in self-care
and stress management. Massage and bodywork therapies do not include
the diagnosis or treatment of illness, disease, impairment or disability.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK OR SOMATIC THERAPIST — Any person licensed
pursuant to the provisions of the Massage and Bodywork Therapist
Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK OR SOMATIC THERAPIST EMPLOYER — Any
individual or entity that employs another person to engage in providing
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK OR SOMATIC THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT —
Any establishment wherein Massage, Bodywork or Somatic Therapies are
administered or are permitted to be administered, when such therapies are
administered for any form of compensation.
§ 5.50.020. License Required. [Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
A. No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall operate any
establishment or utilize any premises in the Township of Raritan as a
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment unless or until
such person, firm or corporation has first obtained a license from the
Raritan Township Clerk in accordance with the terms and provisions of
this section.
B. No person shall practice massage or related therapies as a massage,
bodywork or somatic therapist, employee or otherwise unless such
person has a valid and subsisting massage and bodywork therapist's
license issued to him or her by the New Jersey Board of Massage and
Bodywork Therapy pursuant to the terms and provisions of the Massage
and Bodywork Therapist Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.
§ 5.50.010 CODE ADOPTION § 5.50.020
1.01:133
§ 5.50.030. Application for Massage and Bodywork Therapy
Establishment License. [Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
Any person desiring a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment
license shall file a written application with the Raritan Township Board of
Health upon a form provided by the Raritan Township Clerk.
§ 5.50.040. Application Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
C. No person or entity shall employ a massage, bodywork or somatic
therapist as an employee unless such employee has a valid New Jersey
Board of Massage and Bodywork Therapy therapist license.
D. No massage, bodywork or somatic therapist employer shall engage in,
advertise or hold itself out as offering massage, bodywork or somatic
therapies unless such employer has registered with the New Jersey
Board of massage and bodywork therapy.
A. Any person, firm, corporation, organization or other entity applying for
a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment license shall
submit the required application, which shall include the following
information:
1. The business name and type of ownership of the business, i.e.,
whether individual, partnership, corporation or any other form of
business organization.
2. The trade name, style and designation under which the business is
to be conducted.
3. The address and all telephone numbers, including facsimile, where
the establishment will be maintained, operated and conducted, and
the email address of the applicant.
4. A list and full description of all massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy services to be offered.
5. A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all
massage, bodywork or somatic therapists and employees of the
business and the name and residence address of the owner,
manager or other person principally in charge of the business. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner, manager or other person
principally in charge of the business to maintain an updated
employee list and to provide same to the Raritan Township Board of
Health. The Raritan Township Board of Health shall be notified in
writing within 30 days, transmitted by regular mail, email or
facsimile, of any and all changes to the employee list. The employee
list shall be made available during all inspections of the massage,
bodywork or somatic therapy establishment.
6. A sworn statement attached to the employee list required above
indicating that all massage, bodywork or somatic therapists
§ 5.50.020 RARITAN CODE § 5.50.040
1.01:134
employed or to be employed by the establishment or otherwise
permitted to work at the establishment have been licensed by
the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Massage and Bodywork
Therapist Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.
7. A written disinfection plan for all linens, towels and reusable
instruments used by the establishment, and all surfaces within the
establishment, which disinfection plan must comply with the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 13:37A-3.2.
8. Personal information concerning the applicant shall be provided for
each of the following persons:
a. An individual applicant;
b. Each stockholder holding more than 10% of the stock of the
corporation, and each officer and director, if the applicant is a
corporation;
c. Each partner, including each limited partner, if the applicant is
a partnership; and
d. The manager or other person principally in charge of the
operation.
The information to be provided for each of the above shall be
as follows:
i. The applicant name, complete residence address,
residence telephone number and email address;
ii. Two previous residence addresses immediately prior to the
present residence address of the applicant;
iii. A copy of a current driver's license or other governmentissued
photo identification;
iv. Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days
of the date of the application and at least two inches in
size;
v. The massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment
business history and experience, including, but not limited
to, whether or not such person has previously operated or
is currently operating, in this or another municipality or
state, under a license agreement or permit, or has a
license or permit ever been denied, revoked or suspended
and the reason therefor, in addition to the business
activities or occupations subsequent to such action or
denial, suspension or revocation;
vi. All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic
violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which
§ 5.50.040 CODE ADOPTION § 5.50.040
1.01:135
§ 5.50.050. Building Requirements; Inspections. [Amended by Ord.
2017-41]
convicted, the offense for which convicted and the
circumstances thereof.
B. In addition to the completed application, the applicant, who shall be a
principal of the business, may be required to submit additional
documentation, including, but not limited to, a sketch, floor plan,
building layout, diagram, zoning permit and/or certificate of occupancy
as applicable to the application.
C. In addition to the completed application, the applicant shall provide a
criminal background check to be provided through the filing of a New
Jersey Uniform Fingerprint Form provided by the Raritan Township
Clerk.
D. The applicant shall provide proof of General Liability insurance. This
policy shall be maintained at all times by the establishment.
E. The applicant shall provide proof of ownership or shall provide a copy of
a signed lease agreement for the property location where the massage,
bodywork or somatic therapy establishment shall be operated. If a
signed lease, the applicant must be listed on the lease agreement.
F. All changes in ownership of 10% or more must be reported to the
Raritan Township Board of Health by regular mail, email or facsimile,
within 10 days of the occurrence of such change.
G. The Raritan Township Board of Health may refuse, after notice, to grant
a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment license.
Reasons for such refusal include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation, false statement, or omission of any
required information in the application for the establishment
license.
2. The conviction of an owner/operator, manager or any employee of
the establishment for a crime or disorderly person offense involving
moral turpitude, a felony, an offense involving sexual misconduct,
keeping or residing in a house of prostitution, or any crime
involving dishonesty, or evidence that applicant has had its
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment license
revoked previously in the Township or another municipality.
3. Failure to provide a criminal background check as required by
Section 5.50.040C of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Raritan.
A. The Administrative Authority of the Raritan Township Board of Health,
upon receipt of the application, shall refer same to the Construction
Code Department, the Fire Safety Services Department, the Police
§ 5.50.040 RARITAN CODE § 5.50.050
1.01:136
§ 5.50.060. Transferability; Licenses; Renewal: Reinspections.
[Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
Department, the Engineering Planning and Zoning Department, and
any other department deemed necessary. Such departments shall make
recommendations to the Administrative Authority of the Raritan
Township Board of Health concerning compliance with all municipal
and State codes.
B. No massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment license shall
be issued until an applicant has satisfactorily passed inspections by all
governmental entities provided for by Subsection A of this section.
C. In addition, the establishment must comply with the hygiene
requirements found at N.J.A.C. 13:37A-3.2.
A. Massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment licenses granted
under this chapter are only valid to the applicant to whom it was
granted at the address stated on the application, and are not
transferable in any way. A new license must be obtained in the event of
the sale or other transfer of the establishment.
B. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire each year on
December 31, unless sooner suspended or revoked. In order to renew a
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment license, licensee
shall submit a renewal form provided by the Raritan Township. Said
renewal form shall require licensee to update its list of massage,
bodywork or somatic therapists and certify that licensee has not been
convicted of a crime related to its massage activities, or a sexual
offense. Upon satisfactory review of same, the Raritan Township Board
of Health shall issue a renewal license. As a requirement of the annual
renewal, the Raritan Township Police Department may request an
updated background check from any massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy establishment owner(s), therapist(s), and employee(s).
C. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are subject to a $50 late fee
for failure to renew the license with payment by January 15 of each
calendar year.
D. All establishment licenses are subject to immediate suspension and
closure of the establishment as described in Section 5.50.70 for failure
to renew the license by January 15 of each year.
E. Should a reinspection of a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment be required as determined by the Administrative
Authority of the Raritan Township Board of Health as a result of a
violation observed during an initial inspection, a reinspection fee of
$150 shall be charged to the establishment for each subsequent
reinspection, until all violations have been abated. The reinspection fee
must be paid by the establishment to the Raritan Township Board of
Health within 10 business days of the date the violation requiring
§ 5.50.050 CODE ADOPTION § 5.50.060
1.01:137
§ 5.50.070. Inspections. [Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
The Administrative Authority of the Raritan Township Board of Health shall,
from time to time, at least once a year, make an inspection of each massage,
bodywork or somatic therapy establishment granted a license under the
provisions of this chapter, for the purpose of determining whether the
provisions of this chapter and any applicable rules, regulations, ordinances
and/or laws are being complied with. Such inspections shall be made at
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner. In addition to an annual
inspection, the Administrative Authority of the Raritan Township Board of
Health may also perform an inspection upon any reasonable report of a
violation by any person. It shall be unlawful for any massage, bodywork
or somatic therapy establishment or employee thereof to fail to allow such
inspection officer to gain access to the establishment or to hinder such
officer in any manner.
§ 5.50.080. Display of Licenses. [Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
reinspection was issued. All licenses are subject to immediate
suspension and the establishment subject to closure for failure to remit
the reinspection fee within 10 business days of the date the violation
requiring reinspection was issued.
A. The Administrative Authority of the Raritan Township Board of Health
shall ensure:
1. That the establishment has a written disinfection plan as required
by Section 5.50.040A.8 of the Revised General Code of the
Township of Raritan and is in conformance with all requirements of
N.J.A.C. 13:37A-3.2.
2. That all licenses issued by the State and the Township are posted in
a visible place as required by Section 5.50.80 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan.
3. The establishment is maintaining records as required by Section
5.50.90E and F of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township
of Raritan.
4. There is no evidence of sleeping or living quarters in the
establishment.
5. That the establishment is in conformance with all other
requirements of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Raritan, State statute and State regulation.
A. All massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishments shall display
the establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter in an open
and conspicuous place on the premises of the establishment near the
public entrance.
§ 5.50.060 RARITAN CODE § 5.50.080
1.01:138
§ 5.50.090. Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
B. The State license of each and every massage, bodywork or somatic
therapist employed in the establishment must be posted prominently in
an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the establishment
near the public entrance. A two inch by two inch passport-sized color
photograph of each licensed massage, bodywork, or somatic therapist
must be affixed to each therapist's displayed license.
C. Each and every massage, bodywork or somatic therapist employed in
the establishment shall have in his or her possession at all times while
on the premises government-issued photographic identification, which
must be available for review.
A. Each room of the establishment in which massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy is conducted shall have an adequate area within the room for
clients to store personal items during therapy sessions.
B. With the exception of guide animals, hearing animals and service
animals, no animals shall be permitted in the establishment.
C. Price rates for all services shall be prominently displayed in an open
and conspicuous area on the premises of the establishment near the
public entrance.
D. A written exclusion policy shall be kept on the premises stating that the
establishment shall not knowingly serve any patron infected with any
fungus or other skin infections, nor perform any service on any patron
exhibiting skin inflammation or eruptions, provided that a duly licensed
physician may certify that a person may be safely provided with a
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy prescribing the conditions
thereof. The written exclusion policy shall be prominently displayed in
an open and conspicuous area on the premises of the establishment
near the public entrance.
E. Client intake records must be kept for each and every client who
receives services from the massage, bodywork or somatic
establishment pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:37A-5.2.
F. The establishment shall prominently post signage specifying the age
restriction of patrons and the client record-keeping requirements in an
open and conspicuous area on the premises of the establishment near
the public entrance.
G. The written disinfection plan submitted with the application for the
establishment license shall be kept on the premises at all times for
review by the Board of Health. The employees of the massage,
bodywork or somatic therapy establishment shall demonstrate to the
Administrative Authority of the Raritan Township Board of Health an
understanding of and compliance with the written disinfection plan.
The establishment shall comply with all parts of the written disinfection
plan at all times.
§ 5.50.080 CODE ADOPTION § 5.50.090
1.01:139
§ 5.50.100. Prohibited Acts. [Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
H. All employees, including massage, bodywork or somatic therapists,
shall wear nontransparent outer garments. Employee dressing rooms
must be available on the premises of the establishment. Doors to such
dressing rooms shall be self-closing.
I. All massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishments shall provide
clean linens (including, but not limited to, laundered sheets and towels)
in sufficient quantity, which shall be laundered after each use thereof
and stored in a sanitary manner. All linens shall either be laundered on
the premises of the establishment with properly functioning
commercial-grade washer and drying appliances, or shall be laundered
by a professional linen supply service, the contract of which shall be
made available to the Administrative Authority of the Raritan Township
Board of Health at any time.
J. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths
or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or a massage,
bodywork or somatic therapist.
K. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities and surfaces shall be in good repair and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms,
steam or vapor rooms or steam or vapor cabinets and shower
compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and
sanitized each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers
shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized after each use. When
carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept in a dry, clean and
sanitary condition.
L. Each massage, bodywork or somatic therapist shall wash his or her
hands and arms up to and including the elbows with soap and hot
running water prior to administering any massage, bodywork or
somatic therapy to each client.
M. All massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishments and
employees thereof shall at all times provide access to a sanitary
restroom for patrons of the establishment.
N. If ordered closed by the Administrative Authority of the Raritan
Township Board of Health, the massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment must immediately cease operations and close to the
public, and must remain closed until the Raritan Township Board of
Health permits the establishment to reopen.
O. The massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment shall observe
and conform to all applicable rules, regulations and prohibitions set
forth by the New Jersey Board of Massage and Bodywork Therapy, as
same may be amended from time to time.
A. _____
§ 5.50.090 RARITAN CODE § 5.50.100
1.01:140
1. No owner of a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment or any employee thereof shall tolerate in any
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment any activity
or behavior prohibited by the State of New Jersey, particularly, but
not limited to, (i) laws proscribing prostitution, indecency and
obscenity, including the sale, uttering or public communication of
obscene material; or (ii) N.J.A.C. 13:37A-3.5.
2. Any conviction of any employee of a massage, bodywork or somatic
therapy establishment of a violation of the aforementioned statutes
and codes shall devolve upon the owner or manager of such
establishment, to the extent that it constitutes sufficient cause for
the suspension or revocation of the establishment's license.
B. The owner, manager or any employee of the massage, bodywork or
somatic therapy establishment shall not permit the following upon the
premises:
1. The presence or use of table showers.
2. Ear candling.
3. Any and all procedures that involve ear picks, ear scoops or ear
spoons.
4. Cupping, or applying the open end of a vessel of glass or other
material onto the client's skin and utilizing a heating mechanism to
heat the vessel.
5. Any activities or therapies that utilize any form of terrestrial or
aquatic animals during therapy, including, but not limited to, fish
foot spas.
6. Any activities that utilize animal waste or the use of any products
that contain animal waste as an ingredient.
7. Colon cleansing.
8. Electrical muscle stimulation.
9. Any materials, paraphernalia, or acts depicting, promoting or
associated with sexual activity.
10. Controlled dangerous substances or illegal drugs.
11. Alcoholic beverages.
12. The use of any part of the establishment as sleeping quarters. This
provision shall not preclude the location of a massage, bodywork or
somatic therapy establishment in separate quarters of a building
housing a hotel or other separate business or club.
13. Any owner, operator, employee or patron knowingly placing his or
her hand upon or touching with any part of his or her body, to
§ 5.50.100 CODE ADOPTION § 5.50.100
1.01:141
fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital area of any
other person, and/or any owner, manager or employee performing
or offering to perform any act which would require the touching of
any other person's sexual or genital area.
14. The application of any pest control chemicals by any person other
than a commercial pesticide applicator licensed by the State of
New Jersey.
15. Laundering of any personal items belonging to the owner, manager
or any employee upon the premises of the establishment, or the
commingling of any personal items with linens laundered by a
professional linen supply service.
16. Storage on the premises of excessive personal items belonging to
the owner, manager or any employee of the establishment.
17. Bulk food storage, cooking apparatus or meal preparation on the
premises of the establishment.
18. The presence of any individual under the age of 18 years old, unless
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
19. Any therapy performed on any individual under the age of 18
without the express written authorization of, and presence of, a
parent or legal guardian.
20. The presence upon the premises of the establishment of any
therapist infected with any fungus, skin infection, skin
inflammation, skin eruption or any communicable disease, and/or
tolerating any such therapist to perform any massage, bodywork or
somatic therapy on any client or other person upon the premises of
the establishment.
21. The presence of any persons upon the premises who are not
necessary to the operation of the establishment.
22. Removing any signage posted by any Township Department upon
the premises of the establishment.
23. Placing, publishing, distributing or causing to be placed, published
or distributed any printed or electronic advertising material that
depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonable
suggest to prospective clients that any services are available other
than those therapies described in the establishment license
application.
24. Indicating in text in any printed or electronic advertising material
that any services are available other than those therapies included
in the establishment license application.
25. Depicting in any printed or electronic advertising material any
persons dressed in such a manner or behaving in such a manner as
§ 5.50.100 RARITAN CODE § 5.50.100
1.01:142
§ 5.50.110. Suspension or Revocation of Establishment License;
Closure. [Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
to suggest that they or the establishment is engaged in keeping or
residing in a house of ill repute, soliciting of a lewd or unlawful act,
prostitution or pandering.
A. The Administrative Authority of the Raritan Township Board of Health
may at any time suspend the establishment license if it finds that a
subsequent health hazard or nuisance has arisen and/or that there is a
failure to comply with any part of this chapter. Upon suspension of the
license, the establishment must immediately cease operations, and may
not resume operations until the suspension of the license has been
lifted by the Raritan Township Board of Health. The suspension of a
license may be lifted only after all of the violations have been abated to
the satisfaction of the Health Officer or his or her designee and all
applicable fees and penalties have been remitted in full.
B. If the Administrative Authority of the Raritan Township Board of Health
finds, determines or has reason to believe that an establishment license
should be permanently revoked, then in such event the Administrative
Authority of the Raritan Township Board of Health shall schedule a
hearing on the matter, and shall so notify the license holder in writing
by delivering a copy to him or her personally or by mailing a copy of the
notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the last known
address. The notice shall include the time, date and place of the
hearing.
C. The Township Administrator or his or her designee shall serve as the
hearing officer for any hearing pursuant to this section. The hearing
officer shall notify the license holder of his or her decision either
personally at the conclusion of the hearing, which decision shall be
confirmed in writing, or by written notice sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested.
D. Any license holder who fails to appear at the time and place designated
for the hearing shall not be entitled to any further hearing, and in that
event, the license may, as a matter of course, be revoked. In such an
event, the hearing officer shall so notify the license holder by written
notice sent by certified mail, return receipt requested.
E. Reasons for automatic suspension and/or revocation of a license
include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation, false statement, or omission of any
required information in the application for a license.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation, or omission of any required information
made or given while operating the establishment.
3. Any violation of this chapter.
§ 5.50.100 CODE ADOPTION § 5.50.110
1.01:143
§ 5.50.120. Exceptions. [Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
§ 5.50.130. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
The Administrative Authority of the Raritan Township Board of Health
and any other designated official, shall implement, administer and enforce
this chapter, and are hereby authorized to issue all rules and regulations
consistent with this chapter, and shall have all necessary powers to carry
out the purposes of this chapter and to enforce this chapter, and are
authorized to issue citations for any violation of this chapter.
§ 5.50.140. Violations and Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 2017-41]
4. Conviction of the owner, manager or any employee of the
establishment of a crime involving moral turpitude, a felony, an
offense involving sexual misconduct, keeping or residing in a house
of prostitution, and/or any crime involving dishonesty.
5. The owner, manager or any employee refusing entry to any duly
authorized official from the Administrative Authority of the Raritan
Township Board of Health, Police Department, Construction
Department, Fire Safety Services Department or Building,
Planning and Engineering Department, or any other authorized
Township Official to inspect the premises or operations therein.
F. Should an establishment have its license revoked for any reason, at no
point in the future shall the same premises be used again for the
purpose of operating a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy
establishment.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage and bodywork
therapies given:
1. In the office of a licensed physician, chiropractor or physical
therapist; or
2. By a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanatorium
having a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors
and/or physical therapists; or
3. By any licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist in the
residence of his or her patient; or
4. By a licensed barber or cosmetologist/hairdresser to the areas of
the face, neck, scalp or upper part of the body as set forth in the
Cosmetology and Hairstyling Act of 1984, N.J.S.A. 45:5B-1.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or entity, upon their first conviction of a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to a
fine of $250. Any person, firm, corporation or entity, upon their second
conviction of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be
subject to a fine of $500. Any person, firm, corporation or entity, upon
§ 5.50.110 RARITAN CODE § 5.50.140
1.01:144
Title 6: Animal Control
Chapter 6.02
(RESERVED)
Chapter 6.04
DOGS AND CATS
§ 6.04.010. Definitions. [Prior code § 6-1; amended by Ord. 90-22;
Ord. 01-8; Ord. 06-13]
As used in this chapter:
ANIMAL — Dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the state of New Jersey or authorized by the Raritan Township
Committee or Raritan Township Board of Health to enforce the provisions
of this chapter.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A Certified Municipal Animal Control
Officer or, in the absence of such an officer, the Chief Law Enforcement
Officer of the municipality or his designee as defined in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1.
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of
the owner and not under the control or a member of his or her immediate
family, either by leash, cord or chain.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health.
their third conviction of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, shall be subject to a fine of $1000 and/or by imprisonment in
jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the
judge imposing such penalty and/or fine.
B. Each and every day that a violation of this chapter is found to occur
shall constitute a unique and separate violation of this chapter.
C. Any conviction of any owner, manager, operator or employee of a
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy establishment of any activity or
behavior prohibited by the laws of the State of New Jersey, particularly,
but not limited to laws proscribing indecency, prostitution and
obscenity, including the sale, uttering or public communication of
obscene material; or N.J.A.C. 13:37A-3.5 shall devolve upon the owner
of such establishment, it being specifically declared that following such
conviction of an employee, manager or owner of the establishment, the
owner shall be prosecuted as an accessory to such violation, and the
license which has been issued for the establishment shall be revoked.
§ 5.50.140 CODE ADOPTION § 6.04.010
1.01:145
DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any cat, dog or livestock other than poultry.
HARBOR — To provide with temporary quarters, shelter or refuge and to
give nourishment on a temporary basis for a period which exceeds 10 days.
LICENSING AGE — Any dog or cat which has attained the age of seven
months, or which possesses a permanent set of teeth.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Raritan Township Board of Health or any
designated representative thereof charged with administering the issuance
and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this
chapter.
N.J.S.A. — The cited Annotated New Jersey Statute (N.J.S.A.) as enacted
on the date of adoption of this Ordinance Amendment and any subsequent
Amendments to the New Jersey Statute adopted hereafter.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog or cat, includes
every person having a right of property or custody in such dog or cat, and
every person who has such dog or cat in his or her keeping, or who harbors
or maintains a dog or cat or knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain on or
about any premises occupied by that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared
potentially dangerous by a municipal court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-23.
PREMISES OF THE OWNER — And includes the building and the plot or
tract of land on which the building stands in which the owner of a dog or cat
or dogs or cats has a place of abode or place of business in the Township.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by a municipal
court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-22.
§ 6.04.020. Licensing and Registration of Dogs and Cats. [Prior
code § 6-2; amended by Ord. 90-22; Ord. 06-16; Ord. 07-4; Ord.
07-19; Ord. 13-18]
A. License Required. It is the responsibility of every person who shall own,
keep or harbor a dog or cat of licensing age to annually, during the
months of April or May, apply for and procure from the Township Clerk
a license and official metal registration tag for each such dog or cat so
owned, kept or harbored. No person shall keep or harbor any dog or cat
within the Township without first obtaining a license, to be issued by
the Township Clerk upon application of the owner and payment of the
prescribed fee. Such license shall be obtained within 10 days of a dog or
cat attaining the age of seven months or permanent teeth or within 10
days of the acquisition of a dog or cat that is determined to be of
licensing age. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into
§ 6.04.010 RARITAN CODE § 6.04.020
1.01:146
the State of New Jersey, Township of Raritan a dog or cat licensed in
another state for the current year shall immediately apply for a license
issued by the Township. No person shall keep or harbor any dog or cat
in the Township except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter
and with the provisions of Chapter 151 of the Laws of 1941 of the State
of New Jersey. Failure to comply with this subsection A of this ordinance
shall be deemed a violation and subject to a fine of $50 for each offense.
Each and every day in which a violation of this subsection exists shall
be considered a separate violation.
B. Registration Required. Any person who shall bring or cause to be
brought into the Township any dog or cat licensed in another New
Jersey municipality for the current year, for a period to exceed 10 days
shall, within 10 days, apply for a registration tag for each dog or cat for
a registration fee of $0.50. Such registration shall be valid until May
31st of the current Raritan Township licensing year.
1. Applications, Contents and Preservation of Information. The
application shall state if the dog or cat has been neutered, the
breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog or cat for which
license and registration are sought and whether it is of a long,
medium or short-haired variety; also, the name, telephone number,
street and post office address of the owner and the person who
shall keep or harbor such dog or cat. The information on the
application and the registration number issued for the dog or cat
shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk or other
local official designated to license dogs and/or cats in the
municipality.
2. License Forms and Tags. License forms and official tags shall be
furnished by the municipality, shall be numbered serially and shall
bear the year of issuance and the name of the municipality.
3. Evidence of Inoculation for Rabies Requirement for License. No
Municipal Clerk or official designated by the governing body of any
municipality to license dogs or cats therein shall grant any such
license and official registration tag for any dog or cat, unless the
owner thereof provides evidence that the dog or cat to be licensed
and registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine which
cannot expire through the first 10 months of the licensing year.
C. Renewal of License — Registration Tag. It is the responsibility of any
person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat of licensing age to
annually, during the months of April or May, apply for and procure from
the clerk a license and official metal registration tag for each such dog
or cat so owned, kept or harbored.
1. Display of License. Every person who shall own, keep or harbor any
dog or cat licensing age, shall place upon such dog or cat a collar or
other device, with the license number securely fastened or
displayed thereto. Acceptable methods of displaying the license
§ 6.04.020 CODE ADOPTION § 6.04.020
1.01:147
number shall include, but are not limited to, breakaway or elastic
collars. License tags are not transferable. Failure to comply with
this subsection C shall be deemed a violation and subject to a fine
of $50 for each offense. Each and every day in which a violation
of this Subsection C exists shall constitute a separate violation.
Should such tag be lost a duplicate registration tag may be
obtained for a fee of $0.50 from the Clerk's office.
D. Fees. The fee for a license and registration tag for all dogs and cats
which are spayed or neutered shall be $12 for one year. For any dog or
cat which is to be licensed which is not spayed or neutered, the fee for a
license and registration tag shall be $15 for one year. Every dog and cat
shall be required to have a separate license and registration tag. The
license and registration tag shall be effective for the period beginning
on June 1st and ending on the succeeding May 31st.
E. Late Fees. Any license and registration tag issued for a dog or cat
previously registered with the Township beginning on June 1st shall
have an additional fee as a late charge of $25. Dogs or cats which are
new pets and being licensed for the first time after June 1st shall be
permitted to be licensed without the additional charge as a late fee
providing that the licensing is done as soon as the dog reaches seven
months of age or if the dog is older, within 30 days of having obtained
the dog or cat. If an owner of a new dog or cat fails to secure the license
within the 30 days after the dog or cat attains the age of seven months
or fails to secure a license within the 30 period after having obtained
the dog or cat, he or she will incur the late fee of $25.
F. Loss of License. If a license tag has been misplaced or lost, the
Township Clerk may issue a duplicate license and/or registration tag for
that particular dog or cat at a fee of $0.50.
G. Proof of Licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a dog or cat, upon the
request of any health officer, police officer, animal control officer,
animal census taker or other authorized person.
H. Disposition of Fees Collected. License fees and other moneys collected
or received under the provisions of this chapter shall be forwarded to
the state of New Jersey and the treasurer of the municipality and shall
be placed in a special account separate from any of the other accounts
of the municipality and shall be used for the following purposes only:
collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs or cats liable to seizure for
local prevention and control of rabies; providing antirabies treatment
under the direction of the local board of health for any person known or
suspected to have been exposed to rabies; conducting rabies
inoculation clinics; annual dog and cat census taking; and for
administering the provisions of this chapter. For any unexpected
balance remaining until the end of the third fiscal year following, and at
the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall be transferred from
such special account to the general funds of the municipality, any
§ 6.04.020 RARITAN CODE § 6.04.020
1.01:148
§ 6.04.030. Pet Shops, Kennels, Shelters and Pounds. [Prior code
§ 6-3]
§ 6.04.040. Enforcing Official. [Prior code §§ 6-4.1, 6-4.2]
amount then in such account which is in excess of the total amount paid
into the special account during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
I. Unauthorized Removal or Attachment of Registration Tags. No person,
except an officer in the performance of his or her duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog or cat without the consent of
the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog or cat
for which it was not issued.
J. Waiver of Licensing and Registration Fees. Dogs used as guides for
blind persons and commonly known as seeing-eye dogs, or dogs used to
assist deaf persons and commonly known as hearing ear dogs, shall be
licensed and registered as other dogs herein above provided for, except
that the owner or keeper of such dog(s) shall not be required to pay any
fee therefor. Cats used on a legitimate working farm shall be licensed
and registered as other cats herein above provided for, except that the
owner or keeper of such cat(s) shall not be required to pay any fee
therefor.
A. License Required. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to
establish a kennel, a shelter, a pet shop or a pound shall apply to the
clerk for a license entitling him or her to keep or operate such
establishment. Such application shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 151 of the Laws of 1941 and conform to the requirements as
set forth herein.
B. Fees. The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for
10 or less dogs shall be $10; and for more than 10 dogs, $25. The
annual license fee for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall be charged
for a shelter or a pound.
A. Appointment and Compensation. The Township Committee shall have
power by resolution to appoint and fix the compensation of a
poundmaster, dog warden or any person or persons whose duty it shall
be to enforce the provisions of this chapter as well as the provisions of
Chapter 151 of the Laws of the state of New Jersey.
B. Rights and Powers. The poundmaster, dog warden, dog catcher or other
person appointed by the Township to enforce this chapter shall also
have the rights and powers granted by Chapter 151 of the Laws of 1941
of the state of New Jersey.
§ 6.04.020 CODE ADOPTION § 6.04.050
1.01:149
§ 6.04.050. Impoundment; Grounds; Notice; Destruction or
Adoption; Penalty; Reporting of Rabid Animals. [Amended by Ord.
06-28]
The duties of the Animal Control Officer or other person appointed by the
municipality pursuant to this action, notice to be given, the destruction
or adoption of such animal, prohibition against sale or availability for
experimentation, and the reporting of rabid animals shall be undertaken in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16.
The costs of sheltering, caring for, or treating any animal including
veterinary expenses until the animal is returned to its' owner, forfeited,
liberated, or disposed of shall be borne by the owner of the animal.
§ 6.04.060. Seizure of Dogs; Going on Premises. [Amended by Ord.
01-8]
The Animal Control Officer or other person duly authorized by this chapter,
when in immediate pursuit of a dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize
or impound under the provisions of this chapter or under the Statutes of
the State of New Jersey, is authorized to go upon or into any premises, but
not into an inhabited dwelling house without the permission of the owner,
to seize for impounding such dogs or dogs for impoundment, and such
entry shall not be deemed trespassing, except that he may not go upon any
premises if the owner thereof or the owners representative is present and
forbids him to do so.
§ 6.04.070. Dogs Committing Nuisances. [Amended by Ord. 88-33;
Ord. 01-8]
A. _____
1. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall
cause, suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit
any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway,
bypath, play area, park or any place where people congregate or
walk, or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private
property without the prior permission of the owner of such
property.
2. Any person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog
which soils, defiles, defecates on or commits any nuisance on any
common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area or
any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property
without the prior permission of the owner of the property, shall
immediately remove in a sanitary manner as may be established by
the Board of Health, all feces deposited by such dog, and thereafter
properly dispose of same.
3. Any person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any such
dog shall have in their possession at all times appropriate sanitary
§ 6.04.050 RARITAN CODE § 6.04.070
1.01:150
§ 6.04.080. Dogs at Large Prohibited. [Prior code § 6-6.1; amended
by Ord. 84-8; Ord. 90-22]
No person shall permit any dog owned, harbored, possessed or controlled
by him or her to run at large within the limits of the Township.
§ 6.04.090. Killing of Dogs. [Prior code § 6-6.3]
§ 6.04.100. Rabies Vaccination. [Prior code § 6-8; amended by Ord.
90-22]
means, including but not limited to shovels or other implements
and containers or disposal bags to immediately remove and dispose
of all feces and droppings deposited by the dog.
B. Exclusion. This section shall not apply to blind persons using dogs as
guides.
C. Enforcement/Filing of Complaints. For violation of any of the provisions
of this section on either public or private property, complaints may be
filed by either citizens, police officers or the dog warden of the
Township.
D. Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates, fails or refuses to
comply with the provisions hereof shall be liable to a penalty of not less
than $5 or more than $50 for each violation and to be recovered in the
name of the local Board of Health or by and in the name of the
municipality.
A. Whenever the Township Committee shall deem that the public safety
may so require, it may, by resolution, authorize the Township Clerk to
issue a proclamation authorizing the immediate killing of any dog found
running at large within the limits of this Township without being
properly muzzled.
B. The Township Committee, by resolution, may appoint and fix the
compensation for one or more persons to kill any dog or dogs running at
large after the issuance of the proclamation as provided in Subsection A
of this section. Any such person or persons so appointed shall have full
power and authority to immediately kill any dogs found running at
large. No dog shall be killed until notice of the proclamation aforesaid
has been given at least once in a newspaper printed or circulating in
this Township.
A. Vaccination Required. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain
any dog or cat over seven months of age within Raritan Township,
unless such dog or cat is vaccinated against rabies. The provisions of
this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery, or those held by a
state or federal licensed research facility, or a veterinary establishment
where dogs or cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical,
§ 6.04.070 CODE ADOPTION § 6.04.100
1.01:151
§ 6.04.110. Canvass of All Dogs and Cats. [Amended by Ord. 06-16]
The animal control officer of the Township and/or persons designated by
the municipality as agents to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall
promptly, after June 1st and before October 1st of any given year, cause a
canvass to be made of all dogs and cats owned, kept or harbored within
the limits of the Township and shall report the results thereof to the clerk
of the Township and the board of health of the Township, setting forth in
separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or
harboring such dogs or cats, the number of licensed dogs or cats owned,
kept or harbored by each of such persons, together with the registration
number of each of the dogs or cats, and the number of unlicensed dogs
or cats owned, kept or harbored by each of such persons, together with a
complete description of each unlicensed the dog or cat.
§ 6.04.120. Violations — Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 06-16; Ord.
13-18]
Any person who violates any section or provision of this chapter (Chapter
6.04 -Dogs and Cats), with the exception of Section 6.04.020 and Section
6.04.070 to which a specific penalty is established, shall be liable upon
the first conviction of not less than $75 or more than $2,000; and upon a
second conviction, not less than $150 or more than $2,000, imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 90 days; and/or serving a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days. Each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this chapter (Chapter 6.04- Dogs and Cats) exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 6.05
surgical or other treatments, or licensed animal shelters, pounds,
kennels or pet shops.
B. Method. Except for any applicable exemption pursuant to Subsection D
of this section, all dogs or cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of
Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization,
published by the National Association of State Public Health
Veterinarians.
C. Certification of Vaccination. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued
to the owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended and
approved by the Raritan Township board of health.
D. Exemptions. Any dog or cat may be exempted from the requirement of
vaccination for a specified period of time, within the discretion of the
Raritan Township Board of Health, upon presentation to the board of a
veterinarian's certificate stating that because of an infirmity or other
physical condition or regimen of therapy, the inoculation of such dog or
cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
§ 6.04.100 RARITAN CODE § 6.04.120
1.01:152
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS AND VICIOUS DOGS
§ 6.05.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 01-8]
As used in this chapter:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A Certified Municipal Animal Control
Officer or, in the absence of such an officer, the Chief Law Enforcement
Officer of the municipality or his designee as defined in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health.
DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any cat, dog or livestock other than poultry.
N.J.S.A. — The cited Annotated New Jersey Statute (N.J.S.A.) as enacted
on the date of adoption of this Ordinance Amendment and any subsequent
Amendments to the New Jersey Statute adopted hereafter.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared
potentially dangerous by a municipal court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-23.
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by a municipal
court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-22.
§ 6.05.020. Seizure and Impoundment of Dog by Animal Control
Officer; Grounds.
The animal control officer shall seize and impound a dog when the officer
has reasonable cause to believe that the dog:
§ 6.05.030. Notice of Seizure and Impoundment; Determination of
Identity of Owners; Notice of Hearing; Return of Statement by
Owner; Destruction of Dog.
A. Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury as defined
in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) to that person;
B. Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person during
an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of harm to persons or
domestic animals;
C. Engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A. 4:22-24 and
N.J.S.A. 4:22-26; or
D. Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether
the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. Subject to the approval of
the municipal Health Officer, the dog may be impounded in a facility or
other structure agreeable to the owner.
§ 6.04.120 CODE ADOPTION § 6.05.030
1.01:153
§ 6.05.040. Agreement Between Municipality and Dog Owner;
Settlement and Disposition; Liability of Municipality; Legal
Expenses.
Notwithstanding any provision in N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. to the contrary, the
municipality and the owner of the dog may settle and dispose of the matter
at any time in such manner and according to such terms and conditions that
may be mutually agreed upon. Notwithstanding any provisions of N.J.S.A.
4:19-19 to the contrary, no municipality or any of its employees shall have
any liability by virtue of having entered into any settlement agreement
pursuant to this section, or for any action or inaction related to the entry
into such agreement, for any injuries or damages caused thereafter by the
dog. The municipality may, as a condition of the settlement agreement,
also require that the owner of the dog hold the municipality harmless for
any legal expenses or fees the municipality may incur in defending against
any cause of action brought against the municipality notwithstanding the
prohibition against such causes of action set forth in this section.
§ 6.05.050. Finding to Declare Dog Vicious; Grounds.
A. The Animal Control Officer shall notify the Municipal Court and
municipal Health Office immediately that he has seized and impounded
a dog pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-19, or that he has reasonable cause to
believe that a dog has killed another domestic animal and that a hearing
is required. The animal control officer shall, through a reasonable
effort, attempt to determine the identity of the owner of any dog seized
and impounded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-19. If its owner cannot be
identified within seven days, that dog may be humanely destroyed.
B. The Animal Control Officer shall, within three working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and
impounded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-19, notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the owner concerning the seizure and impoundment,
and that, if the owner wishes, a hearing will be held to determine
whether the impounded dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. This
notice shall also require that the owner return within seven days, by
certified mail or hand delivery, a signed statement indicating whether
he wishes the hearing to be conducted or, if not, to relinquish
ownership of the dog, in which case the dog may be humanely
destroyed. If the owner cannot be notified by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or refuses to sign for the certified letter, or does not
reply to the certified letter with a signed statement within seven days,
the dog may be humanely destroyed.
A. The Municipal Court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear and
convincing evidence that the dog:
1. Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:11-1(b) to a person; or
§ 6.05.030 RARITAN CODE § 6.05.050
1.01:154
§ 6.05.060. Finding to Declare Dog Potentially Dangerous.
§ 6.05.070. Order and Schedule for Compliance for Potentially
Dangerous Dogs; Conditions.
If the Municipal Court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous, it shall
issue an order and schedule for compliance which, in part:
2. Has engaged in dog fighting activities described in N.J.S.A. 4:22-24
and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26.
B. A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious bodily
injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) upon a person if the dog was
provoked. The municipality shall bear the burden of proof to
demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
C. If the municipal court declares a dog to be vicious, and no appeal is
made of this ruling pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-25, the dog shall be
destroyed in a humane and expeditious manner, except that no dog may
be destroyed during the pendency of an appeal.
A. The Municipal Court shall declare a dog to be potentially dangerous if it
finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
1. Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack; and poses a serious threat of bodily
injury or death to a person; or
2. Killed another domestic animal, and
a. Poses a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person; or
b. Poses a threat to another domestic animal; or
3. Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
B. A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
1. Causing bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person if
the dog was provoked; or
2. Killing a domestic animal if the domestic animal was the aggressor.
For the purposes of Subsection B(1) of this subsection, the
municipality shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that the
dog was not provoked.
A. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
1. To apply, at his own expense, to the Municipal Clerk or other official
designated to license dogs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2, for a
special municipal potentially dangerous dog license, municipal
registration number and red identification tag issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-30. The owner shall, at his own expense, have the
§ 6.05.050 CODE ADOPTION § 6.05.070
1.01:155
§ 6.05.080. Procedures for Appeal.
The owner of the dog, or the Animal Control Officer in the municipality
in which the dog was impounded, may appeal any final decision, order or
judgment, including any conditions attached thereto, of a Municipal Court
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. by filing an appeal with the Superior
Court, Law Division, in accordance with the Rules Governing the Courts
of the State of New Jersey pertaining to appeals from courts of limited
jurisdiction. The Superior Court shall hear the appeal by conducting a
hearing de novo in the manner established by those rules for appeals from
courts of limited jurisdiction.
§ 6.05.090. Liability of Owner for Costs of Impoundment and
Destruction.
registration number tattooed upon the dog in a prominent location.
A potentially dangerous dog shall be impounded until the owner
obtains a municipal potentially dangerous dog license, municipal
registration number and red identification tag;
2. To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises warning
that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall
be visible and legible from 50 feet of the enclosure required
pursuant to paragraph 3 of this subsection;
3. To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property where the potentially dangerous
dog will be kept and maintained, which has sound sides, top and
bottom to prevent the potentially dangerous dog from escaping by
climbing, jumping, or digging and within a fence of at least six feet
in height separated by at least three feet from the confined area.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the
enclosure to prevent the entry of the general public and to preclude
any release or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by an
unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous dogs
shall be confined in the enclosure, or if taken out of the enclosure,
securely muzzled and restrained with a tether approved by the
animal control officer having a minimum tensile strength
sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict the potentially
dangerous dog's movements to a radius of no more than three feet
from the owner and under the direct supervision of the owner.
B. May require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the Municipal Court to cover any damage or injury
caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance, which
may be separate from any other homeowner policy, shall contain a
provision requiring the municipality in which the owner resides to be
named as an additional insured for the sole purpose of being notified by
the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of
the liability insurance policy.
§ 6.05.070 RARITAN CODE § 6.05.090
1.01:156
§ 6.05.100. Right to Convene Hearing for Subsequent Actions of
Dog.
If the Municipal Court finds that the dog is not vicious or potentially
dangerous, the Municipal Court shall retain the right to convene a hearing
to determine whether the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous for any
subsequent actions of the dog.
§ 6.05.110. Duties of Owners of Potentially Dangerous Dogs.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall:
A. If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous and all appeals
pertaining hereto have been exhausted, the owner of the dog shall be
liable to the municipality in which the dog is impounded for the costs
and expenses of impounding and destroying the dog. The owner shall
pay the actual costs incurred by the municipality for such costs and
expenses. The owner shall incur the expense of impounding the dog in a
facility other than the municipal depository, regardless of whether the
dog is ultimately found to be vicious or potentially dangerous.
B. If the dog has bitten or exposed a person within 10 days previous to the
time of euthanasia, its head shall be transported to the New Jersey
State Department of Health laboratory for rabies testing.
A. Comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. in accordance
with a schedule established by the Municipal Court, but in no case more
than 60 days subsequent to the date of determination.
B. Notify the licensing authority, local police department and the Animal
Control Officer if a potentially dangerous dog is at large or has attacked
a human being or killed a domestic animal.
C. Notify the licensing authority, local police department and the Animal
Control Officer within 24 hours of the death, sale or donation of a
potentially dangerous dog.
D. Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner that
the dog has been declared potentially dangerous.
E. Upon sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a different
municipality, notify the department and the licensing authority, police
department and Animal Control Officer of that municipality of the
transfer of ownership and the name, address and telephone number of
the new owner.
F. In addition to any license fee required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3,
pay a potentially dangerous dog license fee to the municipality as
provided by N.J.S.A. 4:19-31.
§ 6.05.090 CODE ADOPTION § 6.05.120
1.01:157
§ 6.05.120. Violations by Owner; Penalties; Enforcement; Seizure
and Impoundment of Dog; Destruction by Court Order. [Amended by
Ord. 6-03]
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog, who is found by clear and
convincing evidence to have violated this chapter (Chap. 6.05 Potentially
Dangerous Dogs and Vicious Dogs) or any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, or to have failed to comply with a court's order shall
be subject to a fine as set in Section 1.08.010 per day of the violation,
and each day's continuance of the violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this
section. The Animal Control Officer is authorized to seize and impound any
potentially dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, or a court's order. The Municipal Court may order that the dog so
seized and impounded by destroyed in an expeditious and human manner.
§ 6.05.130. Potentially Dangerous Dog Registration Number, Red
Identification Tag and License; Issuance; Telephone Number to
Report Violations; Publicity.
Each municipality shall:
§ 6.05.140. Fee for Potentially Dangerous Dog License.
Each person who shall own, possess, keep or harbor any potentially
dangerous dog or dogs shall obtain an annual license for each dog and
shall have the same registered and numbered through the Animal Control
Officer and/or person designated in the Township Clerk's office, and for
such license shall pay the sum of $500, as a license fee for each and every
potentially dangerous dog. Said license fee shall be in lieu of the license
fee required pursuant to Section 6.04.110 of the Revised Ordinances of the
Township of Raritan.
A. Issue a potentially dangerous dog registration number and red
identification tag along with a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by the owner to the
Animal Control Officer that he has complied with the court's orders. The
last three digits of each potentially dangerous dog registration number
issued by a municipality will be the three-number code assigned to that
municipality in the regulations promulgated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-33. The Animal Control Officer shall verify, in writing, compliance
to the Municipal Clerk or other official designated to license dogs in the
municipality.
B. Publicize a telephone number for reporting violations of this chapter.
This telephone number shall be forwarded to the New Jersey
Department of Health and any changes in this number shall be reported
immediately to the New Jersey Department of Health.
§ 6.05.120 RARITAN CODE § 6.05.150
1.01:158
§ 6.05.150. Inspection to Determine Continuing Compliance.
The animal control officer shall inspect the enclosure and the owner's
property at least monthly to determine continuing compliance with Section
6.05.070 of this chapter.
§ 6.05.160. Deposit and Use of Fines and Fees.
All fines and fees collected or received by the Township pursuant to this
chapter shall be deposited in a special account and used by the Township to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6.05.170. Inapplicability to Dogs Used for Law Enforcement
Activities.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to dogs used for law
enforcement activities.
Chapter 6.08
DEER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM LOTTERY
§ 6.08.010. Deer Management Program Lottery. [Amended by Ord.
2016-22; Ord. 2017-05]
The Township hereby establishes a Deer Management Program Lottery
to award permits to allow archery hunting on certain Township-owned
properties on an annual basis. The number of permits awarded and the
properties which may be archery hunted pursuant to this chapter shall be
designated by resolution of the Township Committee.
§ 6.08.020. Application. [Amended by Ord. 2016-22]
A. Any Township resident who wishes to enter the lottery shall submit the
following documents as one packet to Raritan Township Public Works,
Deer Management Program, 204 Pennsylvania Avenue, Flemington,
New Jersey 08822:
1. Completed application form for applicant and alternate(s);
2. Completed liability waiver for applicant and alternate(s);
3. Completed lottery ticket;
4. Copy of current New Jersey Archery License for applicant and
alternate(s).
B. Only complete packets will be accepted. All packets must be returned to
Raritan Township Public Works by the date indicated on the application.
C. A new application packet must be submitted each year.
§ 6.05.150 CODE ADOPTION § 6.08.030
1.01:159
§ 6.08.030. Lottery Instructions. [Amended by Ord. 2016-22]
§ 6.08.040. Permits; Fees. [Amended by Ord. 2016-22]
A. The lottery shall be open to all Township residents who hold a valid New
Jersey Archery License. Any permits not awarded by lottery shall be
sold on a first come, first served basis to residents and non-residents.
B. There shall be no fee for a lottery ticket. Only one lottery ticket per
applicant per property may be submitted. Alternates do not submit
lottery tickets.
C. The applicant may be drawn for more than one property.
D. If an applicant is drawn for more than one property, he or she may elect
to vacate any or all of the additional properties awarded to him or her.
E. If a property becomes available due to a lottery winner vacating his or
her award, a replacement hunter shall be drawn for that property.
F. Each applicant may designate up to three alternates in his or her
application. If an applicant is permitted to hunt through the lottery, his
or her designated alternate(s) shall be allowed to hunt on the awarded
property in the applicant's absence, or on a property with the
successful applicant if the applicant is awarded more than one permit
for that property. At no time shall the number of hunters on the
property exceed the number of permits issued for that property.
G. Alternates are subject to the same Deer Management Program Rules as
the original permit holder.
H. Alternates must complete the alternate application and submit it,
together with the completed liability waiver and a copy of his or her
current New Jersey Archery License, with the applicant's application
packet.
I. An applicant who is awarded a permit pursuant to this chapter must
complete the deer management survey by the date indicated thereon,
and must include all deer harvested by his or her alternate(s).
A. An applicant who is chosen in the lottery must obtain a permit prior to
hunting on the awarded property. A permit must be obtained for each
successful award, i.e. each different property or each award on the
same property. The fee for each permit shall be $100.
B. An applicant may elect to vacate his or her award, or may vacate any or
all additional properties awarded to him or her. The failure to pay the
permit fee within the required time shall be deemed a vacation of the
award, and a replacement hunter shall be chosen.
C. Permits awarded by lottery shall be valid for one year. New permits
shall be awarded by lottery on an annual basis.
§ 6.08.030 RARITAN CODE § 6.08.050
1.01:160
§ 6.08.050. Compliance. [Amended by Ord. 2016-22]
Title 7: (Reserved)
Title 8: Health and Safety
Chapter 8.04
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 8.04.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 89-33]
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the installation,
operation and maintenance of private alarm systems within the Township in
order to insure that the quality of alarm responses rendered to the public
will be maintained at a high level, to eliminate potential harm resulting in
responses to false alarms, and to alleviate conditions otherwise leading to
unnecessary drain on the manpower, time, space, facilities, and finances of
the Township and its police and volunteer fire departments.
§ 8.04.020. Scope. [Amended by Ord. 89-33]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglary, fire and other emergency alarm
equipment which produce a visual or audible signal or function by direct
line, radio, telephone or by any other means requiring a response by the
police department, volunteer fire department or other municipal agencies.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to alarm businesses and to any
person who operates, maintains or owns any alarm device, dial alarm, or
local alarm designed to produce a visual or audible signal of an emergency
and designed to summon or alert, directly or through others, the police, fire
service, or other municipal agencies in response to any type of alarm signal.
A. An applicant who is awarded a permit pursuant to this chapter, and his
or her alternate(s), must comply with all applicable laws, regulations,
ordinances and deer management program rules, as same may be
amended from time to time.
B. Failure of an applicant or his or her alternate(s) to comply with any all
applicable laws, regulations, ordinances and deer management
program rules shall result in forfeiture of any awarded permit or
permits for that year, and, in the discretion of the Raritan Township
Public Works Deer Management Program, may further result in
disqualification of applicant and/or his or her alternate(s) from further
participation in the Raritan Township Deer Management Program
Lottery.
§ 6.08.050 CODE ADOPTION § 8.04.030
1.01:161
§ 8.04.030. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 98-42; Ord. 89-33]
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter unless otherwise specifically stated:
ALARM BUSINESS — Any business operated by a person, partnership,
corporation or other individual or entity which engages in the activity
of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, selling,
servicing or responding to a fire or burglar alarm systems(s) or which
causes any of these activities to take place. Excluded from this definition
however are retail establishments which sell alarm systems over the
counter and do not service same.
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm-activating equipment which provides
warning of burglary, intrusion, fire, flood or like peril.
ALARM SYSTEM — Equipment or a device, or an assembly of equipment
and devices to signal the presence of an emergency or hazard requiring
urgent attention and to which the Police Department, fire department or
other municipal agency may be expected to respond.
ALARM USER — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization or entity of any kind in control of any building,
structure or facility wherein an alarm device or system is maintained, and
including but not limited to owners, tenants, subtenants or otherwise.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Township or his or her
designated representative.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — The designated representative of the
Chief of Police or the Fire Official who performs a function required or
permitted by this chapter under the supervision of the Chief of Police or the
Fire Official.
DIAL ALARM — Any type of alarm system using telephone lines,
transmitting an alarm directly through the communications switchboard,
answering service, or alarm company console, providing warning of
intrusion, fire or other peril.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm or signal of an alarm actuated by inadvertence,
negligence, intentional or unintentional act of a person, domestic animal
and/or household pet other than an intruder, and including alarms caused
by mechanical failure, malfunction or improper installation of the alarm
system and related equipment. It shall further include improper adjustment
(sensitivity) to suppress false indications due to short flashes of light, wind,
noises, rattling or vibrations of doors or other forces.
FIRE ALARM EQUIPMENT — Includes the following:
Devices which automatically detect heat, smoke or other products of
combustion;
1.
2. Manual systems which actuate a fire alarm signal;
§ 8.04.030 RARITAN CODE § 8.04.030
1.01:162
FIRE OFFICIAL — The fire marshal of the Township or his or her designated
representative.
FIRE SERVICES — Authorized fire companies providing fire protection and
suppression to the Township.
INDEPENDENT SMOKE DETECTOR — A device having an audible alarm
indicating smoke and/or having an audible alarm indicating smoke and/or
fire within a structure and not connected to an alarm system or to any
external sounding device outside of the structure.
LICENSEE — The person who holds the license to install, operate and
maintain the alarm/alarm console pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm system, which, when activated, produces
a signal not connected to an alarm console or the communication
switchboard, including, but not limited to business burglar alarms actuating
bell or other sound generating devices and/or light emitting devices
providing warning of intrusion or other peril. The term local alarm shall
not include an alarm system solely connected to a registered motor vehicle,
nor shall the term include equipment designed to signal solely within a
building or series of buildings and which does not emit signals, visible or
audible, to persons outside such building or buildings, i.e., independent
smoke detector.
PERMITTEE — Any person who owns an alarm device who has obtained
a permit according to the provisions of this chapter. All permits shall be
issued and fees paid therefore on a one time basis.
PERSON — Any natural person or individual, or any firm, partnership,
association, limited partnership, sole proprietorship, corporation or any
other business entity.
WRITTEN NOTICE — Notice by certified mail, return receipt requested.
§ 8.04.040. Registration of Alarm System. [Amended by Ord. 89-33]
Mechanical systems designed and equipped to detect fires, actuate and
alarm, and suppress such fires, to include water flow alarms.
3.
A. No person shall install, operate or maintain any alarm system unless
the alarm system has been registered with the Township Police
Department. The Police Department shall provide a copy of all approved
registration forms to the Township Fire Official.
B. An alarm system shall be deemed registered at such time as a
registration form supplied by the Police Department is completed as to
all information requested therein. Among the information to be
provided on the registration form is the following: (a) the name, address
and telephone number of the owner or tenant or occupier of the
property if other than the owner, upon which the alarm system is
installed; (b) the name, address and telephone number of the installer
of the system; (c) the type of system; (d) a list of the names, addresses
and telephone numbers of the person(s) to be contacted in the event of
§ 8.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 8.04.040
1.01:163
§ 8.04.050. New Alarm Systems; Installation, Activation and
Operation. [Amended by Ord. 89-33]
an alarm or in an emergency situation determined by the Police or Fire
Department; (e) the names, address and twenty-four-hour telephone
numbers of the persons or company maintaining the alarm system.
C. No further renewal registration shall be required unless and until there
has occurred any material change in the information previously
submitted with respect to any alarm system in which event it shall be
the duty of the owner and user of the alarm system within 10 days of
such material change, to file a supplemental or revised registration
containing accurate, current information.
D. A one-time fee in the amount of $10 shall accompany each registration.
Change or re-registration for new owners or users, there shall be a fee
of $10. Upon payment of the fee and filing of the registration, two
decals will be issued. The decals will be placed in plain view, near the
front/main entrance and rear/secondary entrance of the premises.
E. All pre-existing alarm systems shall comply with the requirements of
this section within 60 days of the date of the final adoption of the
ordinance codified in this chapter.
F. Excluded from this provision are independent smoke detectors that do
not emit an audible or visible signal outside of the structure.
A. Each alarm system as defined in this chapter and installed after the
effective date of this chapter shall utilize discrete circuitry for
multipurpose alarm systems to insure appropriate emergency response.
B. Any alarm system which requires for its operation electricity supplied
by a public utility may be equipped with a battery rendering it operable
in the event of a power outage if so desired by the property owner. Such
a battery back-up shall be required for any alarm system which will
trigger itself automatically in the event of a power outage.
C. Every alarm system must be provided with a device which will shut off
the alarm 10 minutes of activation.
D. Every burglar alarm system shall be equipped with a time delay of at
least 15 seconds which may include an audible signal of the same
length of time, said time delay to be designed to prevent accidental
activation of the system. The 15 second audible signal, if utilized, shall
be audible only within the structure and not externally.
E. No alarm system may be connected directly or indirectly to the Police or
Fire Departments.
F. No person shall install, cause to be installed, or permit to be installed,
any alarm device by whatever name known, which automatically selects
a telephone line dedicated to the Police or Fire Department for the
§ 8.04.040 RARITAN CODE § 8.04.050
1.01:164
purpose of playing a recorded message to report any emergency. All
alarm systems shall be programmed to dial Hunterdon County
communications at (201) 782-0911.
G. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected to allow a call to
Police Headquarters or Hunterdon County communications in the event
of a false alarm.
H. No police, fire or other public department or official shall be
responsible in any way for the resetting or maintenance of any alarm
system.
I. No alarm business or person owning, using or possessing an alarm
system shall cause or permit the giving of repeated false alarms, for test
purposes or otherwise, whether intentional, accidental or otherwise.
Owners/operators of such alarms shall be governed by the false alarm
procedures and penalties set forth in this chapter.
J. If any person has any dial alarm connected at the time of the effective
date of this chapter, it shall be reprogrammed within 30 days of said
effective date to comply with this chapter.
K. The contents of a dial alarm message shall be clear and intelligible and
in the format approved by the Chief of Police or Fire Official. No such
message shall be transmitted more than two times as a result of a single
stimulus of the mechanism. Messages shall not exceed 15 seconds and
the time gap between each shall not exceed 10 seconds.
L. The sensory mechanism of dial alarms shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and not be actuated by impulses due to short
flashes of light, wind, noises, rattling or vibration of doors or other
forces unrelated to general alarms.
M. Permits for local alarm systems shall not be issued with respect to
buildings which are not owner-occupied, prior to receipt by the Chief of
Police of satisfactory proof that the occupant of the building has been
notified of the existence of such alarm system, or of the intent to install
a local alarm system and the provisions of this chapter.
N. By installing an alarm system and registering same with the Township,
each permittee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Township
and the volunteer Fire Department of Raritan Township and mutual aid
departments, their agents, servants and employees from and against
any and all claims, suits, damages, costs, losses and expenses, and to
release the Township, the volunteer Fire Department of Raritan
Township and mutual aid departments, their agents, servants and
employees from any and all liability or damages in any way resulting
from or arising out of or connected with the installation, operation or
maintenance of the alarm system or any act or omission connected
therewith.
§ 8.04.050 CODE ADOPTION § 8.04.050
1.01:165
§ 8.04.060. Confidentiality. [Amended by Ord. 89-33]
All information submitted in compliance with this chapter shall be held in
the strictest confidence and shall be deemed a record exempt from public
disclosure pursuant to state statute. Any violation of confidentiality shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter.
§ 8.04.070. Failure to Register or Install a System in Compliance
With Chapter — Fines. [Amended by Ord. 89-33]
§ 8.04.080. False Alarms and Fines. [Amended by Ord. 89-33]
O. Any alarm business and/or property owner having knowledge of the
sale or change of tenants in a property shall be responsible for notifying
the Police Department when one of its customers possessing an alarm
system sells the property or changes tenants. The alarm business shall
notify the Police Department of the name of the new owner or tenant
and whether or not the new owner or tenant is continuing with an alarm
device or system within the property.
A. Any person who fails to register an alarm system as required by the
provisions of this chapter is subject to a minimum of $50 and maximum
of $500 fine, for each and every violation.
B. Any owner, user or alarm business who installs such a system that is not
in compliance with this chapter is subject to a fine of $50 and may be
required to remove such an alarm system.
A. In the case of each false alarm which summons the Police or Fire
Department to respond, the Police Chief or Fire Official as appropriate
shall cause an investigation to be made and shall keep a record of such
false alarms on file.
B. In the event of the occurrence of three false alarms within a twelvemonth
period, the permittee shall within three days after written notice
to do so from the Chief of Police, complete a written report setting forth
the cause or causes of the false alarms, the corrective action taken and
a statement as to whether the alarm system has been inspected and/or
serviced by an alarm service company, and such other information as
the Chief of Police may reasonably require.
C. Owners and/or users of alarm systems shall be subject to the following
minimum fine schedule for false alarms:
Number of
False Alarms Minimum Fine/Penalty
1-3 Provide written report (as per Subsection B of this
section)
4 $25
5-10 $50 per occurrence
§ 8.04.050 RARITAN CODE § 8.04.080
1.01:166
§ 8.04.090. Intentional False Alarms and Penalty. [Amended by Ord.
89-33]
Any person who intentionally causes the giving of false alarm shall be in
violation of this chapter and subject to a penalty of not less than $100 and
not more than $1,000 and/or imprisonment for any term not to exceed 90
days, and/or by a period of community service not to exceed 90 days, for
each such offense.
§ 8.04.100. Testing Alarms. [Amended by Ord. 89-33]
Any person testing an alarm system covered by the provisions of this
chapter shall notify the Police Department and Hunterdon County
communications immediately prior to and immediately after the testing is
completed. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter and
subject such person to the penalties set forth in this chapter.
§ 8.04.110. Administration Cooperation. [Amended by Ord. 89-33]
The Chief of Police and Fire Official shall cooperate in all respects in
connection with the administration of this chapter and the forms, permits,
decals, records and other documents used by the Chief of Police.
§ 8.04.120. Promulgation of Rules and Regulations. [Amended by
Ord. 89-33]
The Chief of Police may from time to time promulgate rules and regulations
in furtherance of the administration of this chapter which shall be enforced
through the Police Department. Such rules and regulations shall become
effective upon approval by resolution of the Township Committee.
§ 8.04.130. Enforcement of Chapter Provision; Violation and
Penalty. [Amended by Ord. 89-33; Ord. 89-40]
The Township Chief of Police is designated as officer in charge of the
enforcement of this chapter. The Governing Body may designate such
assistant enforcement officers for purposes of the enforcement of this
chapter as are needed for such purposes. The enforcement officer shall have
the authority to use the services of the Police Department or any public
authority to enforce the chapter.
Number of
False Alarms Minimum Fine/Penalty
10 or more $100 per occurrence
The calculation of the number of false alarms shall be without regard
to whether the false alarms involved intrusion alarms or fire alarms.
§ 8.04.080 CODE ADOPTION § 8.04.130
1.01:167
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject, upon
conviction thereof, to the penalties as provided in this chapter and in
chapter 1.08.
Chapter 8.08
CIVIL DISTURBANCES
§ 8.08.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 3-8.1]
N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 authorize the governing body of every
municipality to enact regulations to preserve the public peace and order, to
protect property and to prevent and quell riots, disturbances and disorderly
assemblages, and further to enact regulations for the protection of persons
and property and for the preservation of public safety and welfare of the
Township and its inhabitants. The Township Committee deems it necessary
to provide for appropriate authority and outline orderly procedure in order
to accomplish these purposes.
§ 8.08.020. Definitions. [Prior code § 3-8.2]
As used in this chapter:
CIVIL EMERGENCY — Any riot, disturbance or disorderly assemblage
characterized by the use of actual force or violence, or any potential
threatened force or violence if accompanied by the immediate means of
doing so by five or more persons acting together without lawful authority.
CURFEW — A prohibition against any persons or particular class or age
group of persons, walking, running, loitering, standing or motoring upon
any street, highway, public property or vacant premises within the limits
of the Township, except persons officially performing their duties with
reference to the emergency.
§ 8.08.030. Determination of State of Emergency. [Prior code
§ 3-8.3]
When in the judgment of the Township Committee a civil emergency or
the threat of same is deemed to exist, the Committee shall, by resolution,
determine such an emergency to exist and immediately post notice thereof
in at least five conspicuous places within the Township. Such state of
emergency shall be determined and declared to exist by a quorum of the
Committee at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose upon
notice to all members of the Committee as circumstances of the emergency
might permit, any other forms of notification and publication thereof to the
contrary notwithstanding.
§ 8.08.040. Emergency Powers. [Prior code § 3-8.4]
Upon the determination and declaration of a state of emergency, the
Township Committee is authorized to exercise the following powers;
§ 8.04.130 RARITAN CODE § 8.08.040
1.01:168
provided that any such powers shall not continue to be in force and effect
for a longer period than 48 hours unless, at the expiration of such period of
time, a subsequent resolution of the Committee is duly adopted extending
the duration of the civil emergency:
A. Order a general curfew applicable to such portion of the Township or
age group within the Township as the Committee might deem advisable
to be applicable during such hours of the day and night as is necessary
for the protection of the public safety and welfare;
B. Order that all persons licensed under the alcoholic beverage control
law who dispense alcoholic beverages at retail, wholesale or for onpremises
consumption, as well as private groups or portions thereof
where the consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted, shall close
their establishments and cease operation of their business during the
hours or periods deemed necessary under the emergency;
C. Order the discontinuance of the selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline, or other liquid flammable or combustible products, and order
the closing of all gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief
activity of which is the selling, distributing and dispensing of liquid
flammable or combustible products, or to limit the sale or distribution
of such gasoline and like products directly into the tanks of motor
vehicles;
D. Order the discontinuance of the selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character
whatsoever, and order that all such establishments or portions thereof
which engage in the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of
firearms or ammunition shall close and cease such activity;
E. Order that no person, other than the State Police, National Guard, local
police authorities, or any other person as may be authorized by the
Committee, shall carry, hold or possess, in any motor vehicle, carriage,
motorcycle or other vehicle, or carry on or about his or her clothes or
person or otherwise in his or her possession, or have in his or her
control, alcoholic beverages, narcotics, firearms, explosives or
flammable materials of any kind during the emergency, except as may
be specifically authorized by the Township Committee.
F. Order that the State Police, National Guard and Township Police take
any and all measures required to quell disturbances and outbreaks of
violence, to secure areas within the Township, to prevent and deter
actual or threatened harm to persons or property, to prevent looting,
and generally take all action necessary to implement and effectuate
these regulations, as well as the statutes of this State and all ordinances
of the Township.
§ 8.08.040 CODE ADOPTION § 8.08.050
1.01:169
§ 8.08.050. Notice. [Prior code § 3-8.5]
Whenever a determination and declaration of a civil emergency is
promulgated and emergency powers are exercised by the Township
Committee, the exercise thereof shall be incorporated in a resolution duly
adopted by the Committee. Wherever practicable, a copy of the resolution
shall be posted in a prominent place at or near the various premises affected
by the emergency powers, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to the
owners or occupants of the premises or any responsible person in charge
thereof. In no event, however, shall the failure to post such notice or deliver
a copy thereof render the exercise of such powers ineffective or invalid.
Chapter 8.12
(RESERVED)
Chapter 8.16
FIRE CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 8.16.010. Primary Fire Protection Agency Designated. [Amended
by Ord. 91-12]
The Raritan Township Fire Company is recognized and designated as the
primary fire protection agency within the boundaries of the Township of
Raritan, Hunterdon County, New Jersey.
§ 8.16.020. New Jersey Uniform Fire Code. [Amended by Ord. 85-24]
The New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the
Township.
§ 8.16.030. Local Enforcing Agency Designated. [Amended by Ord.
85-24; Ord. 97-5]
§ 8.16.040. Local Enforcing Agency; Duties. [Amended by Ord.
05-22; Ord. 05-44; 12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-35]
A. The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention which
is created in the Township.
B. The local enforcing agency established herein shall be a part of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention and shall be under the direct supervision and
control of the Fire Marshal, who shall be appointed by the Township
upon the recommendation of the Fire Chief of the Raritan Township
Fire Company.
A. Duties. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall enforce the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.) in all buildings,
structures and premises within the established boundaries of the
§ 8.08.050 RARITAN CODE § 8.16.040
1.01:170
§ 8.16.050. Appointment of Inspectors. [Amended by Ord. 05-22]
In the event that it is necessary for the appointment of inspectors to
carry out the provisions requiring inspection activity in the Township, such
inspectors shall be appointed by the Township Committee upon the
Township, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings,
and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code.
B. Required Life Hazard Use Inspections; Fees. The Bureau of Fire
Prevention shall carry out the cyclical inspections of life hazard uses as
required by the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs. The Bureau of
Fire Prevention shall also carry out inspections of non-life hazard uses
pursuant to Section 8.16.110 of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Raritan. When in the opinion of the Fire Marshal there
exist conditions likely to cause fire, contribute to the spread of fire,
interfere with firefighting operations, endanger life or violate the
provisions or intent of this chapter, additional inspections may be made
as often as necessary for the purpose of ascertaining these conditions
and causing them to be corrected.
C. Fees. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall also collect fees for permits,
certificates of fire code compliance and certificates of smoke detector
and carbon monoxide alarm compliance (CSDCMAC) as set forth in the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code and Section 8.16.040B as follows:
Type of Permit Fee
Type 1 $55
Type 2 $215
Type 3 $430
Type 4 $645
Type 5 Reserved
The application fee for a certificate of smoke detector and carbon
monoxide alarm compliance shall be:
1. Requests for a CSDCMAC received more than 10 business days
prior to the change of occupancy: $50.
2. Requests for a CSDCMAC received four to 10 business days prior to
the change of occupancy: $100.
3. Requests for a CSDCMAC received fewer than four business days
prior to the change of occupancy: $160.
A $50 reinspection fee will be charged for all failed inspections.
Certificate of code compliance: $65.
§ 8.16.040 CODE ADOPTION § 8.16.050
1.01:171
recommendation of the Fire Marshal and Fire Chief of the Raritan Township
Fire Company. The inspector(s) shall be under the supervision and control
of the Fire Marshal. The Township Attorney shall serve as legal counsel for
the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 8.16.060. Right to Appeal. [Amended by Ord. 85-24]
Any person aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall
have the right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the County
of Hunterdon.
§ 8.16.070. Rapid Entry Systems. [Amended by Ord. 97-40; Ord.
97-5]
A. All buildings within the Township, having an automatic fire detection or
suppression system, shall be equipped with a rapid entry key lock box.
However, this requirement shall not apply to owner-occupied one and
two-family dwellings identified by the Uniform Construction Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:23 et seq.) as R-3 and R-4.
B. All commercial and industrial properties within the Township protected
by fences, gates and related barriers presently secured by using a
padlock, or electronically operated or automatic gates or other control
circuits shall be equipped with a high-security padlock or high-security
key switch as approved by the Fire Marshal and Fire Chief. The highsecurity
padlock and key switches shall be located in a manner as
directed by the Fire Marshal and Fire Chief.
C. Rapid Entry Key Lock Box, High-Security Padlock and Key Switch
Types. The rapid entry key lock box and high-security padlock and key
switches shall be U.L. - Underwriter Laboratories certified and
approved by the Township Fire Marshal and Fire Chief.
D. Location. The rapid entry key lock box shall be located at or near the
main entrance to the building or property. The key lock box shall be
mounted at a minimum height of five feet and a maximum of six feet
above final grade.
E. Key Lock Box Contents. The key lock box shall contain labeled keys,
easily identified in the field to provide access into the property, and/or
building and to any locked areas within the building, and as may be
further directed by the Fire Marshal and Fire Chief.
F. Compliance. All existing buildings shall comply with the provisions of
this section within 12 months of its effective date. All newly constructed
buildings, not yet occupied, or buildings currently under construction
shall comply with the terms hereof prior to the fire detection or
suppression system being accepted and approved for service.
G. Exemptions. The Township Fire Marshal, in consultation with the Fire
Chief, may provide for a written exemption of the requirements of this
section based upon their review and determination that the subject
§ 8.16.050 RARITAN CODE § 8.16.070
1.01:172
§ 8.16.080. Fire Lanes and Fire Zones. [Amended by Ord. 05-22]
property or building is maintained continuously with doors that are not
locked or lockable, or which have personnel physically present 24 hours
per day, every day of the year, and such personnel have knowledge and
can permit access to all areas of the building or property.
H. Penalties. Any property or building owner failing to comply with, or in
violation of the terms of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 and/or by imprisonment for
up to 90 days, and/or by a period of community service not exceeding
90 days, in the discretion of the court. Each and every day that such a
violation continues shall be considered a separate and specific violation
of this section.
A. Authorization. The Fire Marshal is hereby authorized under Section
8.16.020 of Chapter 8.16 Fire Code Enforcement to establish fire lanes
and fire zones on properties within the established boundaries of the
Township of Raritan devoted for public uses.
B. Designation. In and on all premises, public or private within the
established boundaries of the Township whereon there is located
including but not limited to retail stores, shopping centers, office
buildings, industrial plants, schools, churches or other public or quasipublic
structure wherein the public is invited, the Fire Marshal may
require and designate fire lanes to provide clear and unobstructed
access to buildings for Fire Department apparatus, equipment or any
other emergency vehicle in the event of an emergency. Fire Zones
located on local, county, state and private roads shall include, but not be
limited to, fire hydrants, water storage tanks, all fire department
connections and fire stations. Fire lanes and fire zones may be
designated on public or private property. Fire Lanes and Fire Zones
may be posted with signs, pavement markings and or a combination
thereof.
C. Parking, stopping or standing of vehicle prohibited. No person shall
park, stop or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, at any time, in any designated fire lane or fire zone or
obstruct any designated fire lane or fire zone. No person shall park,
stop or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended
within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, water draft site or water storage
tanks within the established boundaries of the Township.
D. Enforcement agencies. The Bureau of Fire Prevention and the Raritan
Township Police Department shall have concurrent jurisdiction in
policing and issuing parking summons.
E. Violations and penalties. Violators who park illegally, stop or stand in a
fire lane or fire zone shall be subject to a fine of $75. Said fine shall be
imposed on complaint and conviction in the Municipal Court of the
§ 8.16.070 CODE ADOPTION § 8.16.080
1.01:173
§ 8.16.090. Open Burning and Recreational Fires. [Ord. 05-22;
amended 2-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-3]
Township of Raritan All fines and penalties shall be paid to the
Township of Raritan.
A. Definitions. As used in this § 8.16.090 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Raritan, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
BONFIRE — An outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial fires.
OPEN BURNING — The burning of materials wherein products of
combustion are emitted directly to the ambient air without passing
through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. Open burning
does not include road flares, smudge pots and similar devices
associated with safety or occupational uses typically considered open
flames or recreational fires. For the purposes of this definition, a
chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the time
combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys
necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust
gas are open.
RECREATIONAL FIRE — An outdoor fire burning materials other than
rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator,
outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill, or barbeque pit and has a total fire
area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height, for
pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes.
B. A person shall not cause or allow open burning unless in accordance
with the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.) and this
§ 8.16.090 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Raritan.
C. Prohibited Open Burning. Open burning that is offensive or
objectionable because of smoke emissions or when atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be
prohibited.
D. Allowable Burning. Open burning shall be allowed without prior
notification to the Fire Marshal for recreational fires, highway safety
flares, smudge pots and similar occupational needs.
1. Except as set forth above, open burning shall be allowed after
obtaining a permit from the Fire Marshal for such open burning. All
permits shall be requested by and issued to the owner or agent of
the land upon which the fire is to be started.
a. Applications. Applications for open burning shall be submitted
in writing at least five business days before the fire is set and
shall be in such form and contain such information as required
by the Fire Marshal. Such applications shall contain, as a
minimum, information regarding the purpose of the proposed
§ 8.16.080 RARITAN CODE § 8.16.090
1.01:174
burning, the nature and quantities of materials to be burned,
the date when such burning will take place, the location of the
burning site and the on-site fire-extinguishing equipment to be
provided.
b. Agricultural Burning. The burning of herbaceous or infested
plant life, the burning of orchard prunings and cuttings,
prescribed burnings and the clearing of agricultural land by
burning are prohibited, unless in accordance with a permit
issued under the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:27-2, administered by
the State Forest Fire Service in the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
2. Waste Disposal. Open burning shall not be utilized for waste
disposal purposes.
3. Extinguishment Authority. The Fire Marshal is authorized to order
that the permit holder, another person responsible for the open
burning or the Fire Department extinguish an open fire that creates
or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation.
4. Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 50
feet from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent
the fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, this subsection shall not prohibit:
a. Fires in approved containers that are not less than 15 feet from
a structure; and
b. The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25
feet where the pile size is three feet or less in diameter and two
feet or less in height.
5. Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50 feet of a
structure or combustible materials. Conditions which could cause a
fire to spread within 50 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior
to ignition.
a. Bonfire Size and Duration. A bonfire shall not be more than five
feet by five feet by five feet in dimension and shall not burn
longer than three hours. The maximum size and duration of a
bonfire shall not be increased by the Fire Official unless it is
determined that firesafety requirements of the situation and
the desirable duration of a burn warrant the increase.
b. Material. Fuel for a bonfire shall consist only of seasoned, dry
firewood and shall be ignited with a small quantity of paper.
The fire shall not be utilized for waste disposal purposes, and
the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation of air
contaminants.
§ 8.16.090 CODE ADOPTION § 8.16.090
1.01:175
§ 8.16.100. Vacant and Abandoned Unsafe/Unfit Buildings and
Structures. [Amended by Ord. 05-22]
6. Recreational Fires. Recreational fires shall not be conducted within
25 feet of a structure or combustible materials. Conditions which
could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure shall be
eliminated prior to ignition. Fires in approved containers shall be
permitted, provided that such fires are not less than 15 feet from
any structure.
7. Attendance. Open burning, bonfires or recreational fires shall be
constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one
portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 40A rating or other
approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand,
water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for
immediate utilization.
A. Authorization. The Fire Marshal is hereby authorized under Section
8.16.020 of Chapter 8.16 Fire Code Enforcement to enforce this
section.
B. Abandoned Buildings. All buildings or structures within the established
boundaries of the Township on public or private property that are, or
hereafter become vacant as a result of damage, fire or abandonment. In
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-3.2(a); F-316.1.
C. Notice to Secure. Upon determination of the Fire Marshal that the
vacant structure is unfit and unsafe, the Fire Marshal shall cause to be
served on the property owner or designated agent a Notice of Violation
to property secure the structure and a Notice of Imminent Hazard and
Order to Take Corrective Action. Structures which appear to be in
danger of collapse shall be referred to the Construction Official of the
Township for remedial action in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code.
D. Permits and Inspections. No work shall be undertaken pursuant to this
section. The proper permits shall first be obtained from the Township
Construction Office and Bureau of Fire Prevention. Such work shall be
subject to all inspections and other requirements as set forth in the
Uniform Construction Code or any other relevant law, ordinance or
regulation.
E. Procedures to Secure Against Unauthorized Entry. All openings shall be
secured utilizing one of the following methods. Cover all openings with
five-eights-inch exterior grade sheathing plywood. Such plywood shall
overlap the opening frame for at least two inches on each side and the
top. When no ledge exists, the plywood shall overlap the bottom at least
two inches. One two-by-four shall be placed on the exterior and cut to
width of the plywood and one two-by-four shall be placed on the interior
and cut to a length that shall cause it to overlap for a length of eight
inches beyond the opening frame on either side. The two-by-fours shall
§ 8.16.090 RARITAN CODE § 8.16.100
1.01:176
be held in place by inserting two three-eights-inch carriage bolts
through the two-by-fours and the plywood. The bolts shall be inserted
from the exterior, and the securing nut shall be located on the interior.
When the height of the plywood exceeds 20 inches, at least two twoby-
fours shall be located the exterior and interior with the required
amount of carriage bolts. All lumber used to secure structures shall
be painted at the exterior with exterior paint or stain which closely
matches the predominant characteristics of the structure.
F. Access Opening. One opening in level one or level two posted structures
may be utilized to access the structure for repairs, inspections or other
necessary purposes. Such opening shall be secured in the same fashion
as other openings as set forth herein, except that an access opening
may be constructed with hinged operated hardware or an acceptable
substitute as determined by the Fire Marshal. All such operable
openings shall be equipped with an approved locking device and shall
face and be readily visible from the adjoining street or roadway. Such
openings shall only be required and approved for deterioration level
one and level two posted structures. Deterioration level three, entry is
prohibited.
G. Procedures to Secure Utilities. All utilities which represent a potential
source of ignition shall be disconnected in a manner approved by the
Fire Marshal.
H. Fire Protection Systems. All fire protection systems shall be
maintained. All required sprinkler and standpipe systems and all
component parts shall be maintained in an operable condition at all
times. Fire alarm systems shall be maintained in an operable condition
at all times.
I. Completion of Work. All work and required actions shall be completed
in a timely manner as stated on notices, orders and violations served.
J. Building Deterioration levels and Safety Indicator Warning Sign
Postings. Building deterioration shall be determined and posted by
safety indicator warning signs in 3 levels of deterioration. A painted
safety indicator shall be an acceptable method of warning, until a
permanent sign as listed herein above and below is obtained and
mounted. The property owner or designated agent is responsible for
obtaining and mounting all safety indicator warning signs.
Level one is determined as a light hazard and authorized entry is
permitted, having normal stability at the time of posting. Level one
safety indicator warning posting shall be an eighteen-inch by eighteeninch
red reflective metal sign.
Level two is determined as a medium hazard with known deterioration
and safety concerns, authorized entry is permitted. Level two safety
indicator warning posting shall be an eighteen-inch by eighteen-inch
red reflective metal sign with a one inch white reflective stripe running
from the top left corner to the bottom right corner.
§ 8.16.100 CODE ADOPTION § 8.16.100
1.01:177
§ 8.16.110. Non-Life Hazard Uses; Registration, Inspections and
Fees. [Added 12-4-2018 by Ord. No. 18-35]
If the structures roof has any openings, the safety indicator warning
sign shall display R/O (roof open) in white reflective one inch letters
in the upper right corner. If the structures interior floors have any
openings, the safety indicator warning sign shall display F/O (floor
open) in white reflective one inch letters in the lower left corner.
Level three is determined as a high hazard. Entry is not permitted
under any circumstances. Exterior firefighting operations only, level
three safety indicator warning posting shall be an eighteen-inch by
eighteen-inch red reflective metal sign with two, one inch white
reflective stripes running from the top corners to the opposite bottom
corners. If the structures roof has any openings, the safety indicator
warning sign shall display R/O (roof open) in white reflective one inch
letters in the upper right corner. If the structures interior floors have
any openings, the safety indicator warning sign shall display F/O (floor
open) in white reflective one inch letters in the lower left corner.
All safety indicator warning signs shall be mounted eight feet off the
ground and shall face and be readily visible from the ground and shall
face and be readily visible from the adjoining street or roadway.
K. Unauthorized Entry Prohibited. The Fire Marshal shall cause to be
posted on the structure at locations to be determined by the Fire
Marshal, a placard reading. "This building is declared unsafe for human
occupancy" "No individual is to occupy this building until the structure
is rendered safe and secure". The placard shall be orange in color with
black lettering.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to enter such premises,
except for the purpose of making the required repairs, until fire safety
violations have been abated and entry is permitted by the Fire Marshal.
L. Enforcement agencies. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have
jurisdiction in policing and issuing Open Burning violations.
M. Violations and Penalties. Any person or persons who violate any of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to fines pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.12 of the Uniform Fire Code.
N. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement
agency of this section shall have the right to appeal pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.19 Uniform Fire Code to the Construction Board of Appeals of
the County of Hunterdon.
A. Registration. Non-life-hazard uses shall be registered with the Raritan
Township Bureau of Fire Prevention. Specifically, all non-life-hazard
businesses and multiple-dwelling residential buildings in the Township
of Raritan shall register with the Township on a form provided by the
Fire Marshal. New businesses and multiple-dwelling residential
§ 8.16.100 RARITAN CODE § 8.16.110
1.01:178
Chapter 8.20
buildings must be registered within 30 days of occupancy. Failure to
register will subject the owner of the business or multiple-dwelling
residential building to a penalty of $250 issued by the Fire Marshal.
B. Inspections. Non-life-hazard uses shall be inspected through a cyclical
program established by the Raritan Township Department of Fire
Safety which shall be done on a biannual basis.
C. Registration fees. The operator of a non-life-hazard business or
multiple-dwelling residential building shall pay to the Raritan Township
Bureau of Fire Prevention a registration fee. This fee shall be assessed
upon inspection. The fee shall be as follows (square footage is based
upon gross floor area of all floors, including basements):
1. As to business uses:
a. Occupancy under 2,000 square feet: $65.
b. Occupancy 2,001 to 3,999 square feet: $75.
c. Occupancy 4,000 to 5,999 square feet: $125.
d. Occupancy 6,000 to 7,999 square feet: $175.
e. Occupancy 8,000 to 9,999 square feet: $225.
f. Occupancy 10,000 to 11,999 square feet: $275.
g. Occupancy 12,000 to 13,999 square feet: $325.
h. Occupancy over 14,000 square feet: $375.
i. Retail or commercial common area: $175.
2. As to multiple-family residential dwellings:
a. Multiple-family dwelling:
i. One to five units: $100.
ii. Six to 25 units: $125.
iii. Over 25 units: $225.
D. Failure to pay registration fees. It shall be unlawful to refuse to pay the
registration fee after being given notice to do so as per the fee schedule
established by this subsection. Any penalties assessed are in addition to
others previously assessed. Full payment shall be made within 30 days
of issuance of the notice by the Township for payment of the
registration fee. If payment is not received in 30 days, the matter will be
referred to the Township Attorney for summary collection pursuant to
the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.). A minimum
$25 late penalty will be assessed.
§ 8.16.110 CODE ADOPTION § 8.16.110
1.01:179
INOPERABLE AND UNREGISTERED VEHICLES
§ 8.20.010. Attractive Nuisances. [Prior code § 4-7.1; amended by
Ord. 86-12; Ord. 88-26]
Inoperable and unregistered motor vehicles and truck trailers located on
public or private lands and premises within the Township, constitute
attractive nuisances in so far as children are concerned, and therefore invite
injury; and they likewise tend to attract vermin and thereby cause disease
and otherwise a menace to the health, morals and well-being of the people
of the Township.
§ 8.20.020. Definitions. [Prior code § 4-7.1; amended by Ord. 86-12;
Ord. 88-26]
As used in this chapter:
INOPERABLE — Incapable of being legally driven or moved under its own
power on the public highways of the state of New Jersey.
UNREGISTERED — Not currently registered by the proper licensing
authority to be driven or moved on the public highways, or not bearing
current license plates or tags lawfully issued by the authority for motor
vehicles and truck trailers.
§ 8.20.030. Parking on Public Land. [Prior code § 4-7.2; amended by
Ord. 86-12; Ord. 88-26]
No person shall park, leave or store any inoperable or unregistered motor
vehicle or truck trailer not having current license plates on the vehicle on
any public lands or premises, except in case of emergency, and then for not
more than 48 hours.
§ 8.20.040. Parking on Private Land. [Prior code § 4-7.3; amended
by Ord. 86-12; Ord. 88-26]
No person shall park, leave, store or maintain an inoperable or unregistered
motor vehicle or truck not having current license plates on the vehicle, for
a period of more than 30 days upon any private lands or premises.
§ 8.20.050. Responsibility of Land Owner. [Prior code § 4-7.4;
amended by Ord. 86-12; Ord. 88-26]
No owner or occupier of any private lands or premises shall permit or suffer
any inoperable or unregistered motor vehicle or truck trailer not having
current license plates on the vehicle to be parked, left, stored or maintained
on his or her lands or premises for more than 30 days.
§ 8.16.110 RARITAN CODE § 8.20.060
1.01:180
§ 8.20.060. Exception. [Prior code § 4-7.5]
This chapter shall not apply to motor vehicles or truck trailers located or
stored in garages or other buildings, or to commercial garage operations
where the motor vehicles may be for sale or repair.
§ 8.20.070. Truck Trailers. [Prior code § 4-7.6; amended by Ord.
86-12; Ord. 88-26]
No open or closed truck trailers shall be parked or kept on any public or
private lands and used for the purpose of storing any goods, supplies or
other materials except as may be permitted in the industrial zone, or as may
be used in normal loading and unloading or deliveries in the ordinary course
of business.
§ 8.20.080. Impoundment. [Prior code § 4-7.7; amended by Ord.
88-26]
The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department designated by
him or her is authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle:
§ 8.20.090. Enforcement; Violations and Penalties. [Prior code
§ 4-7.8; amended by Ord. 86-12; Ord. 88-26]
This chapter shall be enforced by the land use enforcement officer of
the Township. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject, upon conviction thereof, to the penalties as provided in Chapter
1.08.
Chapter 8.24
A. Left at any public place within the Township; or
B. Left upon private lands, but only on the written request of the
landowner or his or her authorized agent, and as to such vehicles not
owned or registered to the landowner, his or her immediate family or
any person residing within the landowner's household; and which
appears to be present in violation of this chapter. Such a vehicle shall be
impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with
applicable statutes.
The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department acting for him or
her, shall notify the registered and legal owner in writing by personal service or
by certified mail, at the last known address of the owner, of the removal of the
vehicle, the reason for the removal and the location of the vehicle. The vehicle
shall be retained and impounded until the owner of his or her authorized agent
pays the cost of such taking and removal (towing), together with a charge of
$6 daily for storage. The vehicles shall be held only for the period of time
established by the New Jersey Statutes and thereafter shall be disposed of by
the Police Department in accordance with such statutory authorization.
§ 8.20.060 CODE ADOPTION § 8.20.090
1.01:181
LITTER
§ 8.24.010. Definitions. [Prior code § 3-1.1; amended by Ord. 88-25;
Ord. 93-2]
As used in this chapter:
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein, and all other
waste material.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling house, building, or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether uninhabited or temporarily or continuously inhabited or vacant,
and shall include, but not be limited to, any yard, grounds, walk, driveway,
porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such
dwelling, house, building, or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — All streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys, beaches or
other public ways, and all public parks, squares, spaces, docks, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial waste.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible (not likely to grow rotten) solid wastes
consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper,
wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood,
glass, bedding, crockery, vehicles or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances,
furniture and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
§ 8.24.020. General Prohibitions. [Prior code § 3-1.2; amended by
Ord. 88-25]
A. No person shall sweep, throw, deposit or dump litter in or upon any
property whether occupied, open or vacant, with or without
improvements, and whether owned by that person or by someone else,
or in a public place or pond, lake or stream or other body of water
within the Township, except in public receptacles or in authorized
private receptacles for collection.
B. No person shall throw or drop any bundle, object, article, litter or
debris of any nature from a vehicle whether in motion or not when such
vehicle is on a Township road or any other public highway in the
Township.
§ 8.20.090 RARITAN CODE § 8.24.020
1.01:182
§ 8.24.030. Use of Litter Receptacles. [Prior code § 3-1.3; amended
by Ord. 88-25]
A container suitable for the depositing of litter (litter receptacles) and
their servicing is required at the following public places which exist in the
municipality, including:
C. No person shall throw, place, deposit, discharge or drop any bundle,
object, article, article or debris of any nature on any Township road,
right-of-way, easement or on any other publicly owned land, except
when acting under the authority of the Township Committee.
D. No person shall store or permit the storage of household appliances,
furniture, mattresses or tires on any residential property, except in a
fully enclosed structure, or on specific days designated for the
collection of such items by a private hauler, the Township, or its agent.
E. No owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction or demolition
site shall permit the accumulation of litter, refuse, rubbish or garbage,
before, during or after completion of any construction or demolition
project. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent and contractor in charge
of a construction site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate
flyable and nonflyable debris, litter or trash at areas convenient to the
construction areas, and to maintain and empty the receptacles in such a
manner and with such a frequency so as to prevent spillage of the litter.
F. No owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any
residential or commercial property shall permit open or overflowing
waste disposal bin on his or her property.
G. The owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any
residential or commercial property shall keep and cause to be kept the
sidewalk and curb abutting the residence, structure or building free
from obstruction or nuisances of every kind, and to keep sidewalks,
areaways, backyards, courts and alleys free from litter. No person shall
sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin or other public
place, any accumulation of litter from any public or private sidewalk of
driveway. Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the
sidewalk in front of his or her premises free of litter. All sweepings shall
be collected and properly containerized for disposal.
H. No operator of a vehicle shall permit any vehicle to be driven, moved,
stopped or parked, on any highway unless such a vehicle is constructed
or loaded to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or
otherwise escaping therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from
which any glass or objects have fallen or escaped, which could cause an
obstruction, damage a vehicle, or otherwise endanger travelers or
public property, shall immediately cause the public property to be
cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay the costs therefor.
§ 8.24.020 CODE ADOPTION § 8.24.030
1.01:183
§ 8.24.040. Removal of Litter. [Prior code § 3-1.4]
No person shall permit, allow or maintain litter in or on any of his property,
whether improved or vacant land and whether owned or leased in the
Township.
§ 8.24.050. Enforcement of Provisions. [Prior code § 3-1.5; amended
by Ord. 88-25]
The Zoning Enforcement Officer, Construction Official, or any Police Office
of the municipality is designated as officer in charge with the enforcement
of this chapter. The Governing Body may designate such assistant
enforcement officers for the purposes of the enforcement of this chapter as
are needed for such purposes.
Chapter 8.28
PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
§ 8.28.010. License Required. [Prior code § 4-9.1]
No person, partnership, corporation, organization or group shall promote,
advertise, operate, conduct or participate in any public or quasi-public
exhibition, demonstration, show, festival, parade, dance, theatrical
performance or similar planned event or other indoor or outdoor assembly
of persons, to which 500 or more people at one time are directly or
indirectly invited to attend, unless the person, partnership, corporation,
organization or group promoting, advertising, operating or conducting the
same shall first have obtained a license from the Township in the manner
and upon the conditions in this chapter.
§ 8.28.020. License Application. [Prior code § 4-9.2]
A. Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned
areas, such that at a minimum there shall be no single linear quartermile
without a receptacle;
B. Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, government
buildings, parks and drive-in restaurants;
C. All street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction
sites; gasoline service stations islands; shopping centers; parking lots;
D. Campgrounds and trailer parks; and beaches and bathing areas;
E. And at special events to which the public is invited, including sports
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing litter receptacles and that adequate
containerization is available.
§ 8.24.030 RARITAN CODE § 8.28.020
1.01:184
A. A written application for a license hereunder shall be signed by the
person, persons or parties conducting the event and filed in triplicate,
with the Clerk of the Township accompanied by the fee payable
hereunder.
B. Contents.
1. The applicant shall set forth in the application for a license, the
following information:
a. The names and addresses of the person or persons, or in the
case of a corporation, the names and addresses of the
president, vice president, secretary, treasurer and directors or
trustees, responsible for conducting or participating in the
event described in Section 8.28.010;
b. The type of licensed event referred to in Section 8.28.010
desired to be conducted and a statement of the purposes of
such activity, whether for pecuniary profit or charitable
purposes, and if charitable, a statement of the charity or
charities to be benefited;
c. The proposed location and the premises or portion thereof
available for such event;
d. Whether the premises are owned by the applicant, or if not
owned, the name and address of the lessor or licensor and the
terms of the lease or license;
e. A designation of the premises or portion thereof, or other
areas, intended to be used for the parking of automobiles,
including a statement in square feet of the area to be devoted
for this purpose;
f. A map or sketch showing the entire area sought to be licensed
and delineating thereon the area to be used for the parking of
automobiles, and further showing driveways or means of
ingress and egress to and from the premises and the names
and addresses of all property owners adjoining the premises on
which the event will be conducted and/or the area to be used
for parking purposes;
g. If applicable, a statement of the number of persons to be
engaged as performers in the event sought to be licensed;
h. A statement of the reasonable projected number of persons
who are anticipated to watch, observe or attend the event
sought to be licensed;
i. A statement of the locations where the applicant has promoted,
operated or conducted similar events within the last five years;
§ 8.28.020 CODE ADOPTION § 8.28.020
1.01:185
§ 8.28.030. Application Fee; Liability Insurance Restoration Bond.
[Prior code § 4-9.3]
j. A description of the existing or proposed additional sanitary
and water facilities, which shall be sufficient to accommodate
the number of persons reasonably projected to attend the
event;
k. A plan for the safe handling and sale of food and beverages and
proof of the availability of means to provide sufficient food and
beverage to ensure the health and well-being of the projected
number of persons expected to attend the event;
l. A plan for medical and similar facilities which the applicant
intends to provide in view of the projected number of persons
expected to attend the event.
m. Annexed to such application shall be the written permission of
the record owner or owner of the premises intended to be used
or, if the same is owned by the State of New Jersey, the
Township or another governmental unit, then the written
permission of the officer or agent having authority to permit
the use of such premises for the purposes stated above.
A. The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of $300 to the
Clerk of the Township upon filing an application for a license as
provided hereunder to compensate the Township for its expense in
processing the application.
B. Insurance Requirements.
1. The applicant shall submit to the Clerk of the Township, with the
application, a written commitment from a responsible insurance
company, licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey,
indicating that the applicant will be insured in the minimum
amount for the following occurrences:
a. On account of liability for accidental injury to one person:
insurance in the amount of $500,000;
b. On account of liability for accidental injury to two or more
persons: insurance in the amount of $1,000,000;
c. For property damage to public property or private properties
other than the site in question: insurance in the amount of
$200,000.
2. Where it shall appear that the nature or size of the event or
existence of other applicable insurance will not reasonably require
the limits hereinabove above related, the Township Committee may
set lesser limits or accept such evidence of other insurance or
§ 8.28.020 RARITAN CODE § 8.28.030
1.01:186
§ 8.28.040. Investigation. [Prior code § 4-9.4]
financial responsibility as will reasonably afford protection to the
participants of the event and the general public.
A. The Municipal Administrator of the Township shall, upon receipt of the
application, refer a copy of the application promptly to the Chief of
Police, Director of the Department of Public Safety, Zoning Official and
Construction Code Official, Board of Health and the volunteer Fire
Department, in order that each might complete and submit to the
Township Committee an investigation report and recommendation
which shall include the following:
1. The Director of the Department of Public Safety and Chief of Police
shall cause to be investigated and shall report upon the following:
a. Background of the applicant and the factual accuracy of the
application;
b. The extent to which the proposed event may adversely affect
the health, safety or welfare of the persons attending the event
or the general public;
c. The extent to which, if any, the event sought to be licensed
shall require additional police activity in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare;
d. The adequacy of the proposed parking and traffic control plan;
e. Such other matters as may reasonably be required by the
nature and size of the proposed event or as may be directed by
the Township Committee.
2. The Municipal Planner and Construction Official shall cause to be
investigated and shall report upon the following:
a. The extent to which the event may adversely affect the health,
safety or welfare of the persons attending the same or the
general public;
b. The extent to which the nature of the event and its operations
would promote violations of municipal ordinances;
c. The adequacy of any structure which is anticipated to be used
in connection with the event;
d. Such other matters as may reasonably be required by the
nature and size of the proposed event, or as may be directed by
the Township Committee.
3. The Health Official of the Board of Health shall cause to be
investigated and shall report upon the following:
§ 8.28.030 CODE ADOPTION § 8.28.040
1.01:187
§ 8.28.050. Minimum Requirements. [Prior code § 4-9.5]
a. The factual accuracy of the application as it pertains to
sanitary and health facilities;
b. The adequacy of the provisions for sanitary facilities, water
and the dispensing of food and beverages;
c. Such other matters as may reasonably be required by the
nature and size of the proposed event, or as may be directed by
the Township Committee.
4. The volunteer Fire Department shall cause to be investigated and
shall report upon the following:
a. The factual accuracy of the application as it pertains to the
sufficiency of any structure to contain the number of persons
anticipated to attend the event;
b. The extent to which the nature of the event, with respect to fire
control, may adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of
the persons attending the same or the general public;
c. Such other matters as may reasonably be required by the
nature and size of the proposed event, or as may be directed by
the Township Committee.
B. The above reports shall be in writing and shall contain a statement of
recommendations and the reasons therefor. Each report shall be filed
with the Township Clerk at least five days prior to the meeting at which
the application is to be considered and shall be available for inspection
by the applicant and the general public.
A. The applicant shall be required to comply with the following minimum
requirements as conditions for the issuance or maintenance of any
license issued hereunder:
1. Separate enclosed toilets for males and females, meeting all state
and local specifications and conveniently located throughout the
grounds, sufficient to provide facilities for the maximum number of
people to be assembled at the rate of at least one toilet for every
200 females and at least one toilet for every 300 males, together
with a sufficient sanitary means of disposing of the waste matter
deposited, which is in compliance with all state and local laws and
regulations. A lavatory with running water under pressure and a
continuous supply of soap, paper towels and toilet paper shall be
provided with each toilet.
2. Medical or first-aid facilities shall be provided sufficient to
accommodate the projected number of persons expected to attend
the event. There shall be a minimum of one doctor in attendance,
with additional medical personnel provided where required.
§ 8.28.040 RARITAN CODE § 8.28.050
1.01:188
§ 8.28.060. Public Hearing. [Prior code § 4-9.6]
3. A parking and traffic control plan for the number of persons
projected to attend the event must be formulated, which plan must
be sufficient to ensure a free flow of traffic and make available
rapid access for emergency vehicles. Further, the applicant shall
provide adequate off-street parking facilities on the site or within
1,500 feet thereof to accommodate the projected number of
persons expected to attend the event. For this purpose, a "parking
space" shall be deemed to be any space designated on a prior
approved site plan or an area having a width of 10 feet and a depth
of 20 feet bordering on an access lane which shall have a minimum
width of 25 feet.
4. A free parking area inside the assembly grounds sufficient to
provide parking space for the maximum number of people to be
assembled at the rate of at least one parking space for every four
persons.
5. If the event is to be conducted outdoors and involves the
amplification of sound on a continuous basis, the location of the
performance shall be at least 1,500 feet from the nearest
residential dwelling.
6. If the assembly is to continue during the hours of darkness,
illumination sufficient to light the entire area of the assembly at the
rate of at least five footcandles, but not to shine unreasonably
beyond the barriers of the enclosed areas of the assembly.
7. A sanitary method of disposing of solid waste in compliance with
state and local laws and regulations, sufficient to dispose of the
solid waste production of the maximum number of people to be
assembled at the rate of at least 2 5/10 pounds of solid waste per
person per day, together with a plan for holding and a plan for
collecting all such waste at least once each day in the assembly, and
sufficient trash cans with tight-fitting lids and personnel to perform
the task.
8. Security guards, either regularly employed duly sworn off-duty
New Jersey peace officers or private guards licensed in New Jersey,
sufficient to provide adequate security for the maximum number of
persons assembled at the rate of at least one security guard for
every 250 people.
B. The applicant shall be required to comply with such other conditions as
shall be imposed by the Township Committee upon the issuance of a
license after receiving those reports provided for in Section 8.28.040
and which such conditions shall be reasonably related to the protection
of the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 8.28.050 CODE ADOPTION § 8.28.060
1.01:189
§ 8.28.070. Issuance of License. [Prior code § 4-9.8]
§ 8.28.080. License Fee. [Prior code § 4-9.8]
The fee to be paid prior to the issuance of a license shall be $50 for each 100
persons, or any portion thereof, reasonably anticipated to attend the event
A. The Township Committee shall set a time and place for a hearing on the
application which shall be held within 45 days of the date on which the
completed application is filed with the Township Clerk. The Township
Committee shall direct the Township Clerk to publish a legal notice to
the general public indicating the time, date and place of the hearing,
which notice shall be published not less than three days nor more than
10 days prior to the established hearing date. At the hearing, the
applicant, officials reviewing the application pursuant to Section
8.28.040 and the general public may offer such evidence as relates to
this application. Within seven days after the closing of the hearing, the
Township Committee shall render a determination on the application,
and if the determination is favorable, a license shall be issued through
the Township Clerk. In the event that the determination shall be a
denial of the application, then a copy of the determination, with the
reasons denying the application, shall be served upon the applicant at
the mailing address designated in the application.
B. The Township Committee may grant the license for which application is
made, subject however to such conditions as are reasonable and
appropriate so as to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the
persons anticipated to attend the event as well as the general public.
A. The license authorized to be issued shall be issued by the Township
Committee and executed by the Mayor and the Township Clerk.
B. The license shall set forth and described with particularity the place
where the event is to be conducted and the period of time during which
it may continue. Licenses issued shall be for one day only; provided,
however, that under special conditions the Township Committee may
approve a license for a period of not more than three days. The
applicant shall pay a license fee as established in Section 8.28.080 for
each and every day involved.
C. The license herein authorized shall not be issued until all fees set forth
herein have been paid the Township Clerk or other Township Official as
provided for in this chapter.
D. Any license authorized shall not be issued until all fees set forth herein
have been paid the Township Clerk or other Township Official as
provided for in this chapter.
E. Any license authorized to be issued hereunder shall be issued in
accordance with all provisions of this chapter.
§ 8.28.060 RARITAN CODE § 8.28.080
1.01:190
sought to be licensed. The license fee shall be in addition to the application
fee set forth in Section 8.28.030.
§ 8.28.090. Conduct of Licensee. [Prior code § 4-9.9]
A. No person or party licensed hereunder shall allow, suffer or permit any
exhibition, performance or gathering of persons to be conducted for
any unlawful purpose or in any unlawful, disorderly, obscene or lewd
manner.
B. No person or party licensed hereunder shall allow any performer to
perform or to be displayed in the nude.
C. No person or party licensed hereunder shall permit any employees or
persons attending the event to completely undress, go about in the
nude or become undressed or go about in a lewd, obscene or indecent
manner.
D. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served or consumed unless a
proper license is obtained.
E. The licensee shall allow the Police Department of the Township or any
persons duly authorized by the Township to inspect the licensed
premises, or any part thereof, and the performances of any event
conducted by the licensee, at any time prior to or during the licensed
event.
F. The licensee shall take all proper means to assist in the orderly conduct
and presentation of its event, to maintain a flow of traffic and use of the
premises for the health, safety and welfare of the persons attending the
event, as well as the general public. For this purpose, the licensee shall
employ or obtain sufficient personnel to carry out these objectives.
G. The licensee shall maintain at its own expense one or more persons or
agents responsible for the proper conduct of the event who shall remain
upon the licensed premises at all times during the period in which the
license shall be in effect. The name, address and description of the
person, persons or agents responsible shall be furnished to the
Township Clerk before the beginning of the licensed period, and in the
event that any change is made in the person, persons or agents
responsible herein, notice of such change with the names and
addresses and descriptions of the persons to be substituted shall be
furnished to the Township Clerk at least 24 hours prior to conducting
the licensed event. The Police Department or any other authorized
officers or agents of the Township may require the licensee to introduce
the person, persons or agents responsible for the conduct of the
licensee's activities, at least 24 hours prior to the licensee conducting
the event.
H. No licensee shall violate or suffer or permit the violation of any term or
condition of any license issued under this chapter.
§ 8.28.080 CODE ADOPTION § 8.28.100
1.01:191
§ 8.28.100. Revocation or Suspension of License. [Prior code
§ 4-9.10]
§ 8.28.110. Service of Notices. [Prior code § 4-9.11]
Whenever notice is required to be given to the applicant or licensee
hereunder, such service of notice may be made by registered mail or
certified mail to the address of the applicant indicated in the application or
upon personal service of such notice upon the applicant or any of the agents
of the applicant upon the licensed premises.
A. In the event that any of the provisions of this chapter shall be violated,
the Township Committee, through the Department of Public Safety or
its authorized officers or agents, may terminate or suspend any license
issued hereunder where it appears that any of the following conditions
exist:
1. The application is materially false or purposely misleading and
such fact was not discovered earlier, despite the diligence prior to
such time;
2. The number of people attending the event exceeds by 20% the
number projected by the applicant; or
3. New or substantially changed conditions have arisen so as to
imperil or materially endanger the public health, moral safety or
welfare.
B. The procedure for revoking or suspending the license shall be as
follows:
1. The Township Committee, through the Department of Public Safety,
shall cause a written notice of the alleged violation of this chapter
or any other laws involved to be served upon the applicant upon the
premises, together with a notice of the time, place and hearing to
be held, not less than 72 hours after service, directing the licensee
to show cause before the Township why the license should not be
suspended or revoked.
2. At the hearing of the Township Committee, all evidence offered by
the licensee, Township Officials and general public, which is
material to the issue, shall be offered, and the Township Committee
shall make a prompt determination of its findings. If the findings
are made in favor of the licensee, the license issued hereunder shall
continue under the terms and conditions by which it was issued. If
the findings are against the licensee, the license issued may be
revoked entirely or conditioned in such manner as the Township
Committee may direct. In the event of complete revocation, the
licensed event shall be terminated and all license fees, insurance
policies or funds posted with the Township Clerk shall be returned
to the licensee within 72 hours following the date of the projected
event.
§ 8.28.100 RARITAN CODE § 8.28.120
1.01:192
§ 8.28.120. Exemptions. [Prior code § 4-9.12]
The following persons, partnerships, organizations or groups are exempt
from the operation of this chapter:
§ 8.28.130. Violations and Penalties. [Prior code § 4-9.13]
Chapter 8.32
SPECIAL ROAD EVENTS
§ 8.32.010. Special Road Event Defined. [Amended by Ord. 86-3]
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "special road event" shall be
deemed to include any nonmotorized soap box derby or bikeathon,
marathon run, walkathon or jogging group, or similarly organized road
event, which intends to proceed along a public street or other public rightof-
way within the Township.
§ 8.32.020. Application to Conduct Event. [Amended by Ord. 86-3]
An application for a permit to conduct a special road event shall be made
to the chief of police in writing, by the person or persons in charge or
responsible for the event. A fee of $50 shall accompany the application.
This fee may be waived upon submission of documents verifying that the
sponsoring group is a nonprofit organization as defined by the statutes of
the State of New Jersey or Section 501(C)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
Such application shall set forth the following information:
A. Charitable or nonprofit organizations;
B. Veteran's organizations or local service groups;
C. Quasi-governmental groups and associations such as police, fire or civil
defense organizations;
D. Events sponsored by governmental units, the Township, county of
Hunterdon or state of New Jersey;
E. All events taking place at the Flemington Fair Grounds.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate of
offense shall be deemed committed for each separate day involved or on
each day involved during the continuation of any such event in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The penalty or penalties provided herein shall be in addition to and not
in lieu of the suspension or revocation of any license hereunder.
§ 8.28.120 CODE ADOPTION § 8.32.020
1.01:193
§ 8.32.030. Issuance or Denial of Permit. [Amended by Ord. 86-3]
If the chief of police, in his or her sole discretion, shall find that the special
road event is not to be held for any unlawful purpose and will not in any
manner tend to unreasonably interfere with the public use of the streets
and sidewalks, and the event organizer/sponsor will meet each condition as
required, he or she shall issue such permit.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the
permit;
B. The name and address of the organization or group he or she is
representing;
C. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who
will act as chairman of the special road event and be responsible for the
conduct thereof;
D. The number of monitors to be provided and the identifying marks,
badges or symbols to be worn or used by the monitors;
E. The purpose of the event, the estimated number of persons to
participate and otherwise attend, and the plans for parking of all
vehicles;
F. The method of notifying participants of the terms and conditions of the
special event;
G. The date the event is to be conducted and the hours it will be
commenced and terminated;
H. The location where the special event is to be held, including the specific
assembly and dispersal location, and the proposed route and the plans
for assembly and dispersal of the participants;
I. Whether or not any music will be provided, either live or recorded;
J. The number, types and locations of all loud speakers and amplifying
devices to be used;
K. The name and address of any charity for which the special event is
being run including a disclosure as to the percentage of proceeds to be
raised from the special event to be actually donated to the charity after
administrative costs are deducted;
L. Whether any admission fee will be charged for participation in the
special event and the amount of the fee, if any;
M. Such other information as the chief of police may deem necessary in
order to properly provide for traffic control, street and property
maintenance and the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 8.32.020 RARITAN CODE § 8.32.040
1.01:194
§ 8.32.040. Time Limitations for Application; Hours of Conduct;
Removal of Signs; Approved Road Course. [Amended by Ord. 86-3]
No such permit shall be issued for a special road event unless application
for the permit has been made not less than 30 days in advance of the date
on which the special event is sought to be held. No such special road event
shall commence earlier than 9:00 a.m. not continue beyond the hour of 5:00
p.m. on the same day. All directional signs erected in connection with the
special event shall be removed within 24 hours of the termination of the
event. The Chief of Police shall review the proposed course of travel for the
event and may alter or totally redesignate the course of travel, as he or she
may deem appropriate.
§ 8.32.050. Conditions Contained in Permit-Closing of Streets.
[Amended by Ord. 86-3]
Any permit granted under this chapter may contain conditions reasonably
calculated to reduce or minimize dangers and hazards to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic and the public health, safety and welfare, including but
not limited to changes in the date, time, duration or number of participants
as requested by the applicant. For the purposes of public safety and welfare,
Chief of Police may order the temporary closing of streets and/or the
temporary prohibition of parking along same during the event, and shall
direct the posting of proper warning signs in connection with the event, as
provided by law.
§ 8.32.060. Additional Police Personnel. [Amended by Ord. 86-3]
If the Chief of Police determines that additional Police Officers will be
required for the purpose of preserving the public health, safety and welfare
during the course of the special event, the holder of the special event permit
shall deposit in advance of the holding of the event a sum of money to be
determined by the Chief of Police to pay in full for all police services which
the Chief of Police deems necessary in connection with the special event.
However, the Township will provide to private, nonprofit organizations, as
defined in Section 8.32.020, up to three Police Officers, at no additional cost
or expense to the event organizer/sponsor. Any officers required over those
provided by the Township, shall be paid for by the organizer/sponsor of the
event.
If additional costs are incurred for the purpose of providing police
protection, the holder of the permit shall be required to pay to the Township
the additional funds within 10 days of notification by the Township as to
the exact figure due. In the event that the sum of money so deposited in
advance exceeds the funds needed to pay for actual police protection, the
Township shall refund any excess deposit within 10 days after the holding
of said special event.
§ 8.32.040 CODE ADOPTION § 8.32.070
1.01:195
§ 8.32.070. Indemnification. [Amended by Ord. 86-3]
The holder of a special road event permit shall agree in writing to indemnify
and hold harmless the Township, its servants, agents and employees, for
any and all claims caused by or arising out of the activity covered in the
permit. Further, the holder of the permit shall present to the Chief of Police
an insurance policy in a form acceptable to the Chief which will provide for
indemnification as aforementioned.
Chapter 8.36
SOURCE SEPARATION AND RECYCLING PROGRAM
§ 8.36.010. Mandatory Recycling Program. [Amended by Ord.
10-19]
A. There is established for all occupants and owners of residential,
commercial, industrial and institutional establishments located within
the Township of Raritan, a program for the mandatory separation of
designated recyclable materials effective as of the date of the chapter,
and in accordance with said chapter and the rules and regulations
issued by the Township Committee.
B. All residents, citizens, persons and owners, and commercial, industrial
and institutional entities that own, occupy or use property in the
Township shall separate designated recyclable materials from all other
solid waste products in such premises, and shall either contract for the
removal and disposition of recyclable materials as set forth in this
chapter with a private contractor or deliver such recyclable materials to
the Public Works Center of the Township located on Pennsylvania
Avenue at the times and in the manner as established in this chapter
and the authorized rules and regulations.
C. Upon delivery of the designated recyclable materials to the Public
Works Center of the Township, such items shall become the property of
the Township or its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any person not authorized by the Township to collect or pick
up or cause to be collected or picked up any designated recyclable
materials. Any and each such collection in violation hereof from one or
more residences shall constitute a separate distinct offense punishable
as hereinafter provided.
D. No recyclable that is being collected as part of the Township recycling
program may be donated or sold to or received by any person,
partnership or corporation (whether operating for profit or not for
profit) unless the person, partnership or corporation has first received
written authorization from the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
E. All commercial, industrial and institutional entities shall be permitted
to recycle the designated recyclable materials directly with an
appropriate recycling center, or other facility as may be designated by
§ 8.32.070 RARITAN CODE § 8.36.010
1.01:196
§ 8.36.020. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 10-19]
the State of New Jersey; only after first registering for such direct
disposal with the Township Director of Public Works, and upon the
condition that the entity shall provide to the Township Director of
Public Works or Recycling Coordinator, on a monthly basis, a certified
statement of disposal and copies of the weight slips on all materials
recycled in the previous month.
A. COUNTY — The implementing agency for the Hunterdon County Solid
Waste Management Plan, the Hunterdon County Utilities Authority.
B. DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
designated within the Hunterdon County District Solid Waste
Management Plan to be source separated for the purpose of recycling.
These materials include:
C. DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS FOR THE GENERATORS OF
RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL
WASTE —
1. CORRUGATED — Containers and similar paper items usually used
to transport supplies, equipment parts or other merchandise.
2. MIXED OFFICE AND COMPUTER PAPER — Any and all types of
"office-type" paper including, but not limited to: computer paper,
hi-grade white paper, typing paper, copier paper, onion-skin, tissue
paper, notepad, envelopes, manila folders and colored paper, or any
mix thereof.
3. NEWSPAPER — All paper marketed as newsprint or newspaper and
containing at least 70% newsprint or newspaper (American Forest
and Paper Association grades #6, #7 and #8 news).
4. OTHER PAPER/MAGAZINES/JUNK MAIL — All paper, which is not
defined as corrugated, mixed office paper, computer paper or
newspaper.
5. GLASS CONTAINERS — All glass containers used for packaging
food or beverages.
6. ALUMINUM CANS — Food and beverage containers made entirely
of aluminum.
7. STEEL CANS — Rigid containers made exclusively or primarily of
steel or tin-plated steel and steel and aluminum cans used to store
food, beverages, and a variety of other household and consumer
products.
8. PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Containers including polyethylene
terephthalate (PETE-#1) soda bottles, high-density poly-ethylene
and (HDPE-#2) milk, water or detergent.
§ 8.36.010 CODE ADOPTION § 8.36.020
1.01:197
D. ADDITIONAL DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS FOR THE
GENERATORS OF COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL
WASTE —
1. WHITE GOODS AND LIGHT IRON — All appliances such as
washers, dryers, refrigerators, etc. as well as products made from
sheet iron, such as shelving, file cabinets, metal desks, recycled or
reconditioned steel drums and other non-structural ferrous scrap.
2. ANTI-FREEZE — All automotive engine coolant consisting of a
mixture of ethylene glycol and water or propylene glycol and water.
3. BATTERIES, LEAD-ACID — Batteries from automobiles, trucks,
other vehicles and machinery and equipment. This does not include
consumer batteries.
4. USED MOTOR OIL — Petroleum-based or synthetic oil which,
through use, storage or handling, has become unsuitable for its
original purpose due to the presence of impurities or loss of
original properties.
5. TIRES — Rubber-based scrap automotive, truck or specialty (e.g.
forklift) tires. The tires must be recycled at a facility approved by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
E. DESIGNATED RECYCLE MATERIALS FROM GENERATORS OF
RESIDENTIAL WASTE THAT ARE COLLECTED BY HUNTERDON
COUNTY —
1. ANTI-FREEZE — All automotive engine coolant consisting of a
mixture of ethylene glycol and water or propylene glycol and water.
2. BATTERIES, LEAD-ACID — Batteries from automobiles, trucks,
other vehicles and machinery and equipment. THIS DOES NOT
INCLUDE CONSUMER BATTERIES.
3. USED MOTOR OIL — Petroleum-based or synthetic oil which,
through use, storage or handling, has become unsuitable for its
original purpose due to the presence of impurities or loss of
original properties.
4. BATTERIES, HOUSEHOLD — Any type of button, coin, cylindrical,
rectangular or other shaped enclosed device or sealed container
which was utilized as an energy source for commercial, industrial,
medical, institutional or house-hold use. This does not include lead
acid batteries from vehicles.
5. MERCURY CONTAINING DEVICES — Fluorescent and compact
florescent tubes (CFT's), High Intensity Discharge (HID) and neon
lamps, electrical switches, thermostats and any batteries
containing mercury.
§ 8.36.020 RARITAN CODE § 8.36.020
1.01:198
6. PETROLEUM CONTAMINATED SOIL — Non-hazardous soils
containing petroleum hydrocarbons resulting from spills, leaks or
leaking underground storage tanks used for gasoline or any other
commercial fuel and which are recycled in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:26A-1.1 et seq. NOTE: This material can
be recycled at "Class B" facilities (for example, authorized asphalt
manufacturers).
F. Additional Definitions:
1. MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or person
appointed by the Mayor of the Township of Raritan and who shall
be authorized to, among other things, enforce the provisions of this
chapter, and any rules and regulations which may be promulgated
hereunder.
2. MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste
generated at residential, commercial, and institutional
establishments within the boundaries of the Township of Raritan.
3. NON-RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Commercial, industrial
and institutional establishments that operate or conduct any
business or operations which cannot be included within the
definitions of residential dwellings or residential dwelling complex.
4. RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would
otherwise become solid waste, and which may be collected,
separated, or processed and returned to the economic mainstream
in the form of raw materials or products.
5. RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex
of building in which less than three dwelling units are owneroccupied
or rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for
residential purposes (see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a.).
6. RESIDENTIAL DWELLING COMPLEX — Any building or structure,
or complex of building in which three or more dwelling units are
owner-occupied or rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease,
for residential purposes (see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a.) and shall
include hotels, motels, or other guest houses serving transient or
seasonal guests as those terms are defined under Subsection (j) of
Section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law," P.L. 1967, c. 76
(N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
7. SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable
materials which are separated at the point of generation by the
generator thereof from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
8. SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable
materials are separated at the point of generation by the generator
thereof from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
§ 8.36.020 CODE ADOPTION § 8.36.030
1.01:199
§ 8.36.030. Municipal Recycling Coordinator. [Amended by Ord.
10-19]
§ 8.36.040. Source Separation. [Amended by Ord. 10-19]
A. In order to carry out the requirements of the New Jersey Mandatory
Source Separation and Recycling Act (Act) and the Hunterdon County
District Solid Waste Management Plan (Plan), the position of Municipal
Recycling Coordinator is hereby established, who shall be responsible
for compliance with said Act, Plan and applicable Township regulations.
B. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator will be appointed annually by the
Mayor and will serve a term of one year. The Mayor will annually affirm
in writing the name of the person holding the position of Township
Recycling Coordinator, and the Township Committee will set the
amount of salary for the position.
C. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator will report to the Township
Committee and Township Clerk at least once annually on the status of
the Municipal Recycling Program, and shall from time to time advise
and make recommendations as to how the requirements set forth in this
chapter may be effectuated. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall
report, at a minimum, the following:
1. Tonnages that have been recycled by the Municipal Recycling
Program since the last report;
2. Any additional materials that can reasonably be considered to be
recycled as part of the Municipal Recycling Program;
3. The impact that the Municipal Recycling Program has had upon the
amount of solid waste generated within the Township;
4. Report on financial or technical assistance that is available to the
Municipal Recycling Program; and
5. Recommend revisions of the rules and regulations of the Municipal
Recycling Program as developed by the Township Committee.
D. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator will attend all Municipal
Recycling Coordinator meetings that the Township Committee deems to
be important. This includes meetings that may be conducted by the
State, the County or other appropriate organizations.
E. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall promote the Municipal
Recycling Program by educating citizens, businesses, institutions, and
organizations of the need to participate in the Municipal Recycling
Program and shall explain to citizens, businesses, institutions and
organizations the provisions of this Ordinance and assist in the
enforcement thereof.
A. It shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners, tenants, or
occupants of residential and non-residential premises, which shall
§ 8.36.030 RARITAN CODE § 8.36.040
1.01:200
§ 8.36.050. Residential Dwelling Compliance Requirement.
[Amended by Ord. 10-19]
§ 8.36.060. Residential Dwelling Complexes Compliance
Requirement. [Amended by Ord. 10-19]
include but not be limited to retail and other commercial locations,
as well as government, schools and other institutional locations within
the Township of Raritan, to separate designated recyclable materials
from all solid waste. Designated recyclable materials shall be deposited
separate and apart from other solid waste generated by the owners
or occupants of such premises and shall be placed separately at the
curb in a manner and on such days and times as may be hereinafter
established by regulations promulgated by the Township Public Works
Department.
B. Unless the Township Public Works Center located on Pennsylvania
Avenue as described in Section 8.36.010 is being utilized for the
disposal of designated recyclable materials, every owner and/or
occupant of residential or nonresidential premises must contract for the
removal and disposition of recyclable materials as set forth in this
chapter with a private contractor. Residential recycling contracts must
comply with the provisions of this chapter and must further provide for
not less than monthly pick-up.
C. In the event that a Township, County or State facility, accepts
mandatory recyclable material as set forth in this chapter, then the
residential and/or nonresidential owner or occupant may utilize such
facility, to the extent permitted by the owner or operator of such facility.
A. The occupant(s) and owner(s) of any residential property shall be
responsible for compliance with this chapter. For multifamily units, the
management or owner is responsible for setting up and maintaining a
recycling system, including collection of recyclable materials, in
accordance with guidelines or regulations established by the Township
Department of Public Works. Violations and penalty notices will be
directed to the occupant. In instances where the violator is not easily
identifiable, violations and penalty notices will be directed to the
owner/management. The owner/management shall issue notification
and collection rules to occupants when they arrive and at least twice
annually during their occupancy.
B. Failure of occupant(s) and/or owner(s) of any residential property to
abide by the rules and regulations of this section may be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $250 for each month of noncompliance. Prior to
taking enforcement action pursuant to this section, the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator or other enforcement officer shall issue one
warning to any occupant which is in violation of this chapter, which
warning shall include educational information regarding proper
procedures for recycling.
§ 8.36.040 CODE ADOPTION § 8.36.060
1.01:201
§ 8.36.070. Non-Residential Establishment Compliance
Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 10-19]
A. The occupant(s) and owner(s) of any residential property shall be
responsible for compliance with this chapter. The owner of each
residential complex is responsible for providing a recycling depot for
the entire complex. The depot shall be equipped with owner or
contractor supplied receptacles for each category of designated
recyclable material.
B. Failure of an occupant within a residential complex to comply with the
requirements of this chapter may be fined not less than $50 nor more
than $250 for each month of noncompliance.
C. The owner/management shall issue notification and collection rules to
new tenants when they arrive and at least twice annually during their
occupancy.
D. The owner of each residential complex shall report to the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator by February 15 of each year, the recycling
activity of the prior year. The report shall include the amount of
recycled material-by-material type and the vendor or vendors providing
recycling service. The information must be supplied to the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator and directed to the attention of the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator by name and address. The County must also be
copied on this information.
E. Prior to taking enforcement action pursuant to this section, the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator or other enforcement officer shall
issue one warning to the owner which is in violation of this section. The
warning shall include educational information regarding proper
procedures for recycling including instruction as to how the owner can
reasonably provide adequate recycling facilities to ensure compliance
with this chapter. After the initial warning, the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator or other enforcement officer may issue a summons
returnable in the Municipal Court. Each and every day that the violation
continues after the initial warning shall be considered a separate and
specific violation of this chapter.
A. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments are defined as
all entities which operate or conduct any business whatsoever which
cannot be included within the definitions of a residential dwelling or
complex.
B. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Unless the property owner provides for the collection of designated
recyclable materials arrangement for collection of designated
recyclables shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional
or industrial occupant. All commercial, institutional or industrial
§ 8.36.060 RARITAN CODE § 8.36.070
1.01:202
§ 8.36.080. New Developments of Multi-Family Residential Units
and Commercial, Institutional, or Industrial Properties. [Amended
by Ord. 10-19]
property owners which provide outdoors litter receptacles and disposal
service for their contents shall also provide receptacles for designated
recyclable materials, for those materials commonly deposited, in the
location of the litter receptacle, and shall provide for separate recycling
service for their contents.
D. Unless the property owner provides for the collection of designated
recyclable materials, every occupant of a commercial, industrial or
institutional facility or their designee (including solid waste and
recycling transporters) shall cooperate in communicating recycling
activity. Such communication shall include reporting to the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator by February 15 of each year, the occupants
recycling activity of the prior year. The report shall include the amount
of recycled material-by-material type and the vendor or vendors
providing recycling service. The information must be supplied to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator and directed to the attention of the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator by name and address. The County
must also be copied on this information.
E. If the property owner provides recycling collection services for the
occupants of the property, the owner or their designee (including solid
waste and recycling transporters) shall cooperate in communicating
recycling activity. Such communication shall include reporting to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator by February 15 of each year, the
recycling activity on the property in the prior year. The report shall
include the amount of recycled material-by-material type and the
vendor or vendors providing recycling service. The information must be
supplied to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator and directed to the
attention of the Municipal Recycling Coordinator by name and address.
The County must also be copied on this information.
F. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be
prescribed, for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
G. Prior to taking enforcement action pursuant to this section, the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator or other enforcement officer shall
issue one warning to any commercial, industrial or institutional
establishment which is in violation of this section, which warning shall
include educational information regarding proper procedures for
recycling. After the initial warning, the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator or other enforcement officer may issue a summons
returnable in the Municipal Court. Each and every day that the violation
continues after the initial warning shall be considered a separate and
specific violation of this chapter.
§ 8.36.070 CODE ADOPTION § 8.36.080
1.01:203
§ 8.36.090. Prohibition of the Collection of Solid Waste Mixed With
Recyclable Materials. [Amended by Ord. 10-19]
A. Any application to the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment of the
Township of Raritan, for subdivision or site plan approval for the
construction of multi-family dwellings of three or more units, single
family developments of 50 or more units or any commercial,
institutional, or industrial development for the utilization of 1,000
square feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan. This plan
must contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
2. Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Township of
Raritan, the owner of any new multi-family housing or commercial,
institutional, or industrial development must supply to the Township
Clerk a copy of a duly executed contract with a hauling company for the
purposes of collection and recycling of source-separated recyclable
materials.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Township Engineer.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this chapter and the Health Code.
C. Once placed in the location for collection, no person, other than those
authorized by the Township, shall tamper with, collect, remove, or
otherwise handle solid waste or designated recyclable materials.
1. Prior to taking enforcement action pursuant to this section, the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator or other enforcement officer shall
issue one warning to any commercial, industrial or institutional
establishment which is in violation of this section, which warning
§ 8.36.080 RARITAN CODE § 8.36.090
1.01:204
§ 8.36.100. Solid Waste Transporter Requirements. [Amended by
Ord. 10-19]
shall include educational information regarding proper procedures
for recycling. After the initial warning, the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator or other enforcement officer may issue a summons
returnable in the Municipal Court. Each and every day that the
violation continues after the initial warning shall be considered a
separate and specific violation of this chapter.
A. A minimum of once a year or when necessary to reflect program or
regulatory modifications, solid waste transporters shall notify all
customers:
1. What materials are designated to be source separated from solid
waste and must be recycled in Hunterdon County and that these
items are prohibited in solid waste.
2. That discovery of designated recyclable items in solid waste may
result in the waste not being collected and that the generator is
subject to a monetary fine.
3. That solid waste transporters are prohibited by law to collect solid
waste containing mandated recyclable materials.
4. That documentation of proof of solid waste and recycling collection
service must be maintained and that this documentation must be
made available to the property owner, Township or County upon
request.
B. No later than February 15 of each year, all solid waste companies will
provide a detailed report of all recycling activities to all commercial and
institutional solid waste customers. The report will include a
breakdown of the materials collected for recycling, the total weight of
each material collected for recycling and the recycling market for each
of the materials collected. The information must be supplied to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator and directed to the attention of the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator by name and address. The County
must also be copied on this information.
C. No later than February 15 of each year, all solid waste transporters will
provide each municipality and the County with a summarization of
recycling activity in the Township including totals of all residential,
commercial and institutional recycling. The report will include a
breakdown of the materials collected for recycling, the total weight of
each material collected for recycling and the recycling market for each
of the materials collected. The information must be supplied to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator and directed to the attention of the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator by name and address. The County
must also be copied on this information.
§ 8.36.090 CODE ADOPTION § 8.36.100
1.01:205
§ 8.36.110. Proof of Provision of Solid Waste and Recycling
Collection Services. [Amended by Ord. 10-19]
Unless the solid waste and recycling collection services have otherwise
provided for by the Township, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:66-5.1 all residential,
commercial, industrial and institutional generators of solid waste must,
upon request by the Township supply proof that solid waste and recycling
collection services have been contracted by the generator. The information
requested for proof of service may include provision of weight receipts
or billing statements. The procedure by which the Township may request
receipts or other documentation must be detailed in a process approved by
the Township Committee.
§ 8.36.120. Recycling at Township Public Works Center. [Amended
by Ord. 10-19]
§ 8.36.130. Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 10-19]
D. Failure of the solid waste transporter to comply with the provisions of
the Solid Waste Management Plan, as amended, and this chapter shall
constitute a violation and subject the solid waste transporters to those
penalties as prescribed in this chapter and State recycling regulations.
A. The Township Committee will promulgate reasonable rules and
regulations for recycling at the Township Public Works Center. The
rules and regulations shall include Appendices A, B and C attached to
this chapter. New rules and regulations promulgated after the effective
date of this chapter shall be effective no earlier than 30 days nor later
than 90 days from the date of promulgation and publication of the rules
and regulations. Such regulations as may be promulgated under this
chapter may be changed, modified, amended or repealed by resolution
of the Township Committee.
B. Appendix A establishes a schedule and collection preparation
requirements at the Township Public Works Center.
C. Appendix B designates materials that are required to be recycled by the
residents, citizens, persons and commercial, industrial and institutional
entities pursuant to the County and Township recycling plans.
D. Appendix C designates materials that are not required to be recycled in
the Township.
A. Unless provided otherwise in this chapter, any person, corporation or
entity who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or any regulation promulgated hereunder, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 and/or by
imprisonment for up to 30 days, and/or by a period of community
service not exceeding 30 days, in the discretion of the court. Each and
every day that such a violation continues shall be considered a separate
and specific violation of this chapter.
§ 8.36.100 RARITAN CODE § 8.36.130
1.01:206
Chapter 8.40
SMOKING
§ 8.40.010. Definitions. [Adopted 10-1-2019 by Ord. No. 19-256]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
BOARD OF EDUCATION — The Hunterdon Central Regional High School
Board of Education or the Flemington-Raritan Regional School District
Board of Education.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic device that can be used
to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the
device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo
or pipe.
PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES — All public parks, playgrounds,
open space areas or ball fields, publicly owned or leased by the Township
of Raritan, upon which the public is invited or upon which the public is
permitted and where individuals gather for recreational activities, including
all areas adjacent to such facilities, including, but not limited to, parking
areas, driveways or driveway aisles.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device.
B. The provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall be enforced by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator and/or the recycling enforcement specialist of Hunterdon
County and/or the Township Code Official, and such other designated
officer of the Township.
C. An inspection may consist of sorting through containers and opening of
solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any
recyclable material.
D. Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund. Monies in
the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund shall be used solely for the
expenses of the Township recycling program.
6. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 8.40, Smoking, as amended.
§ 8.36.130 CODE ADOPTION § 8.40.020
1.01:207
§ 8.40.020. Police/Municipal Buildings; Prohibited. [Adopted
10-1-2019 by Ord. No. 19-25]
Smoking is and shall be prohibited in all areas, public or private, in the
Raritan Township police/municipal buildings located, respectively, at 2 and
1 Municipal Drive, Flemington (Raritan Township), New Jersey, and
"Smoking Prohibited" signs with letters at least one inch in height or
designated by the appropriate international symbol shall be located
throughout the police/municipal buildings so as to notify and be clearly
visible to the public and employees therein.
§ 8.40.030. Board of Education Property; Prohibited. [Adopted
10-1-2019 by Ord. No. 19-25]
Smoking is and shall be prohibited in or upon any real property, premises or
buildings owned by the Board of Education within the Township of Raritan.
§ 8.40.040. Parks and Recreation Facilities; Prohibited. [Adopted
10-1-2019 by Ord. No. 19-25]
Smoking is and shall be prohibited in or upon all parks and recreation
facilities. "Smoking Prohibited" signs with letters at least one inch in height
or designated by the appropriate international symbol shall be located
throughout the parks and recreation facilities so as to notify and be clearly
visible to the public and employees therein.
§ 8.40.050. Violations and Penalties. [Adopted 10-1-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-25]
For a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the maximum penalty upon
conviction shall be a fine up to $200, and/or a period of community service
to 30 days, and/or imprisonment in the county jail or other method of
detention for a term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 8.42
NOISE
§ 8.42.010. Noise Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
permitted any unnecessary or disturbing noise, which either annoys, injures
or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others.
§ 8.42.020. General Regulations. [Amended by Ord. 00-36; Ord.
04-36]
No person shall:
A. Maintain or operate in any public building or upon any premises in the
Township any radio, device or mechanical musical instrument or device
§ 8.40.020 RARITAN CODE § 8.42.020
1.01:208
Chapter 8.44
PET WASTE
of any kind whereby the sound therefrom is cast directly upon the
public streets or places where such device is maintained and operated
for advertising purposes, or for the purpose of attracting the attention
of the passing public or which is so placed and operated that the
sounds coming therefrom can be heard to the annoyance, disturbance
or inconvenience of travelers upon any street or public place or of
persons in neighboring places, without a written permit from the
Township Committee of the Township of Raritan.
B. In conducting any building operation, between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., operate or use any pile apparatus, the use of which is
attended by loud or unusual noise, except by written permission of the
Township Committee and then only in case of emergency.
C. Permit or cause the emission of steam or other gases, if such emission
cannot be done without the production of unnecessary or disturbing
noises.
D. Operate or cause to be operated any blower or power fan, or any
refrigeration or air conditioning units, the operation of which causes
noise due to the explosion of operating gases, fluids or steam, unless
the noise from such blower, fan, refrigeration or air conditioning unit, is
muffled and such units are equipped with a sound muffling device
sufficient to deaden such noises so that the same shall not cause
annoyance and disturbance to the public or disturb the rest and quiet of
persons residing or occupying property near enough thereto to be
annoyed or disturbed by such blower, fan, refrigeration or air
conditioning unit.
E. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any fowl, dog or other animal, or for
any other person possessing or harboring upon his premises any fowl,
dog or other animal, to cause or permit the barking, howling, crying or
making of other sounds or noises by any such fowl, dog or other animal
so as to cause annoyance or disturbance to the public or annoy and
disturb the rest and quiet or endanger the comfort, repose, health or
safety of others.
F. Conduct construction, repair, demolition, excavation, alterations or
commercial lawn maintenance other than between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Construction, repair, or
alteration work conducted by a home dweller on his own property and
commercial lawn maintenance are exempted from the Sunday
prohibition with work to be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. through
8:00 p.m. only. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
emergency repairs or situations.
§ 8.42.020 CODE ADOPTION § 8.44.010
1.01:209
§ 8.44.010. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector, or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 8.44.020. Requirement for Disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 8.44.030. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 8.44.040. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department
and/or Board of Health or its designee of the Township of Raritan.
§ 8.44.050. Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 05-29]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation.
§ 8.44.010 RARITAN CODE § 8.44.050
1.01:210
Chapter 8.46
WILDLIFE FEEDING
§ 8.46.010. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their uses
in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish. Feeding does
not include baiting by governmental officials who are acting in their official
capacity for public safety purposes.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 8.46.020. Prohibited Conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Township of Raritan, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 8.46.030. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of Township of
Raritan. Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be ordered
to cease the feeding immediately.
§ 8.46.040. Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 05-29]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation.
Chapter 8.48
YARD WASTE
§ 8.48.010. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
§ 8.44.050 CODE ADOPTION § 8.48.010
1.01:211
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing State, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 8.48.020. Yard Waste Collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this chapter. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
chapter.
§ 8.48.030. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of Township of
Raritan, the Zoning Officer and/or the Board of Health.
§ 8.48.040. Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 05-26]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation.
Chapter 8.50
IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE
§ 8.50.010. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
§ 8.48.010 RARITAN CODE § 8.50.010
1.01:212
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Raritan or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 8.50.020. Prohibited Conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Raritan is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 8.50.030. Exceptions.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters).
C. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water: -
Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing material
§ 8.50.010 CODE ADOPTION § 8.50.030
1.01:213
§ 8.50.040. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of Township of
Raritan, the Zoning Officer, the Township Engineer and/or the Board of
Health.
§ 8.50.050. Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 05-27]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation.
Chapter 8.52
FINGERPRINTING AND BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR
VOLUNTEER AND PAID COACHES OF MINORS
§ 8.52.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 07-11]
To promote the health, safety and welfare of the children of the Township
by prohibiting and barring individuals who have been convicted of crimes
considered to be a disqualifying event from acting in a position in the
Township which involves coaching or assistant coaching of minors, whether
such individuals are volunteer or paid coaches as part of either non-profit
or for-profit organizations.
§ 8.52.020. Policy. [Amended by Ord. 07-11]
It is the policy of the Township that all individuals currently volunteering,
paid as, serving as, or seeking to become a coach in the Township of
Raritan, whether such individuals are coaches as part of either non-profit or
for profit organizations (the Organizations), including both head or assistant
coaching positions (a coach), of children under the age of 18 involved in
sports or recreational activities in the Township of Raritan (minors) shall be
fingerprinted and undergo a state and federal criminal history background
check. This policy shall not apply to coaches that are employed by or
volunteer for coaching positions supervised by any Board of Education for
the Township of Raritan.
If any Township field or facility, including but not limited to schools and
parks, is used by any team or Organization for any practice, game or clinic,
all coaches affiliated with such team or Organization are required to be
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and
de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and vehicles to
the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g.,
shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to
storage for reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted
in this chapter, the above situation is limited to exterior, undercarriage,
and exposed parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed
machinery.
§ 8.50.030 RARITAN CODE § 8.52.020
1.01:214
fingerprinted and undergo a state and federal criminal history background
check in accordance with this section. This requirement shall apply to
all individuals serving as a volunteer or paid coach within the Township,
including those individuals that are coaches as part of teams or
organizations affiliated with Township sports organizations, as well as those
teams or Organizations that are formed independently.
If any coach of a team or Organization affiliated with Township sports
organizations is determined to have a criminal record containing a
disqualifying event, that coach shall be removed immediately from any
current position as coach and permanently barred from any future position
as coach within the Township. If any coach of a team or Organization
independent from or not affiliated with a Township sports organization
is determined to have a criminal record containing a disqualifying event,
that coach shall be permanently barred from acting as a coach within the
Township, and such team or Organization shall designate another individual
to serve as a coach in the barred coach's place, or the Organization will
not be permitted to use any Township field or facility. Once an individual is
cleared to act as a coach after having been found to have no criminal record
containing a disqualifying event, that individual shall be approved to coach
within the Township for a period of three years, after which time the coach
shall be required to undergo a followup state and federal criminal history
background check in order to continue to act as a coach in the Township.
§ 8.52.030. Procedure. [Amended by Ord. 07-11]
All Organizations must register with the New Jersey Volunteer Review
Operations (VRO) Program for the purpose of obtaining criminal
background checks on all of their coaches pursuant to N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 to
-5 and N.J.A.C. 13:59 as may be amended from time to time, so that VRO
can process each coach applicant's fingerprint cards, review the record
once received, and respond to the registered agency Organization with a
letter reporting a recommendation of approval or denial for each coach. Any
coach from a team or Organization independent from or not affiliated with
a Township sports organization may forego registration with the VRO for a
criminal background check if the team or Organization provides proof to the
satisfaction of the Township Police Chief that every individual who will act
as a coach within the Township has undergone fingerprinting and both state
and federal a criminal background checks and as a result has been cleared
to coach minors by another municipality or entity within one year past.
Each Organization shall make appropriate arrangements for either the
Organization or the participating coach to pay the Division of State Police
the required background check fee. Each Organization that receives a
report from the VRO indicating that a participant coach has received a
recommendation of denial shall not permit that participating coach to
supervise or in any way act as a coach in the Organization or any of its
sports or recreational activities for or involving minors. The Organization
shall also immediately notify the Chief of Police of Raritan Township of any
applicant coach that has received a recommendation of denial from VRO.
§ 8.52.020 CODE ADOPTION § 8.52.040
1.01:215
§ 8.52.040. Confidentiality. [Amended by Ord. 07-11]
The criminal history record background check and fingerprinting procedure
set forth in this chapter will be conducted, to the extent possible, in a
manner intended to preserve the privacy of all parties. To the extent
possible, privacy and confidentiality will be maintained.
Chapter 8.54
DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER
§ 8.54.010. Connections. [Amended by Ord. 07-12]
For public safety, health and welfare, residential property owners shall be
permitted to connect all sump pump, floor drain, roof drain and related
apparatus discharge piping to the nearest storm sewer, provided that:
§ 8.54.020. Connection When Storm Sewer Is Not Available.
[Amended by Ord. 07-12]
If the storm sewer is not available, the sump pump floor drain, roof drain
or related apparatus may be connected underground toward the street so
as to discharge on the owner's property at least 20 feet from the curb line
or pavement gutter line, provided the gutter has more than a 0.5% slope.
In existing roadways, a road-opening permit shall be required from the
Engineering Department.
§ 8.54.030. Discharge In All Other Cases. [Amended by Ord. 07-12]
In all other cases, the discharge shall be directed to the nearest ditches or
contained in a dry well on the owner's property so that it does not adversely
affect or flow to adjacent or neighboring lands. All such discharge locations
shall be directed down-slope and shall discharge at a point no closer to the
adjoining property line than the zoning set back line.
§ 8.54.040. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. 07-12]
This section can be enforced by either the Township Engineer, Township
Zoning Officer or the Raritan Township Police Department.
A. The discharge piping is installed underground; and
B. The piping discharges flow at least 10 feet from a building structure
and at a location which will minimize infiltration to the building
foundation and the sanitary sewer; and
C. The piping will not discharge water onto adjoining property; and
D. The connection to the storm sewer is in accordance with the Township
Engineer's specifications, inspections and permit issuance.
§ 8.52.040 RARITAN CODE § 8.54.050
1.01:216
§ 8.54.050. Penalty for Violation. [Amended by Ord. 07-12]
Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall for each
violation by subject to a penalty in accordance with Chapter 1.08 of this
code.
Chapter 8.56
UNDERAGE POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 8.56.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 11-13]
For purposes of this chapter, the following words or terms shall mean:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underaged
person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underaged person's parent, grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling or any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 8.56.020. Underage Possession or Consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages on Private Property. [Amended by Ord. 11-13]
It is unlawful for any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic
beverages, without legal authority, knowingly possess or knowingly
consume an alcoholic beverage on private property.
§ 8.56.030. Exceptions. [Amended by Ord. 11-13]
§ 8.56.040. Violations and Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 11-13]
A. This chapter shall not prohibit an underaged person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony or rite, or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
B. This chapter shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages by
any underaged person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who was licensed under Title 33 of the Revised
Statutes or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while
enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a county
vocational school or post-secondary educational institution, however,
this chapter shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a
penalty under this chapter, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law
against a person that is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage
activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
A. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent
§ 8.54.050 CODE ADOPTION § 8.56.040
1.01:217
Chapter 8.58
COVERING OF DUMPSTERS AND REFUSE CONTAINERS
§ 8.58.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 10-22]
This chapter requires dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system operated by the Township of Raritan Township and/or the waters of
the State so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
offense. Upon a finding of guilt, the court may also suspend or postpone
for up to six months the person's driving privileges in addition to the
authorized fine. Upon the conviction of any person and suspension or
postponement of the person's driver's license, the court shall forward
a report to the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission (Commission)
stating the first and last day of the suspension or postponement
imposed by the court pursuant to this chapter. If a person at the time of
the imposition of the sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period
of license postponement, including a suspension or postponement of
the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the
day this sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months
after the person reaches the age of 17 years. If the person at the time
of the imposition of the sentence has a valid driver's license issued by
this State, the court shall immediately collect the license and forward
it to the Commission along with a report. If for any reason, the license
cannot be collected, the court shall include in the report the complete
name, address, date of birth, eye color and sex of the person as well as
the first and last date of the license suspension imposed by the court.
B. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. The person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of the
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
C. If the person convicted under this chapter is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the non-resident
driving privilege for the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Commission the required report. The court shall not
collect the license of the non-resident convicted under this chapter.
§ 8.56.040 RARITAN CODE § 8.58.020
1.01:218
§ 8.58.020. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 10-22]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Raritan Township or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 8.58.030. Prohibited Conduct. [Amended by Ord. 10-16]
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Township of Raritan.
§ 8.58.040. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Amended by Ord. 10-16]
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers,
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers),
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers,
§ 8.58.020 CODE ADOPTION § 8.58.040
1.01:219
§ 8.58.050. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. 10-16]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department, of Health.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 per violation. Violators have 10
days to comply upon notice of violation by the Township.
Chapter 8.60
RETROFITTING STORM DRAIN INLETS
§ 8.60.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 10-17]
This chapter requires the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which
are in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or
resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the
discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food
wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system
operated by the Township of Raritan so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 8.60.020. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 10-17]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
shall is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Raritan Township or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 8.58.040 RARITAN CODE § 8.60.020
1.01:220
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 8.60.030. Prohibited Conduct. [Amended by Ord. 10-17]
§ 8.60.040. Design Standard. [Amended by Ord. 10-17]
Storm drain inlets identified in Subsection 8.60.020 above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settle able solids. For exemptions to this standard see
paragraph C below.
A. No person in control of private property except a residential lot with
one single family house shall authorize the repaving, repairing
(excluding the repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top
coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot
bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact
with an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm
drain inlet either:
1. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
2. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Section IV below
prior to the completion of the project.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
2. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets,
the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates
on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of
roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas,
sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
§ 8.60.020 CODE ADOPTION § 8.60.040
1.01:221
§ 8.60.050. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. 10-17]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and the
Engineering Department of the Township of Raritan. Violators have 30 days
to comply upon notice of the violation by the Township.
§ 8.60.060. Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 10-17]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 per inlet for each storm drain
inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
Title 9: Public Peace, Morals and Welfare
Chapter 9.04
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
1. Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
a. A rectangular space four and 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities);
or
b. A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 8.60.040 RARITAN CODE § 9.04.010
1.01:222
§ 9.04.010. Definitions. [Prior code § 3-7.1; amended by Ord. 98-49]
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply in the
interpretation and enforcement of this chapter:
DISORDERLY ASSEMBLAGE — Any two or more persons gathered together
and acting in a boisterous, noisy, riotous, offensive, disorderly or
threatening manner toward each other or others or committing any acts
which in any way breach or disturb the peace or tend to breach or disturb
the peace.
PARENT or GUARDIAN — Any adult person having care or custody of a
minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court, or
otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including but
not limited to any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. This definition
shall also include the front or neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant,
tavern or other place of business, public grounds, public areas, parks, as
well as parking lots or other vacant private property not owned by or under
the control of the person charged with violating this chapter or, in the
case of a minor, not owned or under the control of the minor's parent or
guardian.
§ 9.04.020. Unlawful Acts. [Prior code § 3-7.2; amended by Ord.
98-49]
A. Conduct. All acts constituting lewd, immoral or indecent conduct,
unlawful destruction of property, wilful injuries to or unlawful
interference with persons, hazards to the public health and breaches or
disturbances of the peace are severally prohibited.
B. Placing Obscene Words or Figures on Buildings; Graffiti. No person
shall write or cause to be written any lewd, indecent or obscene word or
mark whatsoever or draw or cause to be drawn any lewd, indecent or
obscene figure upon any house, building, wall, fence or other place in
the Township. No person shall deface or damage any building or other
structure owned by any person or public entity by placing thereon any
graffiti, epigraph, or inscription without the consent of the owner of the
building or structure.
C. Disturbing Lawful Assemblies. No person shall at any time or place
wilfully disquiet, interrupt or disturb any assembly of people met for a
lawful purpose, either by making a noise or by rude, disorderly or
indecent behavior or profane language, either within the place of
meeting or out of it, so near as to disturb the order and solemnity of the
meeting.
D. Obstructing or Threatening Persons. No person shall wilfully obstruct,
molest, hinder, annoy, frighten, threaten, insult or interfere with any
other person lawfully upon any public thoroughfare, in any public place,
§ 9.04.010 CODE ADOPTION § 9.04.020
1.01:223
§ 9.04.030. Violations and Penalties. [Prior code § 3-7.3; amended
by Ord. 98-49; Ord. 06-03]
Any person violating any of the provisions of Section 9.04.020 shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine as stated in Section 1.08.010, all in the
discretion of the court.
§ 9.04.040. Regulation of Weapons. [Prior code § 3-5; amended by
Ord. 2016-16]
Chapter 9.08
OBSCENE MATERIAL
§ 9.08.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 91-4]
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the public display by retailers of
obscene materials, particularly where such materials are likely to be viewed
by minors, and thereby control and minimize any adverse effects.
§ 9.08.020. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 91-4]
As used in this chapter:
or in any automobile, bus, or other public or private conveyance which
is lawfully upon any public thoroughfare.
E. Public Drinking; Open Containers. It is unlawful for any person to
consume alcoholic beverages in any public place, or to carry open
bottles or containers of any alcoholic beverage for consumption in any
public place. This shall not apply to persons consuming alcoholic
beverage or carrying open bottles or containers of any alcoholic
beverage for consumption in a public place where such use or
consumption is conducted in compliance with a license permitting such
use or consumption.
A. No person shall shoot any device at, into or upon any street, sidewalk,
curb, alley, highway, park or other public place, quasi-public place or
place to which the public is invited, or into any car or vehicle, or into or
upon private property not his or her own without the express consent of
the owner of such private property, except as allowed by Section
12.48.030 in accordance with the Township of Raritan Wildlife
Management Program to be adopted by resolution of the Raritan
Township Committee, as such Resolution may be amended from time to
time.
B. For the purposes of this section, "Device" shall mean firearms of any
description in which loaded or blank cartridges may be used, as well as
air guns, spring guns, bows, slings or any other form of weapon
potentially dangerous to wildlife or human safety.
§ 9.04.020 RARITAN CODE § 9.08.020
1.01:224
KNOWINGLY —
OBSCENE MATERIAL FOR PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE — Any
description, narrative account, display or depiction of a specified
anatomical area, or specified sexual activity contained in, consisting of, a
picture or other representation, or publication which by means of posing,
composition, format or animated sensual details, emits sensuality with the
sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area or activity.
RETAILER — Any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business with access for persons under 18 years
of age, who is in the business of making sales of periodicals or other
publications at retail containing pictures, drawings and photographs,
whether such sales are either the primary focus of such business or are an
ancillary aspect to such retail business.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY —
§ 9.08.030. Display by Retailers Restricted. [Amended by Ord. 91-4]
No retailer who operates a store, newsstand, booth, concession or similar
business, with unimpeded access or an unimpeded view of obscene
materials, by persons under 18 years of age, or is in the business of making
sales of periodicals or other publications at retail, shall display or permit
to be displayed at its business premises, any obscene material at a height
of less than five feet or without a blinder or other covering placed over the
material displayed so as to completely cover any specified anatomical area.
The public display of the obscene material shall constitute presumptive
evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the display.
Having knowledge of the character and content of the material
described herein; or
1.
Having failed to exercise reasonable inspection which would disclose
its character and content.
2.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
1.
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or
Any act of masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate sexual
intercourse; or
2.
Fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast.
3.
§ 9.08.020 CODE ADOPTION § 9.08.040
1.01:225
§ 9.08.040. Violation and Penalty. [Amended by Ord. 06-03; Ord.
91-4]
Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to penalties as stated
in Section 1.08. Each day that such obscene materials shall be on display
shall be deemed to be a continuing and separate violation.
Chapter 9.12
CURFEW
§ 9.12.010. Establishment of Juvenile Curfew. [Amended by Ord.
93-25; Ord. 96-37]
There is established, a juvenile curfew prohibiting and controlling the
activities of juveniles within the Township in accordance with the provisions
as hereinafter set forth, and during the following periods of time:
A. Halloween Curfew. On Halloween night, October 31st of each year and
for the period of time commencing on October 26th of each year and
ending on November 2nd of said year.
B. Emergency Curfew. Whenever the Township Committee, upon
recommendation of the Chief of Police, shall determine after due
investigation and deliberation that the incidents of potential harm to
juveniles, or juvenile delinquency within the Township has or is about to
reach such a level of frequency or severity as to present a clear and
present danger to the public peace, safety, health, morals and welfare,
then and in that event, the Township Committee, may by resolution,
declare that a temporary emergency exists in the Township. Upon the
declaration of such temporary emergency, the Township Committee
shall by resolution:
1. Proclaim a temporary curfew in the Township for a period of not
more than 90 days and for such hours as hereinafter set forth or
such additional hours and under such conditions as prescribed by
the Township Committee, invoking all of the other restrictions,
provisions and penalties of this chapter.
2. The temporary curfew shall be continued and extended by the
Township Committee for such additional periods, hours and
conditions as prescribed by the Township Committee for not more
than 90 days each, if and only upon further investigation and
deliberation of the police and Township Committee before each
such additional authorized period and upon recommendation of the
Chief of Police, the Township Committee finds that a temporary
emergency as referred hereinabove continues to exist in the
Township.
3. At any time during the period that a temporary curfew has been
proclaimed, continued or renewed under this chapter, the
§ 9.08.040 RARITAN CODE § 9.12.010
1.01:226
§ 9.12.020. Curfew Prohibited Activity; Exempted Activities.
[Amended by Ord. 93-25; Ord. 96-37]
During a curfew period, no juveniles under the age of 18 years shall be
on any of the public streets, roads, thoroughfares, highways, sidewalks,
bridges, plazas, alleys, parks, recreation or shopping areas or other public
buildings, structures, areas or places of or within the Township between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.: (1) unless such juvenile is accompanied
by his or her parent, guardian or other person having legal care or custody
of such juveniles; or (2) unless the juvenile is engaged in or traveling to or
from a business or occupation which the laws of New Jersey authorize a
juvenile to perform, or (3) the juvenile is involved in a medical emergency,
or a school, civil, church or legitimate social, cultural or educational
function supervised by adults.
§ 9.12.030. Parental Responsibility. [Amended by Ord. 93-25]
No parent, guardian or other person having the legal care or custody of a
juvenile under the age of 18 years shall allow or permit an unaccompanied
juvenile during the aforesaid curfew periods to be in or upon any public
streets or other public places in the Township between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except for those activities exempt as hereinabove set
forth.
§ 9.12.040. Violations — Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 93-25; Ord.
06-03]
Any juvenile under the age of 18 years of age violating or failing to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.08.010.
Township may review the situation with regard to the declared
temporary emergency in the Township, and may declare that a
temporary emergency no longer exists in the Township, and upon
such determination, shall immediately rescind and revoke the
curfew.
4. Notice of the existence of the declaration of a temporary
emergency and the imposition of a temporary curfew and the
regulations established hereunder shall be immediately
disseminated to the public by the Township Clerk utilizing such
means as are available to the Township Clerk including but not
limited to, posting of such resolution in the Township municipal
building and Police Department headquarters, telephoning or
telefaxing such resolution to the official newspaper of the Township
and such other appropriate daily newspapers generally circulating
in the Township, providing notice when schools are in session, to
the superintendent and/or principals of the schools located within
the Township, and any such other means to disseminate the
information to the public.
§ 9.12.010 CODE ADOPTION § 9.12.040
1.01:227
Any parent, guardian or legal custodian of any juvenile under the age of 18
years of age, allowing an unaccompanied juvenile to be on any public street
or in any public place during the curfew period and the hours as aforesaid
shall be required to perform community service together with the juvenile,
as determined by the court.
Chapter 9.14
GRAFFITI PROHIBITED AND REMOVAL REQUIRED
§ 9.14.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 07-28]
To promote the public peace, morals and welfare of the residents of the
Township by prohibiting and barring any individual or entity from defacing,
destroying or otherwise damaging private or public property without the
owner's consent by application of graffiti, and requiring the prompt removal
of graffiti by the owner of property on which an unlawful application of
graffiti has occurred.
§ 9.14.020. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 07-28]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — The unlawful application of any drawing, inscription, figure or
mark upon any structure, wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate, roadway,
tree or other real or personal property, either privately or publicly owned.
GRAFFITI TOOLS — Any device including a spray paint container or
indelible marker that can be used to apply any non-water soluble solution to
any surface described in the definition of "graffiti" hereof.
HOBBY-SIZED PAINT CONTAINER — Any spray paint container of six
ounces or less.
INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt tip marker, china marker or similar device
that is not water-soluble and which has a flat or angled writing surface of 1/
2 inch or greater.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
SPRAY PAINT CONTAINER — Any receptacle, whether or not aerosol,
holding paint that can be used to apply paint to any surface described in the
definition of "graffiti" hereof.
§ 9.14.030. Graffiti Prohibited. [Amended by Ord. 07-28]
A. Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface,
destroy or otherwise damage private or public property without the
owner's consent, by or through the application of what is commonly
known as "graffiti."
§ 9.12.040 RARITAN CODE § 9.14.030
1.01:228
§ 9.14.040. Sale of Spray Paint and Other Graffiti Tools. [Amended
by Ord. 07-28]
B. Possession of graffiti tools prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to have in his or her possession any spray paint container,
indelible marker or other graffiti tool while on public or private
property, without the consent of the respective owner of such property,
in a manner that warrants a justifiable and reasonable alarm or
immediate concern for the safety of property in the vicinity. Among the
circumstances which may be considered by the enforcement officer in
determining whether such alarm or immediate concern is warranted is
the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of an enforcement
officer, refuses to identify him or herself or manifestly endeavors to
conceal him or herself or the graffiti tool. Prior to any citation being
issued to a person for a violation of this chapter, such person shall be
afforded an opportunity by the enforcement officer to dispel any alarm
or immediate concern which could otherwise be warranted by
requesting him or her to identify himself or herself and explain his or
her presence and conduct.
A. Sale to minors.
1. No person or entity shall sell or otherwise transfer any indelible
marker or spray paint container other than a hobby-sized paint
container to a minor, unless said minor is accompanied by parent or
legal guardian at time of purchase or transfer.
2. No minor shall, at the time of purchase of items specified in
Subsection 9.14.020, knowingly furnish fraudulent evidence of his
or her majority, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle
operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the
Federal Selective Service Act, an identification card issued to a
member of the Armed Forces, or any document issued by a federal,
state, county or municipal government.
B. Display and sale requirements.
1. No person or entity shall sell or offer for sale, transfer or offer to
transfer any spray paint container, including hobby-sized paint
containers, unless such spray paint container is held for sale or
transfer in an enclosed device which is constructed to prevent
removal of the merchandise except by authorized attendants or is
stored, out of sight, in such a way as to prevent free access to the
merchandise by the public. The merchant may, at its discretion,
utilize a line-of-sight display. To qualify as a line-of-sight display, the
products must be easily and readily observed by the retail
personnel at all times. To accomplish line-of-sight requirements, a
retailer may utilize placement of personnel work stations, mirrors
or cameras or other such devices or arrangements acceptable to
the Township enforcement officials to ensure surveillance of the
product.
§ 9.14.030 CODE ADOPTION § 9.14.040
1.01:229
§ 9.14.050. Deterrence and Intervention. [Amended by Ord. 07-28]
§ 9.14.060. Removal Required. [Amended by Ord. 07-28; Ord.
07-41]
2. Every person or entity selling spray paint or indelible markers shall
place a sign in clear public view at or near the display of such
product stating:
IT IS A CRIME TO SELL OR OTHERWISE CONVEY AEROSOL
SPRAY PAINT OR WIDE-TIPPED MARKERS TO PERSON
UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IN THE TOWNSHIP OF RARITAN
AND IS PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OF UP TO $2,000, OR
IMPRISONMENT NOT TO EXCEED 90 DAYS INCLUDING A
SENTENCE OF COMMUNITY SERVICE.
A. Graffiti Trust Account. A Graffiti Trust Account maintained by the
Township specifically for the remediation of graffiti on public property
within the Township is hereby created. The Township Committee and
Township Administration shall control the allocation of the funds in the
graffiti trust account for the remediation of graffiti within the Township,
which shall include cleaning, repairing, painting or otherwise restoring
the damaged public property to the condition existing prior to any
remediation. Any remediation of public property subjected to graffiti
may be funded by the graffiti trust account at the discretion of the
Township Administrator. Any private property that has been subjected
to graffiti shall not be eligible for remediation through the Graffiti Trust
Account.
B. Reward program. Any person who shall provide information which
leads to the arrest, conviction and actual payment of a fine by a violator
of this chapter is entitled to receive from the Township a reward of up to
$100. The Township Administrator, or his designee, shall determine
whether a particular reward shall be divided among persons based on
the information provided and the number of persons providing it; but in
no event shall the total reward relating to a particular violation exceed
$100. No person employed by the Township shall be eligible for such
reward.
A. Property owner to remove graffiti. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, public agency or utility owning, or acting as manager or agent for
the property, whether privately or publicly owned, to permit the
application of or fail to remove any graffiti from the property within 30
days of receipt of notice from the Township to remove such graffiti. If
the person, firm, public agency or utility owning, or acting as manager
or agent for the owner of such property fails to remove the graffiti
timely, the Township shall cause the graffiti to be removed and charge
the property owner for the expenses incurred. Failure of the property
owner to pay the Township shall result in the charges being placed as a
municipal lien upon the property as permitted by statute.
§ 9.14.040 RARITAN CODE § 9.14.060
1.01:230
B. The Township zoning officer and his designated representatives are
hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including
the issuance of summonses and notices required under Subsection C
hereof.
C. Notice to remove graffiti. Whenever the Township becomes aware of
the existence of graffiti on any property, including structures or
improvements within the Township, the zoning officer or his designated
representative shall give, or cause to be given, notice to the property
owner and/or owner's agent or manager to remove such graffiti
therefrom. Such notice shall be in writing, delivered by certified and
regular mail, and shall be made in substantially the following form:
NOTICE OF ORDER TO REMOVE GRAFFITI FROM PROPERTY
TO THE OWNER, AGENT OF THE OWNER, OR PERSON MANAGING
THE PROPERTY HEREINAFTER DESCRIBED:
[Property Address, Block and Lot]
YOUR ATTENTION IS HEREBY DIRECTED TO THE PROVISIONS OF
ORDINANCE § 9.16 OF THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF RARITAN,
A COPY OF WHICH ORDINANCE IS ON FILE IN THE OFFICE OF
THE TOWNSHIP CLERK, IN THE MUNICIPAL BUILDING. PURSUANT
THERETO, YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED THAT A CERTAIN
UNSIGHTLY CONDITION EXISTS - NAMELY GRAFFITI - ON YOUR
PROPERTY WHICH INJURES NEIGHBORING PROPERTY AND THE
PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE.
YOU ARE HEREBY FORMALLY NOTIFIED THAT YOU MUST
IMMEDIATELY, BUT IN NO EVENT LATER THAN WITHIN 30 DAYS
FROM THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE, REMOVE SUCH GRAFFITI FROM
THE PROPERTY AND THEREAFTER KEEP THE PROPERTY FREE
THEREFROM.
IN THE EVENT YOU FAIL TO COMPLETE THE REMOVAL WITHIN
THE TIME INDICATED HEREIN, THE UNDERSIGNED SHALL CAUSE
THE SAME TO BE REMOVED AND YOU WILL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR
THE COST OF THE TOWNSHIP'S REMOVAL OF THE UNSIGHTLY
CONDITION FROM THE PROPERTY, INCLUDING IMPOSITION OF
THE COST AS A MUNICIPAL LIEN UPON THE PROPERTY.
SIGNED: TITLE:
NAME: DATE:
ONCE THE GRAFFITI HAS BEEN REMOVED, YOU MUST SIGN A
COPY OF THIS NOTICE WHERE INDICATED BELOW AND RETURN
TO THE MUNICIPAL CLERK OF THE TOWNSHIP, BY NO LATER
THAN 30 DAYS AFTER THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE, INDICATING
AND CERTIFYING BY YOUR SIGNATURE THAT THE GRAFFITI HAS
BEEN REMOVED. ANY OBJECTION TO THIS NOTICE MUST BE
MADE IN WRITING BY PERSONAL DELIVERY OR CERTIFIED MAIL
WITHIN 30 DAYS OF THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE.
Certification by Property Owner
§ 9.14.060 CODE ADOPTION § 9.14.060
1.01:231
§ 9.14.070. Violations and Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 07-28]
I hereby certify that the unsightly condition - namely graffiti - at
the property indicated above has been removed. I certify that the
foregoing statement made by me is true and accurate to the best
of my knowledge. I am aware that if the foregoing statement made
by me is willfully false, I am subject to punishment. I understand
that my signature affixed hereto shall serve as my certification, which
signature shall be the same as making a statement under oath, and the
making of this certification is subject to the same penalties as provided
by law for perjury.
Signed: __________
Name: __________
Date: __________
A. Parental responsibility. Any act in violation of the provisions of this
chapter committed by a minor under the age of 18 years shall be
imputed to that minor's parent or legal guardian. A parent or guardian
of a minor who violates any provision shall be liable for payment of any
fines, the expense of restoration and for the performance of community
service simultaneously with the convicted minor as provided in
Subsection B hereof.
B. If a property owner does not undertake the removal of graffiti within 30
days of the date of written notice provided by the Township to the
owner, or in the case of the Department of Transportation - within 120
days of the date of written notice, unless an action challenging the
notice and order to remove is still pending before a court of competent
jurisdiction, the Township shall undertake removal of the graffiti from
the property, and the property owner shall be deemed in violation of
this chapter and shall be subject to a mandatory fine of $50 to be paid
by the property owner to the Graffiti Trust Account. Thereafter, the
Township shall present the property owner, by regular and certified
mail, with a detailed itemization of the costs incurred by the Township -
which shall include the mandatory fine of $50 - and the Township shall
direct the property owner to reimburse the costs listed. If the property
owner does not pay the costs within 30 days of the date of notice of
itemized costs, the Township shall assess the cost of removal as a
municipal lien against the property, after certification thereto to the
taxing authority. Any private property owner subject to this provision
shall be entitled to full restitution for graffiti clean-up costs in the event
the offender who caused the unsightly condition is apprehended and
convicted, in accordance with Subsection C hereof.
C. Any person committing a violation of any provision of 9.16.030 and/or
9.16.040 shall be punished by:
A fine of not more than $2,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days,
or both. In lieu of imprisonment, the Judge may impose a sentence of
§ 9.14.060 RARITAN CODE § 9.14.070
1.01:232
§ 9.14.080. Reporting. [Amended by Ord. 07-28]
The Township Administrator shall report annually to the Township
Committee on the status of the Graffiti Trust Account. At the very least,
such report shall include the amount currently in the fund, and the amount
allocated to graffiti remediation over the past year.
§ 9.14.090. Neighboring Municipalities Urged to Adopt Similar
Legislation. [Amended by Ord. 07-28]
The administrative and legislative branches of this government shall
endeavor to have the municipalities in close territorial proximity with the
Township of Raritan adopt legislation prohibiting the conduct as set forth
by this chapter.
Chapter 9.16
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
§ 9.16.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 06-1]
To promote the health, safety and welfare of the children of the Township
of Raritan by prohibiting individuals convicted of any crime against a minor
as listed in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2, and is required to register with the proper
authorities as a convicted sex offender pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq.
community service not to exceed 90 days with the express requirement
that the offender clean graffiti from public property within the
Township and, if the minor's parent or legal guardian as well as the
minor are found guilty of a violation of this chapter, the minor's parents
or legal guardian shall perform community service together with the
minor.
As a condition of sentencing, the Municipal Count shall have the
authority to order that the convicted individual be responsible for
cleaning, repairing, painting or otherwise restoring the damaged
property to the condition existing prior to being damaged, provided that
a determination is made that any restoration made the by convicted
individual shall not subject the individual to unreasonable risk of
serious physical injury or death or otherwise be in violation of law. In
the event that convicted individual is unable for any reason to comply
with the above, the Municipal Court shall have the authority to order
that said convicted individual make full monetary restitution to restore
the property to its original undamaged condition. The Municipal Court
shall have full discretion to set the terms of restitution.
D. Any fines imposed by the Municipal Court or other agencies authorized
to impose a fine for a violation of this chapter shall be deposited in the
Graffiti Trust Account to be used for the removal of graffiti from public
structures and for the Reward Program as provided in § 9.16.050.
§ 9.14.070 CODE ADOPTION § 9.16.010
1.01:233
from residing or living within 2,500 feet of areas where children regularly
meet and congregate.
§ 9.16.020. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 06-1]
As used in this chapter:
CHILD CARE CENTER — Shall consist of any and all property owned or
leased to a public or private institution which is used for the purposes of
caring for and/or looking after children under the age of 18 years.
CONVICTED SEX OFFENDER — For the purposes of this Chapter 9.16
only, any person over the age of 18 years, who has been convicted of any
crime against a minor as listed in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2, and who is required to
register with the proper authorities as a convicted sex offender pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq., Registration and Notification of Release of Certain
Offenders.
PARK — A tract of land owned by a branch of government and available to
the general public for active or passive recreational purposes.
PLAYGROUND — Shall consist of an improved area designed, equipped, and
set aside for play of six or more children, including swimming pools, which
is not intended for use as an athletic field or athletic court, whether located
on public or privately owned property, excluding single-family residential
lots.
SCHOOL — Shall consist of any and all property owned by or leased to a
public or private elementary, middle or secondary educational institution
located within the Township of Raritan, which is used for school purposes,
including athletic fields or courts accessory to the school.
"Within 2,500 feet" shall consist of a radius of 2,500 feet in any direction of
the property line of any property identified herein.
§ 9.16.030. Residency Restrictions. [Amended by Ord. 06-1]
A. No convicted sex offender, as defined herein, shall be permitted to
reside or live within 2,500 feet of any school, park, playground or day
care center within the Township of Raritan.
B. A convicted sex offender who resides or lives within 2,500 feet of any
school, park, playground or child care center within the Township of
Raritan shall have 60 days, from receipt of written notice of the
prohibition set forth herein, to move to a location which is in
compliance with this section. Failure to move to a location which is in
compliance with this section within 60 days shall constitute a violation
of this section.
C. On October 31st of each year, a day commonly known and referred to as
Halloween, a convicted sex offender must be inside his or her residence
no later than 6:00 p.m. and may not answer his or her door when trickor-
treaters knock. On Halloween, during the entire 24 hours of October
§ 9.16.010 RARITAN CODE § 9.16.030
1.01:234
§ 9.16.040. Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 06-1]
Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person violating
any of the provisions of this Chapter 9.16, upon conviction thereof, and in
the discretion of the Municipal Court Judgment, shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $2,000; imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days;
a period of community service not exceeding 90 days; or any combination
thereof.
Chapter 9.18
PROTECTIVE CUSTODY
§ 9.18.010. Holding and Release From Protective Custody.
[Amended by Ord. 09-7]
Any person who is arrested for a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 shall be held
in protective custody at an appropriate police or other facility where the
person's condition may be monitored until the person is no longer a danger
to himself or others. That person shall be released from protective custody
when that person is no longer a danger to himself or others. A person is
no longer a danger to himself or others when the person's blood alcohol
concentration is less than 0.05% and the person is no longer under the
influence of any intoxicating liquor or narcotic or hallucinogenic or habitforming
drug to the extent that the person's facilities are impaired. In no
event shall the Township's Police Department or the Hunterdon County
Detention Center hold a person in protective custody for a period of longer
than eight hours without providing an appropriate hearing.
§ 9.18.020. Release or Alternative. [Amended by Ord. 09-7]
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, provided that it is not a
detriment to the public safety, the arresting law enforcement agency may,
because of the age, health or safety of the arrested person, release the
person pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 2001, c.69, N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.22 et
seq., or provide an appropriate alternative to protective custody. Neither
the Township's Police Department nor the Hunterdon County Detention
31st, a convicted sex offender cannot attend parties in the Township
where there are children present, and cannot take any children,
including his or her own children, out for trick-or-treating in the
Township.
D. This section shall not apply to persons who have established a
residence prior to February 6, 2006. Any person who has established a
rental residence that falls within the 2,500 feet provision prior to
February 6, 2006, which lease expires after the adoption of this
ordinance, will not be permitted to renew the lease without violating
this ordinance.
§ 9.16.030 CODE ADOPTION § 9.18.020
1.01:235
Center shall be subject to liability if a person is released from custody
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter under N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.3.
§ 9.18.030. Use of State Police Facilities. [Amended by Ord. 09-7]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the use of State
Police facilities by the Township of Raritan for purposes of this chapter
under N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.3.
§ 9.18.040. Statutory Authority. [Amended by Ord. 09-7]
All the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.3 referenced above are hereby
incorporated into and are deemed to be a part hereof.
§ 9.18.050. Appropriate Facility. [Amended by Ord. 09-7]
For purposes of this chapter, the appropriate police or other facility is the
Hunterdon County Detention Center.
Title 10: Vehicles and Traffic
Chapter 10.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.04.010. Definitions. [Prior code § 7-1]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this Title, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 10.04.020. Official Time Standard. [Prior code § 7-2]
Whenever certain hours are named in this Title, they shall mean either
Eastern standard time or Eastern daylight saving time, as may be in current
use in the Township.
§ 10.04.030. Violation; Penalty. [Prior code § 7-9]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this Title or any supplement thereto shall
be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 15 days, or to both.
Chapter 10.08
PARKING GENERALLY
§ 9.18.020 RARITAN CODE § 10.08.010
1.01:236
§ 10.08.010. Regulations Not Exclusive. [Prior code § 7-3.1]
The provisions of this Title imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.R.S. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 10.08.020. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [Prior
code § 7-3.2]
§ 10.08.030. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on All
Streets Between November 1st to April 15th. [Prior code § 7-3.4]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. on any street within Raritan Township during the months between
November 1st to April 15th, inclusive.
§ 10.08.040. Parking Prohibited on Snow Covered Roads. [Prior
code § 7-3.6; amended by Ord. 94-3]
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary "emergency no parking"
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his or her absence, the
ranking Police Officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of "emergency no parking" signs when weather
conditions, accidents, fires, public celebrations, etc., dictate or require
the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the
free flow of traffic. Notification that "emergency no parking" signs are
being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any
vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any peace Officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of removal
and storage which may result from such removal, before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
C. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon signs being erected
as required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
any road, street or highway in the Township, an emergency shall exist
and the parking of any vehicle is prohibited on any portion of a road,
street or highway, including those roads within qualified private
communities designated by the Township to receive snowplowing
services under the Municipal Services Act, N.J.S. 40:67-23.2 et seq., in
Raritan Township.
§ 10.08.010 CODE ADOPTION § 10.08.040
1.01:237
§ 10.08.050. Parking Prohibited at All Times. [Amended by Ord.
07-7; Ord. 09-2; Ord. 12-6]
Ordinance amendments:
Chapter 10.12
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC STREETS
This parking prohibition shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased and until the road, streets or highways have been plowed
sufficiently and to the extent that parking will not interfere with the
normal flow of traffic. No provisions of this section shall apply to any
county or state road, street or highway located within the Township.
B. During extreme weather conditions when a vehicle is not able to
proceed and must be parked on any street, road or highway in the
Township, the operator of such vehicle must, by the quickest means of
communication, notify an on-duty Police Officer of the Township and the
Superintendent of Public Works of such vehicle and its location, and
thereafter follow the directions of the Police Department regarding
removal.
C. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any Police Officer may provide for the removal
of such a vehicle. The owner of such vehicle shall pay the reasonable
costs of the removal and storage which may result from such removal,
before regaining possession of such vehicle. The payment of costs of
removal shall be in addition to any penalty assessed for violation of this
section.
D. Regulatory and warning signs in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 or
as specified by the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
shall be erected and maintained at all road, street or highway entrances
for motor vehicles into this Township, and the entranceways to the
qualified private communities receiving snowplowing services under
the Municipal Services Act.
E. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by the New Jersey
Statutes, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this
section or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not
more than $100 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or
both.
§ 10.08.040 RARITAN CODE § 10.12.010
1.01:238
§ 10.12.010. Stopping or Standing Prohibited at All Times on
Certain Streets. [Prior code § 7-4; amended by Ord. 07-34; Ord.
2016-14; Ord. 2016-21]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule II on file in the Township Clerk's office and
made a part of this Title.
§ 10.12.020. Through Streets. [Prior code § 7-5]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 39:4-140, the following streets or parts
of streets described in Schedule III on file in the Township Clerk's office and
made a part of this Title are designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street.
§ 10.12.030. Stop Intersections. [Prior code § 7-6]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 39:4-140, the following intersections
described in Schedule IV on file in the Township Clerk's office and made a
part of this Title are designated as stop intersections and stop signs shall be
installed as stated.
§ 10.12.040. Maximum Speed Limit. [Prior code § 7-7; amended by
Ord. 07-7; Ord. 07-30; 07-34; Ord. 07-36; Ord. 08-02; Ord. 11-16;
Ord. 15-16]
The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the following streets
in the Township described in Schedule V on file in the Township Clerk's
office and made a part of this Title are established. Regulatory and warning
signs shall be erected and maintained as required by the director of motor
vehicles.
§ 10.12.050. Routes for Trucks Over Four Tons. [Prior code § 7-8]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.R.S. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VI on file in the Township Clerk's office and
made a part of this Title are designated as routes for trucks over four
tons' gross weight. Trucks over four tons' gross weight are excluded from
all other streets except for the pickup or delivery of materials along such
streets.
§ 10.12.060. Local Traffic Only. [Amended by Ord. 14-06]
§ 10.12.070. Vehicles Over a Certain Weight Excluded From Certain
Streets. [Amended by Ord. 11-4]
§ 10.12.080. Traffic Control Signal. [Amended by Ord. 07-1; Ord.
07-9; Ord. 07-29]
§ 10.12.010 CODE ADOPTION § 10.12.090
1.01:239
§ 10.12.090. Regulations for Parking and Traffic on Private Property
Open to the Public. [Amended by Ord. 06-34; Ord. 09-22; Ord.
09-23; Ord. 10-9]
§ 10.12.100. No Parking on Certain Streets at Certain Times.
[Amended by Ord. 2016-20]
On Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., no person shall park
on Junction Road Extension as designated on the map attached hereto and
made a part hereof.
Chapter 10.16
BICYCLES AND OTHER WHEELED VEHICLES
§ 10.16.010. General Regulations. [Prior code § 3-4; amended by
Ord. 83-24]
Chapter 10.20
TRAFFIC CONTROL STANDARDS; REQUIREMENTS FOR
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
§ 10.20.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 2016-04]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish controls and regulations for the
safe and expeditious movement of traffic through the Township of Raritan,
in order to promote public health, safety and welfare, when construction,
maintenance, repairs or utility work require blocking the streets and
obstructing the normal flow of traffic.
§ 10.20.020. Adoption of Standards. [Amended by Ord. 2016-04]
The Township of Raritan hereby adopts the current Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, hereafter known as "MUTCD", as same may be
supplemented and amended. The MUTCD controls and regulates traffic
A. No person shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in the Township.
B. No vehicles nor devices with wheels, including bicycles, minibikes,
motor vehicles, wagons, carriages, strollers and carts shall be
permitted on tracks constructed and designated for running nor upon
any athletic fields in any parks owned and maintained by the Township.
C. No motorized vehicles of any kind whatsoever shall be permitted in
parks except in designated parking areas, except that authorized
maintenance vehicles and emergency vehicles shall be permitted in
park areas.
D. The only exception shall be wheelchairs occupied by persons who are
physically disabled and requiring wheelchairs.
§ 10.12.090 RARITAN CODE § 10.20.020
1.01:240
whenever construction, maintenance operations or utility work obstructs
the normal flow of traffic. Any person, entity, contractor or utility that fails
to comply with the provisions of the MUTCD while performing such work is
in violation of this section.
§ 10.20.030. Hazardous Conditions. [Amended by Ord. 2016-04]
A person, entity, contractor or utility wishing to conduct work on, under
or above any roadway within Raritan Township shall provide the Raritan
Township Police Department Traffic Safety Bureau with at least two
emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of emergency
problems at the construction or maintenance site, or arising from the
construction or maintenance being performed, prior to the start of any
work. If for any reason an emergency contact cannot be reached, or if
the emergency contact person does not respond in a timely manner to the
call from the Raritan Township Police Department to correct a hazardous
condition, the Township of Raritan may respond to such hazardous
conditions. The reasonable fees for such emergency service by the Township
shall be charged to the person, entity, contractor or public responsible for
such conditions.
§ 10.20.040. Road Closings and Detours. [Amended by Ord.
2016-04]
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Raritan Township Chief of Police or his designee. Advance notice of
detours must be given to motorists, except in emergent situations.
§ 10.20.050. Preconstruction Meeting. [Amended by Ord. 2016-04]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, entity, contractor or utility as
required under N.J.A.C. 16:25-9.2 wishing to conduct work on, under or
above the roadway, to contact the Raritan Township Chief of Police or his
designee in order to arrange a preconstruction meeting to submit plans
for the safe movement of traffic during the period of construction work.
The preconstruction meeting shall take place at least one week prior to the
start date of the construction or maintenance work. The Raritan Township
Chief of Police (or his designee) shall determine the required number of offduty
police officers required to ensure the safe movement of traffic in the
construction or maintenance zone. Any person, entity, contractor or utility
who fails to submit and secure approval for its traffic plan prior to the start
of work shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter. The requirement
to obtain approval of the plans shall be in addition to any other permit
or other approval required by any other Federal, State or municipal law,
ordinance or regulation.
§ 10.20.060. Requirement to Hire Off Duty Police Officers.
[Amended by Ord. 2016-04]
§ 10.20.020 CODE ADOPTION § 10.20.060
1.01:241
§ 10.20.070. Stop Work. [Amended by Ord. 2016-04]
The Raritan Township Police Department shall have the authority to stop
work being performed within the Township, and to require the removal of
equipment, vehicles and/or stored material within the right-of-way, or the
backfilling of open excavations and/or other related work, in order to abate
any nuisance and/or safety hazard, or for any violation of this chapter.
§ 10.20.080. Site Preparation and Maintenance. [Amended by Ord.
2016-04]
No materials, vehicles or equipment are to be placed in any roadway or
sidewalk areas until all construction signs, lights, devices and pavement
markings are installed and approved. All construction signs that will not
apply during construction, such as "Flagman Ahead" signs after all work
has been completed for the day, must be bagged or removed from view of
motorists.
§ 10.20.090. Violations and Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 2016-04]
Unless another penalty is provided by New Jersey statute, every person,
entity, contractor or utility convicted of a violation of a provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
A. Any person, entity, contractor or utility wishing to conduct work on,
under or above any roadway within Raritan Township, which is
anticipated to take longer than one hour, shall be required to hire offduty
Raritan Township police officers when determined by the Raritan
Township Chief of Police (or his designee) to be necessary to ensure
compliance with the MUTCD, as well as to control traffic through the
work zone.
B. The Raritan Township Police Department shall be contacted at least 48
hours before starting work to arrange for the hiring of off-duty police
officers.
C. All work on, under or over any roadway within Raritan Township which
is anticipated to take less than one hour may be controlled with civilian
flagmen, unless off-duty officers are deemed necessary and approved by
the Raritan Township Chief of Police or his designee. All civilian
flagmen shall wear orange glow-type vests and must be educated as to
the proper operation of traffic flag controls. If flagmen cannot see each
other, they must have walkie-talkie communication between them.
D. If the work requires any road to be closed to traffic 24 hours a day, the
hiring of off-duty officers shall only be required when deemed necessary
and approved by the Raritan Township Chief of Police or his designee.
§ 10.20.060 RARITAN CODE § 10.20.100
1.01:242
§ 10.20.100. Notification of Traffic Delays or Detours. [Amended by
Ord. 2016-04]
The Township of Raritan Police Department shall have sole responsibility to
notify immediately all affected agencies, including but not limited to, police,
fire, EMS, and the school transportation office, or any work or construction
upon or near a roadway within the Township of Raritan that would delay or
interfere with the provision of service. Such notification shall be made in a
manner pursuant to, and in compliance with, the Raritan Township Police
Department's policy and procedures.
§ 10.20.110. Non-Applicability. [Amended by Ord. 2016-04]
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any construction on or
maintenance to any roadway located within the Township of Raritan when
such construction, maintenance or work is performed by the Township or its
designated agents.
Title 11: (Reserved)
Title 12: Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
Chapter 12.04
SPECIFICATIONS FOR TOWNSHIP ROADS
§ 12.04.010. Load Limit; Four-Ton Roads. [Prior code § 10-6.1]
§ 12.04.020. Load Limit; Ten-Ton to Twelve-Ton Roads. [Prior code
§ 10-6.2]
A. The minimum right-of-way width shall be 33 feet, and the minimum
paved width shall be 24 feet.
B. Two alternate paving designs shall be used depending on traffic volume
and site conditions, subject to determination by the Township Engineer.
1. Alternate A: one-half gallon per square yard, RC250 or MC250,
five-eighths-inch crushed stone chips; roll, then one-third gallon
per square yard; RT 9 or RT 10 or RC 250, three-eighths-inch
crushed stone chips; roll, then one-third gallon per square yard, RT
9 or RT 10 or RC 250, three-eighths-inch crushed stone chips; roll.
2. Alternate B: four inches of bituminous stabilized base course with a
two-inch FABC-1 surface course. In both alternates there shall be a
crown of four inches and, where required, Type 5, Class "A"
subbase shall be placed at a minimum depth of four inches.
A. The minimum right-of-way width shall be 50 feet where possible. Under
certain circumstances a width of 33 feet shall be considered. The
§ 10.20.100 CODE ADOPTION § 12.04.020
1.01:243
§ 12.04.030. Load Limit; Thirty-Ton Roads. [Prior code § 10-6.3]
§ 12.04.040. Other Specifications. [Prior code § 10-6.4]
All paving shall be constructed in accordance with specifications
established by the New Jersey Highway Department or by specifications
invoked by the Township Engineer.
Sections 12.08.020.E. and 12.08.030 shall govern for these roads.
Chapter 12.08
SPECIFICATIONS FOR PRIVATE ROADS
§ 12.08.010. Required Widths. [Prior code § 10-5.1]
Paved widths and right-of-way widths shall meet the design specifications
set forth in Title 16.
§ 12.08.020. Paving. [Prior code § 10-5.2]
minimum paved width shall be 30 feet or as determined by the
Township Engineer.
B. The paving shall be the same as that specified in Section 12.08.020.C.
for development roads.
A. The minimum right-of-way width shall be 60 feet and the minimum
paved width shall be 40 feet.
B. The paving shall be the same as that specified in Section 12.08.020.B.,
except when soil conditions are such that a stronger pavement is
required.
A. Arterial Streets. The required paving for arterial streets shall be
designed in accordance with New Jersey State Highway Department
design standards, depending on soil conditions, traffic volume, load
limit etc. In no case shall this paving be less than that required for
connector streets.
B. Connector Streets. The required paving for connector streets shall be
six inches of bituminous stabilized base course with two inches of
FABC-1 surface course. Subbase, where required, shall be Type 5, Class
"A" soil aggregate placed at a minimum depth of four inches. A crown of
six inches shall be provided.
C. Feeder Streets, Minor Streets and Dead End Streets. The required
paving for these streets shall be five inches of bituminous stabilized
base course with two inches of FABC-1 surface course. Subbase, where
required, shall be Type 5, Class "A" soil aggregate placed at a minimum
depth of four inches. A crown of six inches shall be provided.
§ 12.04.020 RARITAN CODE § 12.08.020
1.01:244
§ 12.08.030. Drainage Facilities. [Prior code § 10-5.3]
§ 12.08.040. Temporary Cul-De-Sac. [Prior code § 10-5.4]
Where a temporary cul-de-sac is called for in the subdivision plans
presented to the planning board and approved by them, the following
specifications shall govern as to temporary paving.
D. Establishment of Specifications. All paving shall be constructed in strict
accordance with specifications established by the New Jersey State
Highway Department.
E. Approval and Inspection. Before any pavement is placed, the street or
road shall be graded and rolled and approved as to profile and cross
section grades. The subgrade shall be inspected and approved by the
Township Engineer. Any unsuitable subgrade shall be removed and
replaced with the specified subbase as directed by the Township
Engineer.
A. Stormwater Facilities. Provisions shall be made for adequate storm
sewer facilities such as cross drains, runoffs, culverts, ditches, inlets,
headwalls, etc., which will enable stormwater to be transported in such
a manner as not to create a driving hazard, and also to preclude the
possibility of erosion of the roadway or surrounding areas. All drainage
facilities shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Driveway and Drainage Pipes. All driveway pipes and drainage pipes
shall be of cast iron or reinforced concrete. All sizes of pipe are to be
determined in advance of installation and in no case shall a pipe of less
than 12 inches inside diameter be installed.
C. Drainage Ditches. Where drainage ditches are proposed, the top of
bank shall not be less than two feet from the edge of pavement. There
shall be a minimum of six inches at the base of the ditch. All slopes shall
be a maximum of 1 1/2 to one and shall be stabilized in accordance with
requirements established by the New Jersey Soil Conservation Service.
A. The entire temporary cul-de-sac within the normal thirty-foot roadway
shall be paved in the manner listed below. The regular pavement with
normal crown shall stop at the mouth of the temporary cul-de-sac. No
grass center island shall be allowed to remain.
B. The temporary cul-de-sac itself shall be well drained, and preferably the
center shall be dome shaped to direct all surface water to the outside of
the circle. No crown shall be built in the roadway proper around the
temporary cul-de-sac, but a slight drop to the outside of the circle shall
be maintained around the temporary cul-de-sac.
C. The subgrade shall be firm, well-graded and rolled.
§ 12.08.020 CODE ADOPTION § 12.08.040
1.01:245
§ 12.08.050. Date of Acceptance by the Township. [Prior code
§ 10-5.5]
Under no circumstance shall any road system be accepted by the Township
as part of the Township road system in less than 18 months after final
completion of construction.
Chapter 12.12
ROAD MAINTENANCE
§ 12.12.010. Definitions. [Prior code § 3-10.1]
As used in this chapter:
ENGINEER — The Township Engineer of the Township of Raritan.
Roads includes rights-of-way, driftways and dedicated roads which have not
been accepted.
§ 12.12.020. Maintenance Required. [Prior code § 3-10.2]
No person shall keep or maintain any road in the Township which shall
be used for ingress and egress by motor vehicles for more than three
residential dwellings, in such a physical condition as to create a nuisance to
the general public at large who would have occasion to use the road.
§ 12.12.030. Inspection by Engineer; Notice. [Prior code § 3-10.3]
The Township Engineer shall have the right to inspect any road within
the Township, which serves more than three residential dwellings, for the
purpose of determining whether or not the road being used for the ingress
and egress is being maintained in a safe and orderly condition. If the
Engineer determines that the road is not being maintained properly or is
in such a condition as to present a danger of property damage or personal
injury to those who may utilize the road for ingress and egress, then he
D. An eight-inch compacted layer of Clinton Vicinity shale, back-run gravel
or other comparable material shall be installed, graded and rolled
thoroughly.
E. Additional material shall be added if soft spots develop in the temporary
cul-de-sac. The pavement shall carry the loads normal to the projected
use of the developed area.
F. If, within 18 months after the completion of construction, further
extension of the road has not yet commenced, the developer shall then
be required to grade and pave the temporary cul-de-sac, under the
direction of the Township Engineer, according to specifications set forth
for permanent culs-de-sac. Under no circumstance shall a road with a
temporary cul-de-sac be accepted as part of the Township road system.
§ 12.08.040 RARITAN CODE § 12.12.030
1.01:246
or she shall issue a written report to the owner of the lands over which
the road travels and to the users, as can be determined by the Township
Engineer, setting forth in detail those conditions which are determined to
create an unsafe and hazardous condition.
§ 12.12.040. Abatement. [Prior code § 3-10.4]
The owner, owners or users of the road shall make all of the necessary
repairs within seven days of receipt of the written report, eliminating
the unsafe conditions or making such necessary temporary repairs and
improvements as are possible until permanent repairs can be effected.
§ 12.12.050. Reinspection; Complaint for Noncompliance. [Prior
code § 3-10.5]
The Township Engineer shall conduct a reinspection of the premises after
the seven-day period to determine whether or not the unsafe and hazardous
conditions have been removed. If the conditions as set forth in the
Engineer's original report have not been remedied, then the engineer shall
forthwith file a complaint in the Municipal Court against the owners and
users of the road for maintaining a public nuisance by failing to remove or
abate such nuisance.
§ 12.12.060. Violation; Penalty. [Prior code § 3-10.6]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof be subject to penalties as provided in Chapter 1.08.
Each and every day in which a violation exists shall constitute a separate
violation.
Chapter 12.16
SIDEWALK AND CURB SPECIFICATIONS
§ 12.16.010. Sidewalk Specifications. [Prior code § 10-2.1]
The following specifications for sidewalk construction shall be required.
A. Materials. All sidewalk construction shall be of Portland Cement
Concrete. Concrete shall be Class B, as specified in Art. 4.1.2 of the
Standard Specifications, and shall be air-entrained. The materials for
concrete and the materials and methods used for air-entrainment shall
be as specified in Art. 3.12.2 of the aforementioned Standard
Specifications and performed bituminous cellular type and preformed
bituminous type joint fillers shall conform to the requirements specified
respectively therefore in Art. 3.5.31 of the same aforementioned
Standard Specifications.
B. Subgrade. The subgrade for all sidewalks shall be constructed smooth
and even and at the prescribed grade. It shall be compacted by not less
than three passes of a tandem roller (3 1/2 — five tons). Areas
§ 12.12.030 CODE ADOPTION § 12.16.010
1.01:247
inaccessible to a roller shall be compacted by an approved flat-faced
mechanical tamper acceptable to the engineer.
C. Base. All sidewalks shall have a four-inch gravel or cinder base suitably
compacted at the direction of the engineer. The base shall be dampened
prior to placing of the concrete to prevent loss of water to the base and
subgrade.
D. Measurements. All sidewalks shall be four feet wide and four inches
thick and shall be located and constructed as shown on the
"Construction Detail" for concrete sidewalks, which are on file with the
Township Clerk and made a part hereof as though set out in full. All
sidewalks at driveways shall be at least six inches thick.
E. Concrete Work. Preparation of the concrete shall be as specified in Art.
3.12.3 of the Standard Specifications. After being placed, the concrete
shall be tamped, screened and finished to true grade and surface. The
finish shall be made with a wood float, followed by brushing with a wet
soft-hair brush to a neat and workmanlike surface.
F. Joints. Transverse expansion joints, one-half-inch wide, shall be
provided at intervals of not more than 16 feet and filled with preformed
bituminous cellular type joint filler. Longitudinal joints, one-fourth-inch
wide, shall be provided between curbs and abutting sidewalks, and
shall be filled with preformed bituminous type joint filler. The top of all
joint filler material shall be one-fourth-inch below the top of sidewalk.
Transverse surface grooves shall be cut into the sidewalk surface
between expansion joints at intervals equal to the sidewalk width. All
edges shall be neatly rounded with a one-fourth-inch radius.
G. Curing. Sidewalks shall be cured with clear or translucent liquid
compound which shall be applied as soon as the concrete has been
finished. The compound shall be applied in one application at a rate of
one gallon per 200 square feet of surface and in a continuous uniform
film. If the film becomes damaged in any way the contractor shall apply
a new coat of material to the affected areas equal in curing value to that
specified for the original coat. The treated surface shall be protected
from all vehicular and pedestrian traffic for a period of at least three
days.
H. Finishing. Sidewalks shall be finished with a slightly roughened surface
using a wood float or broomed with a hair broom.
Where "Standard Specifications" are mentioned herein, these are the
"Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1961, New Jersey
State Highway Department."
Whenever sidewalks are required to be built in the Township, either as a part
of a major subdivision or otherwise, the specifications aforementioned shall be
utilized.
§ 12.16.010 RARITAN CODE § 12.16.020
1.01:248
§ 12.16.020. Curb Specifications. [Prior code § 10-2.2]
Whenever concrete curbs are required to be built, in the Township, either
as a part of a major subdivision or otherwise, the specifications following
shall be utilized:
A. Materials. Concrete shall be Class B as specified in Art. 4.1.2 of the
standard specifications and shall be air-entrained. Joint filler of the
preformed bituminous cellular type shall conform to the requirements
specified therefore in Art. 8.5.31 of the Standard Specifications. Curing
material of clear or translucent liquid compound shall conform to the
requirements therefore specified in Art. 8.5.29 of the Standard
Specifications.
B. Excavation and Backfill. The foundation for the curb, and backfilling,
shall be well compacted by means of flat-faced mechanical tampers or
by other means approved by the engineer.
C. Driveways and Entrances. Curbs at driveways and entrances shall be
depressed so that the top is two inches above the adjacent pavement or
shoulder surface. The width of opening shall be approved by the
engineer and in no case shall a single opening be wider than 20 feet for
a residence or 40 feet for other uses.
D. Preparation and Placing. Preparation of the concrete shall be as
specified in Art. 3.12.3 of the Standard Specifications except that the
consistency shall be as specified in Art. 4.1.3 of the Standard
Specifications.
1. Wood or metal forms may be used and shall be constructed to
conform to the lines and grades established by the plans, as
approved, except that minor grade and line adjustments shall be
permitted in the field with the prior approval of the engineer. The
materials and methods used for lubricating the forms shall be such
that will not discolor or stain the concrete. Forms shall be removed
when the concrete has hardened sufficiently to be self-supporting
yet in ample time to allow for finishing as hereinafter specified.
2. The concrete shall be tamped and spaded, or vibrated, so that the
forms are completely filled, the concrete is thoroughly compacted
and mortar is flushed to the face and top. The top and face shall be
finished with a wood float to an even, smooth and dense surface to
form a neat and workmanlike appearance.
E. Joints. Expansion joints shall be provided at approximate equal
distances of not more than 20 feet and shall be filled with preformed
bituminous cellular type joint filler, one-half-inch thick, which shall be
inset one-quarter-inch from the top and face. Curb joints shall be neatly
rounded to a one-quarter-inch radius.
F. Curing. Concrete curbs shall be cured with clear or translucent liquid
compound which shall be applied as soon as the concrete has been
§ 12.16.020 CODE ADOPTION § 12.16.020
1.01:249
Chapter 12.20
DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION AND ALTERATION
§ 12.20.010. Permit Required. [Prior code § 10-3.1; amended by
Ord. 86-11]
No driveway or field entrance may be constructed or no existing driveway
or field entrance may be altered within or along an existing or future
Township street, road, or right-of-way without first obtaining a driveway
permit from the Township Engineer on application forms provided for that
purpose and payment of a fee of $20.
No curb shall be removed, altered, modified nor shall any curb be broken
into nor shall any curb be constructed or installed along Township roads
at the edge of the right-of-way lines, except as designed and shown on an
approved major subdivision plan, or if not a part of a major subdivision
without first obtaining a permit from the Township Engineer on application
forms for that purpose and the payment of a fee of $20 and unless a plan
is submitted in accordance with Section 12.20.020 which shall show the
location of the proposed curb, the specifications of the curb in accordance
with the provisions of Section 12.16.020 and the existence of any drainage
improvements, structures or easements. No drainage pipes shall be placed
through a curb to discharge drainage waters onto a Township road.
No change shall be made in the elevation or contour of any lands within the
area of a right-of-way of a Township road by the removal or grading of earth
from the lands to another site without first having obtained a permit from
the Township Engineer.
An application shall be filed in triplicate copies with the Township Engineer
upon forms to be supplied by the clerk.
§ 12.20.020. Approval of Permit; Submission of Plan. [Prior code
§ 10-3.2; amended by Ord. 86-11]
The Township Engineer, in the interest of good planning, will require the
person applying for a driveway permit to submit a plan in sufficient detail
to him or her for his or her approval prior to the issuance of the permit. The
plans shall show or include the following information:
finished. The rate of application and workmanship shall in all ways
agree with the "Curing" portion of the "Specifications for the
Construction of Sidewalks."
G. Existing Curbing. Gradual transitions shall be constructed where
changes in the size or shape of curbs occur in a continuous section.
H. Measurements. All curbs shall be the standard six inches by eight
inches by 20 inches curb with six-inch reveal.
§ 12.16.020 RARITAN CODE § 12.20.020
1.01:250
§ 12.20.030. Requirements. [Prior code § 10-3.3]
All driveways to be constructed or existing driveways to be modified within
Township road rights-of-way shall be constructed or modified in accordance
with the following minimum requirements.
A. A plot or site plan showing the driveway for its entire length and its
relation to the Township road;
B. A profile of the driveway showing existing and proposed centerline
grades and elevations for its entire length;
C. A plan showing the type of storm drainage to be constructed at the
driveway entrance to the Township road, i.e., dish type gutter, pipe or
culvert. Sizes of pipes, culverts and gutters, grades, elevations, typical
cross sections, construction details and any other information deemed
necessary to the proper analysis of the installation shall also be shown.
D. Where a driveway existed on August 12, 1968 and the owner at any
subsequent date decided or decides to improve the existing driveway,
including blacktopping, then the owner shall file an application with the
Township Building Inspector on forms provided for existing driveway
improvements with a fee of $20. The Township Building Inspector shall
inspect the premises and review the application as to the proposed
improvement and if it is his or her determination that the proposed
improvement already complies with the standards of this chapter, then
the Building Inspector shall issue a permit to the applicant. If it is his or
her determination that the proposed improvement will cause an
alteration or modification of the driveway which does not comply with
standards of this chapter, then the applicant will receive written notice
from the Building Inspector to comply with the remaining provisions of
this chapter and submit plans as required as though this was a new
driveway.
A. All driveways shall be constructed or altered so as to slope from the
road right-of-way line toward the edge of the existing shoulder or
traveled way in accordance with the following:
1. For road right-of-way widths greater than 50 feet, the driveway
shall be constructed or modified so that at the point of intersection
of the road right-of-way line and the centerline of the driveway, the
finished grade of the driveway shall be no more than six inches
higher than the centerline elevation of the existing pavement or
traveled way.
2. For road right-of-way widths of 50 feet or less the driveway shall be
constructed or modified so that at the point of intersection of the
road right-of-way line and the centerline of the driveway, the
finished grade of the driveway shall be no more than three inches
higher than the centerline elevation of the existing pavements or
traveled way.
§ 12.20.020 CODE ADOPTION § 12.20.030
1.01:251
B. All driveways constructed or modified within a Township road right-ofway
shall be constructed so as to be perpendicular to the existing
pavements or traveled way. Any curved or angular approach of the
driveway for aesthetical or topographical reasons shall be
accomplished outside of the Township road right-of-way.
C. All driveways constructed or modified within Township road rights-ofway
shall have a minimum driving width of 10 feet with a minimum
radius of five feet each side as it touches the Township paving or
traveled way. They shall be constructed of the same material from the
right-of-way line to the edge of the existing pavement or traveled way.
D. All driveways shall be constructed in such a manner as to prevent
erosion of the soil from them and land behind them. Water and erosion
must be prevented from running on the Township road, filling up road
gutters, catch basins, inlets or pipe drains.
E. All driveways constructed or altered within the Township road right-ofway
shall be constructed in such a manner as not to interfere with the
drainage along the existing pavement or traveled way. Under no
circumstances shall the driveway be allowed to extend beyond the edge
of the existing ditch line at an elevation creating a hump or uneven
driving surface on the pavement or traveled way, or shoulder.
F. The construction of a properly sized dish type gutter will be permitted
provided that the existing Township water flow will not be blocked,
altered or changed in any manner.
G. The installation of a suitable size pipe or culvert will be required in the
event that the existing flow line or ditch cannot be crossed with a dish
type gutter. The size and type of pipe or culvert required shall be
determined by the Township Engineer.
H. All driveways constructed or altered within Township road rights-ofway
shall be constructed of the following materials:
1. Driveways entering unpaved roads: four inches (compacted
thickness) of quarry blend process one and one-half-inch stone
thoroughly rolled and compacted at the specified width.
2. Driveways entering paved roads:
a. Base course: four inches (compacted thickness) quarry blend
process one and one-half-inch stone thoroughly rolled and
compacted.
b. Surface course: one and one-half-inch (compacted thickness) of
bituminous concrete type "A" or type FABC.
3. All materials shall comply with the New Jersey State Highway
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1961 Edition and
all amendments and revisions thereto.
§ 12.20.030 RARITAN CODE § 12.20.030
1.01:252
Chapter 12.24
EXCAVATIONS
§ 12.24.010. Definitions. [Prior code § 10-1.1]
As used in this chapter, words shall have the following meanings:
APPLICANT — Includes applicant's agents, servants, representatives and
any contractors employed by it.
ENGINEER or TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — Refers to the person or persons
employed by the Township to supervise and inspect the progress of the
work.
STREET — Any road, highway, public way, public alley, easement or other
right-of-way accepted or maintained by the Township as a public street, as
well as any state or county road or highway over which the Township has
acquired jurisdiction by agreement.
§ 12.24.020. Permit Required; Emergencies. [Prior code § 10-1.2]
No person shall do any excavating or disturb any street or road surface,
shoulder or bank areas in the Township, including all streets and roads in
private developments not a part of the Township road system at the time of
excavation, but where it is contemplated that application will subsequently
be made to have the streets or roads become a part of the Township road
system, for the purpose of laying, changing, repairing or connecting any
water, gas, sewer pipe or any electric, telephone or telegraph pipes or
conduits, or for any other purpose whatever without first having obtained a
permit from the Township Clerk. In the event of emergency where repairs
must he made immediately and the person charged with the responsibility
for making the repairs would be unduly delayed in seeking a permit, then,
and in that event, the excavation may be made for the purpose of stopping
a leak or interruption in service of the utility. As soon as the leak or
interruption in service has been repaired, and an emergency no longer
exists, the person having made the excavation shall forthwith apply for
a permit and comply with all the other provisions of this chapter. In
emergency matters and in the absence of the Clerk, a permit may be issued
by the Mayor or a member of the Township Committee.
I. Any person violating any provision of this Title which results in damage
to or obstruction of any Township road, gutter, storm drain, ditch, basin,
inlets or culvert shall be responsible for all expenses incurred by the
Township in repairing the damage or removing the obstruction, in
addition to any other penalty provided in this code.
§ 12.20.030 CODE ADOPTION § 12.24.030
1.01:253
§ 12.24.030. Permit Application. [Prior code § 10-1.3]
Any person desiring such permit shall file with the Township Clerk, or
other designated official in the event of emergency, a signed application
containing the following information:
A. The name and address of the applicant;
B. The purpose for which the opening is to be made;
C. A clear description of the location of the proposed opening;
D. Three complete copies of the plans and specifications showing the work
contemplated to be done, and indicating clearly the section of
pavement, shoulder or bank which the applicant desires to open. Three
complete "as-built plans" shall be filed if any changes are made from the
original plans;
E. The length, width and depth of the proposed opening;
F. The outside diameter of all proposed manholes;
G. The distance of the proposed opening from the nearest curb or ditch
line, or edge of pavement where road is paved so that some suitable tiein
for later location purposes be shown;
H. Whenever any of the above requirements cannot be stated with
exactness, the words, "subject to engineer's consent during
construction" shall be used for the information given;
I. The estimated date of commencement and the estimated date of
completion of the proposed work. These estimates can be based on past
experience in doing similar work. In the event of unforeseen
circumstances beyond the control of the applicant may apply for an
extension of the completion date;
J. The approximate cost of backfilling, tamping and repaving work in all
cases where a bond is to be furnished;
K. An agreement in writing to save the Township harmless from any loss,
injury or damage whatsoever resulting from the course of construction,
whether directly or indirectly connected with the work, or from any
negligence or fault of the applicant, its agents, servants,
representatives or contractors in connection with the performance of
the work covered by the plans;
L. Except as provided in Subsection T of Section 12.24.050, relative to
New Jersey Public Utility Corporations, the applicant shall, as a part of
each application, annex thereto a certificate by its liability insurance
carrier acceptable to the Township, showing that he or she, they or it
has liability insurance during the period required for the proposed
improvement in the following minimum amounts:
1. For personal injury to one person, $100,000,
§ 12.24.030 RARITAN CODE § 12.24.030
1.01:254
§ 12.24.040. Fees. [Prior code § 10-1.4]
The applicant shall pay to the Clerk upon filing its application a fee of $2
for each excavation applied for. The fees so paid shall be turned over to the
Township for general purposes.
§ 12.24.050. Rules and Regulations. [Prior code § 10-1.5; amended
by Ord. 98-42]
The following rules and regulations shall apply:
2. For personal injury for one accident, $300,000,
3. For property damage, $50,000;
M. Except as provided in Subsection T of Section 12.24.050, relative to
New Jersey Public Utility Corporations, the applicant shall, as a part of
each application, annex thereto a certificate showing that the applicant
is covered by workmen's compensation during the period required for
the proposed improvement;
N. The application is to be filed with the Clerk in sufficient time to provide
a forty-eight-hour notice to the Township Engineer so that inspection of
the project may be arranged for.
A. The applicant shall keep all openings and all excavated material
properly guarded and shall place and maintain warning lights thereon
of adequate nature to warn the public from one hour before sunset to
one hour after sunrise. No greater portion of the street, road, shoulder
or bank shall be left open at any one time in excess of 500 lineal feet.
B. If at any time during the course of the work, the engineer in his or her
judgment deems that adequate traffic control is not being maintained
by the applicant, the Township may take such steps as are necessary in
the judgment of the engineer to maintain adequate traffic control and
the cost thereof shall be charged to such sums on deposit in the same
manner as set forth for the making of corrections in the work and as
though the charges were for corrections in the work. No refunds shall
be made out of any deposits which may have been charged until the
applicant has restored the amount of the charges.
C. The applicant shall pay to the Township the amount charged by the
engineer, or his or her representative, in accordance with their salary
rate, as permitted by the Municipal Land Use Law of the state of New
Jersey, N.J.S. 50:55d-1 et seq.
D. All work performed must be done within the time specified by the
engineer or the inspector. If the applicant shall backfill the opening and
temporarily pave the surface thereon within the time set forth in the
permit the applicant shall thereupon be refunded 50% of its cash
deposit for that permit. For each calendar day after the date set forth in
the permit for completion of such backfill and temporary pavement that
§ 12.24.030 CODE ADOPTION § 12.24.050
1.01:255
the applicant shall be in default of such backfill and temporary
pavement to the satisfaction of the engineer, such refund shall be
reduced by 1% of the deposit. Within two months of the completion of
the temporary pavement above referred to, the applicant shall complete
the final paving, provided that if the two months terminates between
the first day of December and the first day of the following April,
then the date for completing the final paving shall be extended to
April 15th. On completion of such final pavement to the satisfaction
of the engineer, the applicant shall be refunded 50% of its deposit
for that permit. For each calendar day after such date for completing
final pavement that the applicant shall be in default of completing it
to the satisfaction of the Engineer, such refund shall be reduced by
1% of the deposit. Any funds withheld by way of reduction of refunds
shall become the property of Raritan Township and shall not thereafter
be refunded. The Engineer may extend the date for completion of
the temporary paving or for completion of the final paving, or both,
in cases in which in his or her judgment he or she considers such
extension justifiable, and any reduction in refund shall then date from
such extended date.
E. If dust, dirt or other detrimental material continue to arise as a result of
the work or neglect of the applicant, its agents, contractors or
representatives, or if a nuisance is, in the opinion of the engineer,
caused by the actions of any of the parties, the engineer may stop the
work until the situation complained of is eliminated. The Engineer may
direct that suitable amounts of calcium chloride or other dust settling
material be used as may be required.
Streets and paved surfaces must be kept broom clean. If dust persists
streets may be required to be hosed clean.
F. No blasting shall be allowed unless permitted by the Township
Engineer. Work shall be so conducted so as not to interfere with the
existing utilities, water mains, sewer lines, gas pipes or electrical
conduits, or the service connections thereof, and in case of injury to any
such utility, it shall be the duty of the applicant, at its own expense, to
properly repair or replace the same. The applicant shall not at any time
come closer than three feet to any trunk line water pipe without the
permission of the engineer. Such pipe shall be protected or temporarily
supported as directed by the Engineer.
Wherever the construction work passes under a service line of water,
sewer lines, gas pipes, electrical conduits or the service connections
thereof, the applicant shall cause, where the Engineer shall deem
necessary, the same to be temporarily supported by a brace extended
six inches or more into the solid earth on each side of the trench
and extending the full width of the roof. The brace so used shall be
of such material and placed as directed by the Engineer, and may be
removed when backfill has been satisfactorily placed each side of the
brace. No excavation shall be made which in the opinion of a competent
nurseryman will damage shade trees.
§ 12.24.050 RARITAN CODE § 12.24.050
1.01:256
G. In placing backfill, the applicant or his contractor shall use a
mechanical or vibrating tamping machine. Six inches to 12 inches of
backfill shall be tamped as directed by the Engineer. Whenever the
engineer considers the excavated material unsuitable for backfill, the
applicant shall backfill the trench with sand or bank run gravel, or such
other material as the Engineer may direct, acceptably compressed as
directed.
H. On unimproved roads and shoulders, the backfill shall be brought up to
within seven inches of the existing surface grade. There shall then be
placed six inches of two and one-half crushed stone ballast which shall
be bound up with Grade "B" screenings and thoroughly compacted. The
top one inch shall be three-quarters inch crushed stone quarry blended
with sufficient fines to make a tight, stable surface.
I. On banks and slopes of improved or unimproved Township roads or
grass sidewalk areas, the topsoil shall be saved and carefully replaced
after the trench has been tamped properly and settled completely. The
topsoil shall be replaced after final settlement, shall be raked evenly
and shall have rye grass seed sown thereon, or other means satisfactory
to prevent erosion of slopes and banks. The applicant or his or her
contractor may bring in sod in order to restore slopes, banks or
sidewalk area to a satisfactory condition.
J. Where a street was previously paved, the pavement shall be placed on
backfill as required by Subsection G above. The type of paving shall
conform to Chapter 12.08 if the same is within a private development or
shall conform to Chapter 12.04 if located along a Township road.
Should the existing pavement be of greater thickness or of superior
materials than that specified in Chapters 12.04 or 12.08, then the new
pavement shall be equal to the existing pavement.
K. The existing black-top pavement shall be cut in a straight line prior to
any excavation being made. Excavation shall only be allowed between
the cuts so made. If the edge of the excavation is ragged or zigzag when
it comes time to repave the street or shoulder, then the street pavement
shall be cut out in a straight line as directed by the Township Engineer,
parallel to the line of the excavated trench in a width sufficient to
straighten out any rough edges and the entire area shall then be
repaved.
L. Pending the actual repaving operation stated above, the contractor
shall use a temporary fill over the trench of such material as may be
directed by the engineer to the end that no loose stones, mud or dirt
may impede the flow of traffic. The Engineer may at any time require
any irregularity in the surface to be immediately taken care of.
M. The applicant assumes the responsibility of refilling the trench as it may
sink from time to time, and keeping it level with the balance of the
pavement. The applicant shall supply the name, address and telephone
number of the representative of the person doing the work so that
§ 12.24.050 CODE ADOPTION § 12.24.050
1.01:257
notice of settling or potholes in any trench of the applicant, verified
by the police department, may be made to the applicant's agent
immediately after verification.
N. After repavement the applicant shall be under the duty of maintaining
the trench for a period of 18 calendar months, and assume the
responsibility of refilling the trench as it may sink, as directed by the
Engineer, and in case of undue settlement, may be required to open the
trench to ascertain the cause of the undue settlement and to remedy the
same as required by the Engineer.
O. Upon the failure of the applicant to comply with any of these
requirements, the Township may do the necessary repairs and
replacements and charge the same to the applicant.
P. In cases where it becomes necessary to resort to tunneling operations
to reach the point of connection with the main line, the backfill in such
tunnel shall be of rammed soil composed of a mixture by volume of one
part cement to six parts of coarse aggregate material such as sand or
bankrun gravel.
Q. Surplus material such as broken up concrete or excavated material
shall be disposed of by the applicant by placing the same at any point
within the Township specified by the engineer within one mile of the
project, and it shall be the duty of the applicant to dump and grade, if
necessary, the material as directed by the Engineer. If the Township
does not require the material within one mile of the project, the
applicant must dispose of it in a satisfactory location.
R. The applicant shall deposit with the clerk the sum of $50 with each
application for each opening to be made in the road pavement, shoulder
or bank. A maximum continuous opening of not more than five feet in
length may be made under such deposit. If the proposed excavation is
for more than a single hole of up to five feet in length, the sum of $10
per lineal foot of the opening applied for shall be deposited; but in no
case less than $500, the payment to be made five days before the
beginning of any work or the moving of any equipment or material to
the site of the proposed opening.
S. For house connections the deposit shall be $50 for each opening,
regardless of the type of pavement or the length of the ditch.
T. The applicant may in lieu of a cash deposit submit a surety bond which,
upon approval of the Township Committee, shall have the same force
and effect as a cash bond. The bond shall by its terms provide for
payment of any damages by or from the acts of the applicant, its agents,
servants or subcontractors, and save the Township harmless from any
suits at law or otherwise which may result from damages sustained by
any persons or property as a result directly or indirectly of the work
performed under the permit. Public utility corporations of the State of
New Jersey may file a corporate bond on a yearly basis in an amount of
$5,000 in lieu of cash or construction bonds.
§ 12.24.050 RARITAN CODE § 12.24.050
1.01:258
Chapter 12.28
TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE OPERATIONS
§ 12.28.010. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highway; Adopted by Reference. [Prior code § 7-10; amended by
Ord. 88-29]
The Township Committee finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur when traffic must be moved through or around road or street
construction maintenance operations, and utility work, above or below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal
flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous
when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health,
safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and
regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement of traffic for the
work forces performing these operations.
The Township adopts the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, 1978 edition with appropriate updates, hereafter known as
M.U.T.C.D., except as supplemented and amended by this chapter, as it
controls and regulates whenever construction, maintenance operations or
utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor,
or utility, who fails to comply with the provisions of the M.U.T.C.D. while
performing such work is in violation of this chapter.
§ 12.28.020. Pre-Construction Meetings. [Prior code § 7-10.1;
amended by Ord. 88-29]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor or public utility,
wishing to conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the
Chief of Police or his or her designated representative or Township
Engineer in order to arrange a pre-construction meeting in order to submit
plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of construction
work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section
prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not approved by the
office of the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative or the
Township Engineer is in violation of this section.
U. All street or road surfaces so restored shall be subject to final release
and acceptance in writing by the Township Engineer. No deposit money
shall be returned nor bond released until 18 months after the
completion of the project and its acceptance by the Township Engineer,
and then only upon the above written certification by the Township
Engineer that the work has remained in a satisfactory condition for the
18 months.
§ 12.24.050 CODE ADOPTION § 12.28.030
1.01:259
§ 12.28.030. Emergency Contact Telephone Numbers. [Prior code
§ 7-10.2; amended by Ord. 88-29]
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the police department with
at least two emergency contact telephone numbers to be called in case
of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to
the start of any work. If, for any reason, emergency contacts cannot be
reached, or if the emergency contact person does not respond to a call
from the police department to correct a hazardous condition, the Township
may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for
such emergency services by the Township shall be charged to the person,
contractor or utility responsible for such condition.
§ 12.28.040. Road Closings and Detours. [Prior code § 7-10.3;
amended by Ord. 88-29]
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
in advance by the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative and
Township Engineer.
§ 12.28.050. Traffic Directors. [Prior code § 7-10.4; amended by
Ord. 88-29]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Chief of Police or his or her designated
representative that same is necessary to provide for the safe and
expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 12.28.060. Violations; Penalties. [Prior code § 7-10.5; amended by
Ord. 88-29]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense pay a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days. For a second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay
a fine of not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned in the County Jail for a
term not exceeding 90 days. For a third or subsequent conviction pay a fine
of not less than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 12.32
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 12.28.030 RARITAN CODE § 12.32.010
1.01:260
§ 12.32.010. Removal From Sidewalks. [Prior code § 10-7.1;
amended by Ord. 93-17]
The owner of any premises abutting or bordering on any street in the
Township, including streets in developments (such as planned residential
developments) upon which neighboring parties or the public may travel,
shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks of the street
actually used by the public or, in the event of ice which may be so frozen as
to make removal impractical, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered
with sand, within 12 hours of daylight after the same shall fall or be formed
thereon.
§ 12.32.020. Removal From Business Premises. [Prior code § 10-7.2;
amended by Ord. 93-17]
The owner of premises used by the public or business invitees shall remove
all snow and ice from the sidewalks, streets, rights-of-way and parking areas
used by the public in the transaction of business thereat and, in the event of
ice which may be so frozen as to make removal impractical, shall cause the
ice to be thoroughly covered with sand, within 12 hours of daylight after the
same shall fall or be formed thereon.
§ 12.32.030. Depositing of Snow or Ice. [Prior code § 10-7.3]
No owner of premises abutting on any street in the Township shall deposit
snow or ice on any street, it being the intent and purpose of this provision to
prohibit all persons from depositing snow and ice which accumulates on the
private property belonging to that person on the sidewalks or streets within
the Township.
§ 12.32.040. Authority to Remove; Costs; Lien. [Prior code § 10-7.4;
amended by Ord. 93-17]
In case the snow or ice is not removed from the sidewalks or is deposited
upon the sidewalks or streets by the owner of any premises, it shall be
removed under the direction of the Supervisor of the Road Department of
the Township or other officer having charge of the streets in the Township,
and the cost or expense paid and incurred by the Township shall be certified
by the Supervisor to the Township Committee. Upon review by the Township
Committee, the certification shall be forwarded to the tax collector of
the Township, and such costs shall be charged against the real estate
abutting or bordering upon these sidewalks, and the amount so charged
shall become a tax lien in the same manner as the taxes next to be levied
upon the premises and shall bear interest and be collected by the same
officers and in the same manner as other taxes.
§ 12.32.050. Collection of Costs. [Prior code § 10-7.5]
The imposition of a penalty for violation of any other provisions of this
chapter shall not constitute any bar to the right of the Township to collect
§ 12.32.010 CODE ADOPTION § 12.32.050
1.01:261
the costs, as certified, for the removal of snow or ice in the manner herein
authorized.
§ 12.32.060. Enforcement. [Prior code § 10-7.6; amended by Ord.
93-17]
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by officers of the Township
Police Department, the Township Department of Public Works personnel,
the Township Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Township Building Subcode
Official and such other designated officer of the Township.
§ 12.32.070. Violations; Penalties. [Prior code § 10-7.7; amended by
Ord. 93-17]
Any person, corporation or entity who violates or neglects to comply with
any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by a fine not to exceed $1,000, and/or by imprisonment for up to 90 days,
and/or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the court. Each and every day that such a violation continues
shall be considered a separate and specific violation of this chapter.
Chapter 12.36
NEWSRACKS
§ 12.36.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 87-16]
§ 12.36.020. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 87-16]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — The person responsible for placing, erecting, maintaining
or operating a newsrack on a public right-of-way.
A. The unmonitored placement of newsracks on public sidewalks and in
public rights-of-way may present an inconvenience and danger to the
safety and welfare of persons using such rights-of-way, including
pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles and buildings, and
persons performing essential utility, traffic control and emergency
services.
B. Newsracks so located cause an inconvenience or danger to persons
using public rights-of-way, and unsightly newsracks located therein
constitute public nuisances.
C. The provisions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of
and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health and
general welfare of persons in the Township in their use of public rightsof-
way.
§ 12.32.050 RARITAN CODE § 12.36.020
1.01:262
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the
United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law.
NEWSRACK — Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit
or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers only.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designated or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes,
and shall include but not be limited to roadways, parkways, alleys and
sidewalks.
§ 12.36.030. Registration Required. [Amended by Ord. 87-16]
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place, maintain
or operate on any public street or public sidewalk, or in any other public
way or place, in the Township any newsrack(s) without first, or within 10
days after such erection, placement, maintenance or operation, filing an
application for registration of such newsracks(s) with Township Clerk.
§ 12.36.040. Registration Procedure; Renewals; Fees. [Amended by
Ord. 87-16]
The application for registration of newsrack(s) shall be made, in writing,
to the Township Clerk, on forms approved by the Township Committee and
available through the Clerk's office. The application shall contain the name
and address of the applicant, the specific location of each newsrack(s),
and such other pertinent information as may be required to carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
Newsrack(s) may be installed without prior inspection of the location by the
municipality, but such newsrack(s) and the installation, use or maintenance
thereof shall be conditioned upon the observance of the provisions of this
chapter.
Fees as hereinafter set forth shall be paid for the initial application and on
each yearly renewal to offset the cost of application processing, compliance
inspections and enforcement.
A. An initial application fee of $30 which shall cover the registration of as
many newsracks as the applicant has listed in their initial application.
Such application and registration of the newsrack(s) shall be valid for a
period of one year beginning June 1st and then expiring on May 31st of
the following year.
§ 12.36.020 CODE ADOPTION § 12.36.040
1.01:263
§ 12.36.050. Location and Placement. [Amended by Ord. 87-16]
Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, or on any portion of
a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a
public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this
section;
B. Thereafter, each year that the newsrack(s) registration is renewed, an
annual renewal fee of $15 shall be paid to cover the registration of as
many newsrack(s) as included in the renewal application. In addition,
the renewal application shall contain a certification that all newsrack(s)
have been inspected and comply with this chapter. The renewal
application shall specify the number and location of each additional or
deleted newsrack(s).
A. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or
over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly
or in part upon, on or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street.
B. No newsrack shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public
sidewalk, when such installation, use or maintenance:
1. Endangers the safety of persons or property; or
2. Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle;
or
3. Unreasonably interferes with the ingress to or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
4. Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals, or
hydrants permitted at or near the location.
C. Newsrack(s) shall not be chained, bolted or otherwise secured or
affixed to or in the appurtenant land of the public right-of-way, but may
be secured or affixed to an adjoining newsrack(s) by separate
agreement with the owner of such newsrack(s).
D. Newsracks of different newspapers may be placed next to each other,
provided that no group of newsracks shall extend for a distance of more
than 10 feet along a curb.
E. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
1. Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;
2. Within 10 feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
3. Within 10 feet of any fire hydrant, and within five feet of a fire call
box, police call box or other emergency facility;
4. Within five feet of any driveway;
§ 12.36.040 RARITAN CODE § 12.36.050
1.01:264
§ 12.36.060. Installation and Maintenance. [Amended by Ord.
87-16]
Any newsrack which, in whole or in part, rests upon or over any public
sidewalk or right-of-way as permitted herein, shall comply with the
following standards:
5. At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet;
6. Within 100 feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the
street in the same block containing the same issue or edition of the
same publication;
7. Facing the public roadway in such a way that a motorist could stop
their vehicle and secure a newspaper without leaving the vehicle.
A. No newsrack shall exceed 50 inches in height, 24 inches in width or 22
inches in thickness.
B. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
newspaper sold therein.
C. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in
the event the newsrack door does not open. The coin-return
mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.
D. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the name
and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working
telephone service to call to report a malfunction, or to secure a refund
in the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism, or to secure
a refund in the event the newsrack was empty; or to give the notices
provided for in this chapter.
E. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times, and shall be serviced so that:
1. It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof;
2. It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon;
3. The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free
of cracks, dents, blemishes and discolorations;
4. The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peelings or fading.
§ 12.36.050 CODE ADOPTION § 12.36.060
1.01:265
§ 12.36.070. Violation; Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 87-16]
Any person or persons, firms, partnership, association or corporation or
employee thereof who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500.
Inspections and enforcement of this chapter shall be made by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
Chapter 12.40
SIGNS AND NOTICES ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 12.40.010. Posting on Public Property Prohibited. [Prior code
§ 3-12.1; amended by Ord. 92-9]
No person, firm or corporation shall paint, place upon or in, or affix to any
structure or other object located within the limits of any Township right-ofway,
or upon any public building, property or structure, any words, device,
political literature, trademark, advertisement, sign or notice not permitted
or required by law to be so posted.
§ 12.40.020. Posting on Private Property Restricted. [Prior code
§ 3-12.2; amended by Ord. 92-9]
No sign shall be erected, posted or placed on private property by the
owner of such property unless it is done so in strict accordance with the
provisions of the sign ordinances of the Township, or if posted, erected or
placed on such private property, by a person other than the owner, only if
such posting, placement or erection is permitted by the ordinances of the
Township and its strict compliance therewith. The owner of the property
and the person posting such signs shall be responsible for compliance with
all sign regulations of the Township.
§ 12.40.030. Posting on Utility Structures Prohibited. [Prior code
§ 3-12.3; amended by Ord. 92-9]
Signs and notices of any nature posted on fire hydrants, public telephone
booths, public utility poles or similar public fixtures are expressly
prohibited.
5. The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
Should inspection determine a failure to adhere to the maintenance of a
newsrack(s) as required herein, the registered applicant shall be given a
written notice to cure the defect within 15 days of receipt of such notice,
otherwise a summons for violation of this chapter shall be issued.
§ 12.36.060 RARITAN CODE § 12.40.040
1.01:266
§ 12.40.040. Removal by Township Officials. [Prior code § 3-12.4;
amended by Ord. 92-9]
The person, firm or corporation, by posting any sign or notice which does
not comply with this chapter or the sign ordinances of the Township by
the posting, placing or erection of such notice or sign in violation of these
ordinances hereby grants to the Township Police Department, Public Works
Department and Zoning Enforcement Official, the right to remove such sign
or notice.
§ 12.40.050. Removal by Violator; Signs as Evidence. [Prior code
§ 3-12.5; amended by Ord. 92-9]
Any person apprehended violating this chapter shall be given the
opportunity to remove such illegal signs, which, and the facts of such
and compliance or noncompliance, shall be admissible as evidence in the
prosecution of the violation.
§ 12.40.060. Each Sign to Be a Separate Offense. [Prior code
§ 3-12.6; amended by Ord. 92-9]
The erection, posting or placing of each individual sign or notice shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 12.40.070. Violations; Penalties. [Prior code § 3-12.7; amended by
Ord. 92-9; Ord. 98-42]
Any person, firm or corporation that violates the provisions of this chapter
shall be penalized in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.08.
Chapter 12.44
STREET AND BUILDING NUMBERS
§ 12.44.010. Purpose and Intent. [Amended by Ord. 13-4]
The purpose of this chapter shall be to require the clear display of building
numbers for all properties that contain principal buildings within the
Township in order to assist the authorities and the general public in
identifying properties in case of emergency as well as for the welfare of
the general public in conducting their normal affairs pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:67-1 et seq. Any changes made pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall be reflected on the appropriate municipal tax and building numbering
maps for inclusion in the 9-1-1 address system.
§ 12.44.020. Establishment of Numbers. [Amended by Ord. 13-4]
The Tax Assessor and 9-1-1 Coordinator are authorized to establish
numbers for all buildings, suites, apartments, structures and vacant lots
within the Township. The Tax Assessor and 9-1-1 Coordinator shall give
due regard to the need for a logical and uniform sequence of number
§ 12.40.040 CODE ADOPTION § 12.44.020
1.01:267
assignments along the streets and roads of the Township. All properties
which now or hereafter have frontage on or access to any street shall
be plotted on the official tax map of the municipality. Each property with
frontage on or access to any street shall be assigned an official property
number except where one or more buildings or lots are located on an
unnamed private road, lane or way having access to a street. In that
situation only one official number shall be assigned and it shall be based
upon the number which describes the location of the access point on the
street. If more than one occupied building exists, each building shall be
known by the street number assigned followed by a letter of the alphabet
said letters of the alphabet to be assigned sequentially. Official property
numbers shall proceed from a logical point of origin and shall be in proper
numerical sequence in relation to the numbers assigned to other lots with
access to the same street. New streets will follow west to east numbering
and south to north numbering. Odd numbers will be on the left side and
even numbers will be on the right side starting from low to high. This shall
be the initial assignment of numbers. Every effort will be made to follow
these procedures. The number 13 will not be used. If circumstances dictate
the change of the numbering format from its natural sequence it will be
reviewed on an individual basis with agreement from the 9-1-1 Coordinator
and the Tax Assessor.
§ 12.44.030. Responsibility of Owner and Tenant. [Amended by Ord.
13-4]
The owner and tenant of any property or structure shall be responsible for
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. The owner and tenant
shall install and maintain the identification numbers and other property
identification required by this chapter so as to be clearly visible and
unobstructed at all times.
§ 12.44.040. General Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 13-4]
The following regulations shall apply to all identification numbers installed
in order to provide the greatest degree of identification of the property so
as to assist any persons thereon:
A. Identification numbers for residential homes and single businesses
shall be no less than four inches in height and made of durable and
clearly visible material. The identification numbers shall be installed on
the front of the structure approximately six to eight feet from the
ground so as to be clearly visible. Identification numbers shall also be
installed at the driveway entrance to the property.
B. Identification numbers for large commercial, industrial or residential
properties where several buildings are present shall be placed on a
placard 18 inches by 18 inches with the numbers filling the placard. The
design of the placard shall be compatible with the design of the
building. The placard shall be installed on the front of the structure
approximately six to eight feet from the ground so as to be clearly
§ 12.44.020 RARITAN CODE § 12.44.040
1.01:268
§ 12.44.050. Compliance Required for Issuance of Occupancy
Certificate. [Amended by Ord. 13-4]
No original certificate of occupancy or continued certificate of occupancy
shall be issued for any structure in the Township unless the property and
structure is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 12.44.060. Enforcement; Violations and Penalties. [Amended by
Ord. 13-4]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Township of Raritan 9-1-1 Coordinator,
Bureau of Fire Safety, Planning Department and Police Department. In the
event that there is a violation of this chapter, a Notice of Violation shall be
issued providing the owner or tenant of the property a period of 15 days
to cure the violation. In the event that the violation has not been cured
within this period, a summons may be issued to the owner or tenant of the
property returnable in the Township of Raritan Municipal Court for violating
this chapter. Each day after the fifteen-day cure period that the violation
continues unabated shall be considered a separate and distinct violation of
this chapter. Upon conviction of violating this chapter, a fine of $100 per
violation shall be assessed, plus applicable court costs.
Chapter 12.48
OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 12.48.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 94-15]
As used in this chapter:
OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION AREAS — Any property which is located
in Raritan Township and dedicated to or owned by the Township and which
is dedicated, used or held-out for open space and active or passive
visible. Identification numbers shall also be installed at the driveway
entrance or access road to the property.
C. Identification numbers shall be of reflective material or of sufficient
visible contrast to the background material to be easily discernable at
night with the aid of an emergency vehicle spotlight. The identification
numbers shall be clearly visible at all times unobstructed by trees,
shrubs, vegetation or otherwise.
D. Identification numbers shall be installed at the driveway or access road
to any property wherein a principal structure is being constructed.
E. In addition to the foregoing requirements, properties and structures
with multiple entrance points shall be labeled as required by the 9-1-1
Coordinator for emergency response purposes. The 9-1-1 Coordinator
shall assess such properties and structures on an individual basis so as
not to over label the properties or structures.
§ 12.44.040 CODE ADOPTION § 12.48.010
1.01:269
recreation purposes and which is open to the public either without charge
or on a fee-basis. The term includes, but is not limited to, playgrounds,
parks, ballfields, nature education facilities, and any paths, roadways,
sidewalks and parking areas therein or adjacent thereto.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Raritan, county of Hunterdon, state of New
Jersey.
§ 12.48.020. Hours of Operation. [Amended by Ord. 94-15; Ord.
2016-16]
Except as otherwise posted, all open space and recreation areas shall open
at 7:00 a.m. in the forenoon and shall close in the evening. Closing times
will vary with the seasons and will be posted in the particular open space/
recreation area, but in no event shall closing be later than 10:00 p.m.
No person shall enter upon or remain within an open space or recreation
area except during its hours of operation, except that any person who is
authorized pursuant to the Raritan Township Wildlife Management Program
may have access to his or her designated property according to the Wildlife
Management Program in effect at the time.
§ 12.48.030. Rules and Regulations. [Amended by Ord. 94-15; Ord.
96-34; Ord. 00-31; Ord. 06-37; Ord. 2016-16]
A. The following rules and regulations are established and shall apply to
all open space and recreation areas in the Township:
1. No person shall damage, deface, cut, carve, transplant or remove
any tree or plant or injure the bark, pick the flowers, fruits, berries
or seeds, of any tree or plant, nor shall any person attach any rope,
wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant, except that a
treestand may be permitted on certain properties as designated
and authorized by the Township Committee in connection with the
Township of Raritan Wildlife Management Program to be adopted
by Resolution of the Raritan Township Committee, as such
Resolution may be amended from time to time.
2. No person shall mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or
displace or remove any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace,
railing, paving or paving material, water line or other public
utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, sign, notice or placard,
whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post or other
boundary marker, or other structure or equipment, facilities or
property or appurtenances whatsoever.
3. No person shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or caused to
be placed in the waters or streams any substance, matter or thing,
liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said
waters.
4. No person shall bring in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles,
broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
§ 12.48.010 RARITAN CODE § 12.48.030
1.01:270
garbage or refuse or other trash. All such items shall be placed
in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where
receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be
carried away from the open space and recreation area by the
person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of
elsewhere.
5. No person shall possess, use or consume any alcoholic beverage or
controlled dangerous substance or related paraphernalia, as such
terms are defined in New Jersey Statutes.
6. No person shall allow a dog, cat or other animal to run at large. All
such animals shall be restrained at all times on adequate leashes
not greater than six feet in length. All persons bringing such
animals to the open space and recreation areas shall have in their
possession at all times, appropriate sanitary means, including but
not limited to shovels or other implements and containers, or
disposal bags, and such person shall immediately remove and
dispose of all feces or droppings deposited by the dog or other
animal. Horses shall be allowed only on trails or other areas
specifically designated for horseback riding. No animals are
permitted on any designated playing field at any time.
7. No person shall bring into, carry or have in his or her possession,
use or discharge any firearm or weapon, as defined in N.J.S.
2C:39-1(r), or as may be amended, unless the firearm or weapon is
being used in accordance with the Township of Raritan wildlife
management program to be adopted by a resolution of the Raritan
Township Committee, as such resolution may be amended from
time to time.
8. No person shall bring into, carry or have in his or her possession,
use, set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or bum, any
firecracker, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives or
inflammable material, except as previously authorized by
resolution of the Township Committee.
9. No person shall ignite or attempt to ignite a fire except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated. No such
fires shall be ignited or attempted to be ignited except in a camp
stove or fireplace provided for that purpose at that time.
10. No person shall engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive,
insulting or indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct
or behavior tending to cause a breach of the public peace.
11. No person shall ride a bicycle or roller blades without reasonable
regard for the safety of others, nor shall any person ride a bicycle
or roller blades on any playing field or playing surface.
12. No owner or driver of a motor vehicle shall cause the vehicle to
stand or park anywhere outside designated parking spaces.
§ 12.48.030 CODE ADOPTION § 12.48.030
1.01:271
13. No person shall operate or use within the open space or
recreational areas, any all-terrain vehicles (ATV's), four-wheelers/
three-wheelers, skateboards, mini-bikes, dirt-bikes, snowmobiles
or other such type vehicles, except for Township authorized
vehicles.
14. No person shall enter or leave any open space or recreational area
except through established entrance or exit ways, or as directed by
the Superintendent of the Raritan Township Department of Public
Works.
15. No person shall interfere with or fail to obey any Police Officer,
Park Ranger, Animal Control Officer or open space and recreational
area personnel in the proper performance of their duties.
16. Persons and organizations may reserve a facility within an open
space or recreation area for limited specific use on forms available
through the Township. Such reservation and permission to use the
facility shall be in the sole discretion and continuing jurisdiction of
the Township, and subject to the rules and regulations imposed
herein and such other conditions related to public health, safety
and well-being imposed by the Township. Fees paid to reserve an
area are nonrefundable unless the Township deems the
cancellation of activities on any field or facility is necessary due to
weather conditions or otherwise, or to protect the public health,
safety and welfare, and to prevent harm to life or property.
The reserving party assumes all risk arising from inclement
weather or cancellations of any kind. If the Township does not
cancel a reservation, the reserving party shall use its best
judgment concerning cancellations due to inclement weather.
Under no circumstances may any person or persons operate a
business from an open space or recreational facility without the
express, written approval of the Township Committee.
17. All groups using fields shall remove their personal property,
including but not limited to, bases and other equipment. The
Township shall not be responsible for personal property left
unattended.
18. Any trash generated by members of a group or an organization
must be removed and/or deposited in the trash receptacles at the
site.
19. Proper use of fields and/or facilities is required. Any damage or
alteration of the same, other than from normal use, shall be
considered a violation of these rules and regulations and shall be
prosecuted as such, in addition to reimbursing the Township for
repairs of all damage and related costs. Any type of golf activity,
such as but not limited to driving golf balls, is prohibited.
§ 12.48.030 RARITAN CODE § 12.48.030
1.01:272
20. Parking of motor vehicles shall only be in parking lots at each
facility specifically designated for such use. No vehicles are to be
parked or driven on any turf area or areas designated for other
specific activities, except for Township authorized vehicles and as
allowed by the Superintendent of the Raritan Township
Department of Public Works.
21. Facility reservation and permitting:
a. A permit issued by the Township is required for all organized
use and reservation of facilities as defined below. All groups
and organizations must obtain a permit prior to using the
facility. The permit must be on hand and available for
inspection by appropriate Township personnel while the
facility is in use. Failure to follow these procedures will be
cause for removal from the facility.
i. Organized use includes, but is not limited to, facilities that
will be used by teams or organizations for practices,
games, social gatherings and other passive or active
recreational use.
b. Parties interested in a permit for the use of the pavilion at
Minebrook Park are to contact the Flemington-Raritan Joint
Recreation Committee. The use of all other facilities shall fall
under the jurisdiction of the Township Public Works
Department.
c. Any and all use of facilities for events intended to entertain
persons, including but not limited to, carnivals, races, festivals,
concerts and the like which are open to the general public and
where the attendance will exceed the number of persons
normally permitted at the recreational facility will be required
to apply for a Public Assembly License in accordance with
Code Section 8.28.
d. A certificate of insurance as proof of current liability coverage
must be provided, except in the case of individuals or family
users who shall execute a waiver of liability to the Township in
lieu of providing a certificate. Said insurance certificate must
include:
i. Liability limits of $1,000,000 for each occurrence for
personal injury and bodily injury/property damage.
ii. It must indicate that athletic participation liability
coverage is included for use of the Township facilities.
iii. Raritan Township must be specifically named as an
additional insured.
§ 12.48.030 CODE ADOPTION § 12.48.030
1.01:273
§ 12.48.040. Reservation Fees. [Amended by Ord. 94-15; Ord. 97-9;
Ord. 06-37; Ord. 07-5]
In order to qualify for the residency fee teams or leagues, as the case may
be, must provide a certified roster that is comprised of at least a minimum
of 75% residents from Raritan Township and/or Flemington Borough.
Organized teams from Hunterdon Central Regional High School and the
Flemington-Raritan School District are considered Township organizations
when determining fees for field use.
iv. It must indicate that the user's policies will be primary for
the additional insured.
22. Failure to comply with these rules and regulations, in addition to
any other penalties provided herein, will deny the person or group
the right to reserve or use facilities in the future.
23. No person making use of any open space or recreational area shall
do, perform or engage in or encourage others to do, perform or
engage in any act or activity that is prohibited by the laws of the
State of New Jersey or ordinance of the Township.
24. No person or persons shall at any time engage in ice hockey, roller
hockey, or operate remote controlled model airplanes in any open
space or municipal parks in the Township.
25. Smoking or the use of tobacco products is prohibited in all
recreation areas and municipal parks in the Township.
A. Baseball, Softball and Soccer Fields. The following fees are on a
seasonal or per field/per game or use basis with a 2.5 hour maximum
time limit per game:
Location Resident Non-Resident
Lenape Park $15 per game/$300
per season
$100 per
game/$2,000 per
season
Minebrook Park $15 per game/$300
per season
$30 per game/$600
per season
B. Basketball.
1. Township residents or organizations:
$5 per court per game with a two-hour maximum at designated
times or $100 maximum per court per season with a two-hour
maximum at designated time.
2. Non-resident teams or organizations cannot reserve the basketball
courts at any time.
§ 12.48.030 RARITAN CODE § 12.48.040
1.01:274
§ 12.48.050. Speed Limit. [Amended by Ord. 94-15]
The following speed limit is established for all vehicles within all open space
and recreational areas of the Township: 15 miles per hour.
§ 12.48.060. Removal of Violators and Confiscation of Prohibited
Items. [Amended by Ord. 94-15; Ord. 06-37]
The Township Police Department, park ranger and/or any open space or
recreational area personnel shall have the authority to eject from the open
space or recreational area, any person acting in violation of this chapter
and shall have the authority to seize or confiscate and impound any item or
device prohibited under this chapter.
§ 12.48.070. Violations and Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 94-15; Ord.
06-37]
Any person or group, who violates or neglects to comply with any provision
of this chapter or any regulation promulgated hereunder, shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.08. Each and every day that such a
violation continues shall be considered a separate and specific violation of
this chapter.
Chapter 12.49
PUBLIC UTILITY POLE OR UNDERGROUND FACILITY
PLACEMENT
§ 12.49.010. Notice to Municipal Officials Required.
Before a public utility places, replaces or removes a pole or an underground
facility located in the Township of Raritan, the public utility shall notify
the Municipal Engineer, Municipal Public Works Superintendent and the
Municipal Code Official in writing, which may be by Fax or e-Mail, at least,
but not less than 24 hours before undertaking any excavation related to the
replacement or removal of the utility pole or underground facility, which
pole or underground facility is used for the supplying and distribution of
electricity for light, heat or power, or for the furnishing of water service or
telephone or other telecommunications service on or below a public right of
way in the Township. The Township Committee of the Township of Raritan
shall notify any public utility that provides service in the Township of the
application of the provisions of this chapter.
C. Baseball, Basketball, Softball and Soccer Fields. Use by-For-Profit
Entities, both resident and non-resident, is established at $50 per hour,
per field, per Township Facility.
§ 12.48.040 CODE ADOPTION § 12.49.020
1.01:275
§ 12.49.020. Removal of Debris and Restoration Required.
After completing the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or an
underground facility pursuant to this chapter, the public utility shall remove
from such right of way any pole or underground facility no longer in use
as well as any other debris created from such placement, replacement
or removal and restore the property including, but not limited to, the
installation of a hot patch as needed to restore the property within the
right of way to its previous condition as much as possible. As used in this
section, hot patch means the installation of a mixture of asphalt to restore
property within the right of way to its previous condition subsequent to the
construction or excavation of a site required for the placement, replacement
of a pole or an underground facility pursuant to this section.
§ 12.49.030. Definitions.
POLE — In addition to its commonly accepted meaning, any wires or cable
connected thereto, and any replacements therefore which are similar in
construction and use.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY — One or more underground pipes, cables,
wires, lines or other structures used for the supplying and distribution of
electricity for light, heat or power or for the providing of water service, or
for the furnishing of telephone or other telecommunications service.
§ 12.49.040. Penalties.
In the event a public utility does not meet the requirements of Subsection
12.49.020 of this section concerning the removal of debris and the restoring
of property including, but not limited to, the installation of a hot patch,
within a right of way to its previous condition within 90 days of placement,
replacement or removal of a pole or an underground facility, said public
utility will be fined up to an amount not to exceed $100 each day until the
requirements of Subsection 12.49.020 are met, except that if the public
utility is unable to complete the installation of a hot patch due to the
unavailability of asphalt material during the period of time from November
through April, the public utility shall not be required to complete the
hot patch installation until 60 days immediately following the end of the
November through April period. At least five business days prior to the end
of the ninety-day period established by this subsection, the municipality
shall notify the public utility that the penalties authorized by this subsection
shall begin to be assessed against the utility after the end of the ninetyday
period unless the utility complies with the requirements of Subsection
12.49.020 of this section. Any penalty imposed shall be collected or
enforced in a summary manner, without a jury, in any court of competent
jurisdiction according to the procedure provided by The Penalty
Enforcement Law of 1999, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.). The Superior Court
and Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this
section. In the case of removal or replacement of a pole or an underground
facility utilized by two or more public utilities, the public utility last
removing its pipes, cables, wires, lines or other structures shall be liable
§ 12.49.020 RARITAN CODE § 12.49.040
1.01:276
for the removal and restoration required under Subsection 12.49.020 of this
section, unless a written agreement between the public utilities provides
otherwise.
§ 12.49.050. Exception to Notice Requirement. [Amended by Ord.
05-36]
Under emergency conditions which significantly impact the placement of
a pole or underground facility resulting from natural forces or human
activities beyond the control of the public utility, or which pose an imminent
or existing threat of loss of electrical, water, power, telephone, or other
telecommunication service, or which pose an imminent or existing threat
to the safety and security of persons or property, or both, or which require
immediate action by a public utility to prevent bodily harm or substantial
property damage from occurring, the provisions of Subsection 12.49.010
of this section shall not apply when a public utility undertakes any
construction or excavation related to the placement, replacement or
removal of a pole or an underground facility in response to such an
emergency, provided that the public utility undertaking such construction
or excavation notifies the Municipal Engineer, Municipal Public Works
Superintendent and the Municipal Code Official of Raritan at the earliest
reasonable opportunity and that all reasonable efforts are taken by the
public utility to comply with the removal and restoration requirements of
Subsection 12.49.020 of this section after responding to the emergency.
Title 13: Public Services
Chapter 13.04
SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM
§ 13.04.010. Definitions. [Prior code § 11-1.1]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the meanings given herein.
AUTHORITY — The Raritan Township municipal utilities authority, a body
public, politic and corporate of the State of New Jersey.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the service lateral of a collection sewer.
COLLECTION SEWER — The Raritan Township municipal utilities
authority's (hereinafter the Authority) collection sanitary sewers located
under highways, roads, streets, and rights-of-way with branch service
laterals that collect and convey sanitary sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both and into which storm, surface, and ground waters or
unpolluted industrial waters of liquids are not intentionally admitted.
CONNECTION UNIT — Each individual building or house whether
constructed as a detached unit or as one of a pair or row which is
§ 12.49.040 CODE ADOPTION § 13.04.010
1.01:277
designated or adaptable to separate ownership for use as family dwelling
unit or for commercial or industrial purposes. A school, factory, apartment
house, office building or other multiple unit structure whose individual
apartments or units are connected to a common internal sewage system and
which are not commonly subject to separate ownership shall be considered
as one connection unit for the purpose of this chapter.
ENGINEER — The authority's engineer, who is engaged at the time to serve
the authority for the design, inspection of construction, and operation of the
authority's sanitary sewage system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing,
trade or business process in the course of development, recovery or
processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the sewered area.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from property containing improvements, buildings or structures.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time,
for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes, situated in the sewered area and owned or operated by
the Authority.
SERVICE LATERAL — That part of the sanitary sewer system which extends
from a collection sewer to a point just beyond the curb line or to a point
approximately one foot beyond the edge of the paved roadway if there is no
curb line, and to which a building sewer is to be connected.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sanitary sewer
system used or usable to collect and convey sewage and to which ground,
unpolluted industrial waters, surface and stormwater or liquids are not
admitted intentionally.
TOWNSHIP'S AUTHORIZED AGENT — The Plumbing Inspector appointed
by the Board of Health of the Township.
§ 13.04.020. Building Sewers. [Prior code § 11-1.2]
The following requirements shall apply:
A. The owner of any dwelling or other building, to be occupied by persons,
located on property which either contains or abuts a collection sewer,
shall, if required by either the Township's authorized agent or by the
Authority, install a toilet in the dwelling or other building. Upon the
installation of the toilet, the dwelling or other building shall be
considered to be a connection unit.
B. From and after May 24, 1971, it is unlawful for any owner, described in
Subsection A of this section, to use or maintain or to allow any person to
use as a place for the disposal of human or industrial waste, any
outhouse or privy, or any other form of disposal not specifically
§ 13.04.010 RARITAN CODE § 13.04.020
1.01:278
§ 13.04.030. Connections. [Prior code § 11-1.3]
The following requirements shall apply:
authorized in writing by the Raritan Township Municipal Utilities
Authority or the Department of Health of the State of New Jersey.
A. The Authority's engineer shall issue a certificate of completion with
regard to the sanitary sewer system and shall forward the certificate of
completion to the Township Clerk with a list of all properties which are
connection units and which are in existence on the date of the issuance
of the certificate of completion, designated by tax map lot and block and
name and which connection units are located on property which either
contains or abuts a collection sewer. The Township Clerk within 10 days
of the receipt of the certificate of completion from the Authority's
engineer, shall cause written notice to be mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to each owner of a connection unit designated
by tax map lot and block and name on the list supplied by the
Authority's engineer and the notice shall contain information about
applications for a permit to install a sewer connection, a list of fees,
copies of the pertinent rules and regulations of the sewer authority and
information as to hook-up. The notice to the property owners of the
connection units shall direct that the connection units shall be
connected with and use the services of facilities of the authority's
sanitary sewer system to the exclusion of any other systems or methods
for the collection and disposal of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes
within 90 days from the date of receipt of the notice. Subsequent to the
issuance of the first certificate of completion by the Authority's
engineer, the Authority's engineer shall forward from time to time
additional notices to the Township Clerk that additional lines have
become available as a part of the sanitary sewer system, if and when
the lines are constructed, and the notices from the Authority's engineer
shall also contain a list of all connection units designated by name of the
owner, tax map block and lot numbers which shall be connected to the
additional new lines. The Clerk shall again forward notices as
previously described herein to the owners of those connection units and
forward the notices requiring connection to the sanitary sewage system
within 90 days after receipt of the certified mail notice.
B. Connection units shall be connected with and use the services and
facilities of the Authority's sanitary sewer system to the exclusion of any
other system or methods for the collection and disposal of sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes before the new connection unit is used or
occupied unless said unit has received a waiver from said connection
requirement from the Raritan Township Planning Board under Section
16.18.100 Land Subdivision Standards or Section 16.20.040 Site Plan
Design Standards. [Amended by Ord. 02-9; Ord. 02-14]
C. If the connection unit is not subject to review by the Raritan Township
Planning Board under Section 16.18.100 Land Subdivision Standards or
Section 16.20.040 Site Plan Design Standards then the Authority may
§ 13.04.020 CODE ADOPTION § 13.04.030
1.01:279
specifically exempt said connection unit from the requirements of
Subsections A and B of this section, if the authority finds that the
connection with the sanitary sewer system by the connection unit would
be economically unfeasible to the owner of the connection unit. The
Authority may rescind the exemption if and when a connection becomes
economically feasible, or when the Township's authorized agent
determines that a public health or safety hazard exists and that the
continued exception would aggravate the situation. [Amended by Ord.
02-9; Ord. 02-14]
D. If any owner, after being given proper notice of the sewer's availability,
fails to comply with the provisions of this section and Section
13.04.020, the Authority shall request the Township to cause the
connection or installation to be made under the direction and
supervision of the Township's authority agent and the authority's
engineer.
1. The Township shall cause notice of the contemplated connection to
be given in writing to the owner of the properties affected, within
30 days after receipt of a written request from the Authority. The
notice shall contain a description of the property affected,
sufficiently definite in terms to identify it, as well as a description of
the required connection or installation, and notice that unless the
connection or installation is completed within 30 days the Township
shall proceed to make the connection, or cause the same to be
done. In the event that any owner, after being served with proper
notice by the Township as described herein, fails to complete the
connection or installation within the 30 days as prescribed herein,
then the owner shall be subject to any penalties provided by this
Code.
2. When any such connection or toilet installation is made, a true and
accurate account of the cost and expense shall be kept and
apportioned to the property or properties thereby connected, and a
true statement of the costs under oath shall be forthwith filed by
the Township's authorized agent in charge of the connection or
installation with the Clerk of the Township. The Township shall
examine the same, and, if properly made, shall confirm it and file
such statement with the Township Tax Collector. The Township Tax
Collector shall record the connection or installation charge in the
same book in which he or she records sidewalks and other
assessments; and shall remit to the Authority any connection fee
charged by the Authority for connections of similar units paid to the
tax collector.
3. Every such connection or installation shall bear interest and
penalties from the same time and at the same rate as assessments
for local improvements in the Township, and from the time of
confirmation shall be a first and paramount lien against the
respective property so connected with the sewer to the same extent
§ 13.04.030 RARITAN CODE § 13.04.030
1.01:280
§ 13.04.040. Permit Required. [Prior code § 11-1.4]
No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use, alter
or disturb, in any manner, any sewer or the sanitary sewer system without
first obtaining a written permit from the Township's authorized agent. The
permit, upon prior approval by the Authority's engineer, shall be issued
to owners required to connect to the sanitary sewer system by Section
13.04.030, and may be issued to owners not so required to connect.
§ 13.04.050. Permit Application. [Prior code § 11-1.5]
Application for the permit required by Section 13.04.040 shall be made
by the owner of the connection unit involved or by his or her authorized
representative to the Township's authorized agent on forms prescribed for
the application, together with fees as required by the Township Board of
Health.
§ 13.04.060. Notice of Connection. [Prior code § 11-1.6]
No person shall make or cause to be made a connection of any improved
property with a sewer until a permit approved by the authority has been
issued by the Township and until the person has given the authority's
engineer and the Township's authorized agent at least 48 hours' notice of
the time when the connection will be made, so that the Authority's engineer
and the Township's authorized agent may supervise and inspect the work of
connection and the installation from the foundation line of the improvement
as assessments for local improvements and shall be collected and
enforced in the same manner.
4. No such charge for sewer connections or toilet installation shall be
invalid by reason of any error or omission in stating the name of the
owner or owners of properties affected by the connections or toilet
installations, nor for any other informality, where the property has
actually been improved by the sewer connection or toilet
installation.
5. The Township may provide for the payment of the same in
installments in the same manner as assessments for local
improvements are payable in the Township, in which case the
installments shall bear the same rate of interest and be collected
and enforced in the same manner as are installments for
assessments on local improvements.
6. The Township may award contracts for the construction of sewer
connections or toilet installations in the same manner and after the
same advertising as in the case of other contracts; and may, in lieu
of awarding separate contracts, award a contract, to the lowest
responsible bidder, for making all connections or installations of
toilets, which the Township may desire to have made within a
period of one year or less.
§ 13.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 13.04.060
1.01:281
to the connection point and when necessary supervise in testing of the
connection.
§ 13.04.070. Grouping of Connections. [Prior code § 11-1.7]
Connection units to be connected to the sanitary sewer system shall be
connected separately and independently with a single building sewer
connected to a service lateral. Grouping of more than one connection
unit on one building sewer shall not be permitted, except under special
circumstances and for good cause shown to the Authority's engineer and
then only after special written permission of the Authority.
§ 13.04.080. Costs and Expenses. [Prior code § 11-1.8]
All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and costs and
expenses of connection of a building sewer to a collection sewer or service
lateral shall be borne by the owner of the connection unit to be connected;
and the owner shall indemnify and save harmless the Township and the
Authority from all loss or damage that may be occasioned directly or
indirectly, as a result of construction of a building sewer or of connection of
a building sewer to a service lateral.
Title 14: (Reserved)
Title 15: Buildings and Construction
Chapter 15.04
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE
§ 15.04.010. Construction Code Department. [Prior code § 9-1.1;
amended by Ord. 97-28]
A. Established Composition. There is established in the Township a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the
Construction Code Department which shall consist of a Construction
Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official,
Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such
other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency.
B. Qualifications for Positions. Each official position created in Subsection
A of this section shall be filled by a person qualified for such position
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, N.J.S.A. 52:27d-119 et seq. as amended
and N.J.A.C. 5:23; provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode
official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be
§ 13.04.060 RARITAN CODE § 15.04.010
1.01:282
§ 15.04.020. Appeals. [Prior code § 9-1.2; amended by Ord. 97-28]
All appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency shall be to the
Hunterdon County Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 15.04.030. Fees; Biannual Fee Schedule Report; New Construction
Surcharge. [Prior code § 9-13; amended during 3-00 supplement;
Ord. 97-28; Ord. 99-11; Ord. 02-44; Ord. 06-07; Ord. 07-45; Ord.
10-6; Ord. 11-14; Ord. 2016-23; Ord. 2017-02; 3-20-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-10]
held by the same person, provided that such-persons qualified pursuant
to P.L. 1975, C.217, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold
each position.
C. One Office Location for Business with the Public. The public shall have
the right to do business with the enforcing agency at one office location
except for emergencies, and unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
A. Waiver of construction permit surcharge and enforcing agency fees for
construction to promote accessibility by disabled persons, as stated in
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-1263, the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
1. No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee, except those fees for subcode inspections not
performed by Township employees, for any construction,
reconstruction, alteration, or home improvement designed and
undertaken solely to promote accessibility by disabled persons to
an existing private structure or any of the facilities contained
therein. For the purposes of this section, "disabled person" means a
person who has the total and permanent inability to engage in any
substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable
physical or mental impairment, including blindness, and shall
include, but not be limited to, any person who is disabled pursuant
to the Federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 416), or the Federal
Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. § 231 et seq.), or is
rated as having a 60% disability or higher pursuant to any federal
law administered by the United States Veterans Administration. For
purposes of this subsection, "blindness" means central visual acuity
of 20/200 or less in the better eye with the use of correcting lenses.
An eye which is accompanied by a limitation in the field of vision
such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle
no greater than 20° shall be considered as having a central visual
acuity of 20/200 or less.
B. The fee for construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed in Subsection B.1 through B.5 hereof and shall be paid before the
permit is issued. Excluded from the construction fee schedule set forth
herein is any unattached structure under 30 inches in height which is
an accessory to landscaping development on the property. For purposes
of example only, not limitation, such landscaping structures may
§ 15.04.010 CODE ADOPTION § 15.04.030
1.01:283
include railroad ties, rock gardens, patio pallet construction and similar
items. All use groups and construction classifications referenced herein
are as defined by the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
1. The minimum Building Subcode fee shall be $50 for the R-2 Use
Group, $50 for the R-3 and R-5 Use Groups and $100 for all other
use groups.
a. New Construction and Additions. Fees for new construction
shall be based upon the volume of the structure in cubic feet.
i. For the following use groups, the fee shall be based on the
formula of volume times $0.035: B (Business), H (High
Hazard), I-1 through I-4 (Institutional), A-1 through A-5
(Assembly), M (Mercantile), R-1 through R-5 (Residential)
and E (Educational).
ii. For the following use groups, the fee shall be based on the
formula of volume times $0.025: S-1 through S-2
(Storage), U (Utility) and F-1 through F-2 (Factory).
[A] The fee is $0.025 per cubic foot of volume for the first
50,000 cubic feet or part thereof.
[B] The fee is $0.018 per cubic foot of volume for the
second 50,000 cubic feet or part thereof.
[C] The fee is $0.014 per cubic foot of volume of the
structure over 100,000 cubic feet.
[D] The fee for commercial farm buildings, as defined by
the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C.
5:23-3.2(d)1, shall not exceed $2,290.
[E] Decks and raised patios shall be charged the greater
of a minimum fee of $100 or $30 per thousand dollars
of work.
b. Renovations, Alterations, and Repairs. Fees for renovations,
alterations, and repairs shall be based upon the estimated cost
of the work. (The applicant shall submit cost data by an
architect or engineer of record, a recognized estimating firm or
by contractor bid. The Department will review the construction
cost for acceptability.) The fees shall be as follows:
i. If the estimated cost is between $1 and $100,000, the fee
shall be $30 per $1,000.
ii. If the estimated cost is over $100,000, the fee shall be $23
per $1,000.
iii. If the estimated cost is over $200,000, the fee shall be $23
per $1,000.
§ 15.04.030 RARITAN CODE § 15.04.030
1.01:284
iv. If the estimated cost is over $300,000, the fee shall be $23
per $1,000.
c. Additions and Renovations, Alterations or Repairs. Fees for
additions and renovations, alterations or repairs shall be a
combination of rates set by Subsection B.1.a and b above.
i. All roof replacements and overlays shall have a flat fee of
$50 for the R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, and $30 per $1,000 of
the estimated cost for all other use groups.
ii. All siding replacements shall have a flat fee of $50 for R-3
and R-5 Use Groups. A fee of $30 per $1,000 of the
estimated cost shall be for all other use groups.
iii. Radon vent systems shall be the minimum fee for the first
vent stack, and 50% of the minimum fee for each
additional vent stack.
d. Pool fees shall be as follows:
i. Swimming Pools, Aboveground.
[A] R-5 Use Group: $150.
[B] All other use groups: $150.
[C] Seasonal-use pools, those which are not permanent in
nature and are regulated by the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code, shall be a fee of $40.
ii. Swimming Pools, In-Ground:
[A] R-5 Use Group: $150.
[B] Other use groups: $150.
iii. Pool Barriers:
[A] For the R-5 Use Group, the fee shall be $75.
[B] For all other use groups, the fee shall be $100.
e. Asbestos Abatement:
i. For R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, the fee shall be $120.
ii. All other use groups shall be $300.
iii. Certificate of occupancy fee for asbestos abatement shall
be 50% of the minimum fee.
f. Fences (Over Six Feet In Height):
i. For R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, the fee shall be $50.
§ 15.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 15.04.030
1.01:285
ii. All other use groups shall be $100.
g. Sheds as Defined in the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code:
i. Those Not Requiring a Foundation System:
[A] For R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, the fee shall be $50.
[B] All other use groups shall be $100.
ii. Sheds With a Required Foundation System:
[A] For R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, the fee shall be $100.
[B] All other use groups shall be $300.
h. Signs:
i. Temporary signs shall be $100.
ii. Permanent Signs:
[A] Wall or surface-mounted signs: $100.
[B] Pylon and monument signs: $200.
i. Demolition: flat rate, depending on building class when
occupied, as follows:
i. Class 1: $200.
ii. Class 2: $100.
iii. Class 3: $65.
iv. Demolition of Swimming Pools:
[A] Aboveground: minimum fee.
[B] In-ground: same as established rate for Class 3
demolition.
[C] Demolition of shed: minimum fee.
j. Installation or erection of temporary structures, tents,
tensioned membrane structures, canopies and greenhouses, as
defined in N.J.A.C. 5:23, shall be $100.
k. Buildings moved or relocated, unit rate: $16 per $1,000, with a
minimum fee of $95; unit rate times the total estimated cost of
the following:
i. Cost of moving.
ii. Cost of new foundation.
§ 15.04.030 RARITAN CODE § 15.04.030
1.01:286
iii. All other costs necessary to complete the structure.
l. Fees for retaining walls shall be as follows:
i. The fee for a retaining wall with a surface area greater
than 550 square feet that is associated with a Class 3
residential structure shall be $100.
ii. The fee for a retaining wall with a surface area of 550
square feet or less that is associated with a Class 3
residential structure shall be $50.
iii. The fee for a newly constructed retaining wall of any size
at other than a Class 3 residential structure shall be based
on the cost of the construction and shall be a fee at the
same rate of Subsection B.1.b above.
m. Photovoltaic systems shall be a flat fee of $140 for Use Groups
R-3 and R-5. All other use groups shall be a fee based on the
designated kilowatt rating of each solar photovoltaic system as
follows:
i. 1 to 50 kilowatts: the fee shall be $140.
ii. 51 to 100 kilowatts, the fee shall be $260.
iii. Greater than 100 kilowatts: the fee shall be $750.
2. The minimum Plumbing Subcode fee shall be $50 for the R-2 Use
Group, $50 for the R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, and $100 for all other
use groups. All other fees shall be as stated below.
a. The fee shall be $13 per drip pan, humidifier, whirlpool tub,
combustion air, fixture, vent or stack. For the purpose of
computing this fee, fixtures, vents or stacks shall include, but
not be limited to, water closets, urinals, bidets, lavatories,
sinks, showers, floor drains, washing machines, dishwashers,
hose bibs, drinking fountains, indirect waste or water
connections, residential solar systems, roof drains, storm
drains, leaders, sump pumps and conductors.
b. The fee shall be $75 per special device. For the purpose of
computing the fee, special devices shall include, but not be
limited to, sewage ejectors, gas piping, water-conditioning
equipment, grease, oil, sand or other type inceptors, backflow
devices, booster pumps, water heaters, heat exchangers,
boilers or furnaces, air-conditioning units, refrigeration
systems and solar systems.
c. The minimum fee shall be charged for each residential sewer,
septic and water utility connection. The fee for commercial,
industrial and private on-site sanitary and storm sewers,
domestic water lines and combination mains shall be $75 for
§ 15.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 15.04.030
1.01:287
up to and including the first 100 feet. Each additional 10 feet or
portion thereof shall be an additional $20 per 10 feet or portion
thereof.
d. The minimum fee shall be charged for each of the following:
furnace, water heater, swimming pool water heater, water
heater coil, ultraviolet system, central air conditioning,
hydronic piping, refrigeration piping, pool drains, steam
shower units, backflow preventer reports and tempering
valves. Gas piping, liquefied petroleum gas piping and fuel oil
piping shall be the minimum fee and includes provisions for the
installation of up to four appliances. The fifth and each
additional appliance shall be an additional $13 fee.
e. $140 shall be for each new or replacement complete hot water
and steam boiler system installation consisting of a boiler,
backflow preventer, temperature mixing valve control,
domestic hot-water coil or external water maker coil unit and
tank, combustion air or any combination thereof.
f. The minimum fee shall be for single boiler hydronic piping for
the R-5 Use Group. For all other use groups, the minimum fee
shall be per floor of each structure.
g. The minimum fee shall be per unit for commercial-industrial
refrigeration piping.
3. The minimum Mechanical Subcode fees, which are only applicable
to the R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, shall be $75. The fees shall
otherwise be as follows:
a. The fee for the replacement of an individual mechanical device
shall be the minimum fee for the first device, and 50% of the
minimum fee for each additional device, and shall include
inspection for required combustion air. Exceptions to this fee
are as follows:
i. Generators shall be $100.
ii. Gas piping shall be $75.
iii. Hot-water boilers shall be $140.
iv. Steam boilers shall be $140.
b. No separate fee shall be for existing gas, fuel oil, or water
piping connections associated with the mechanical equipment
inspected.
c. A flat fee of $140 shall be for each new or replacement
complete HVAC system installation, consisting of a furnace,
compressor, a-coil, drip pan, condensate pump or discharge
line, humidifier, combustion air, or any combination thereof.
§ 15.04.030 RARITAN CODE § 15.04.030
1.01:288
4. The minimum Electrical Subcode fee shall be $50 for the R-2 Use
Group, $50 for the R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, and $100 for all other
use groups. All other fees shall be as stated below:
a. The fee for electrical fixtures and devices, for the first 50
fixtures or switches, shall be the $50. Each additional 20
receptacles, fixtures, switches or portion thereof shall be $10.
For the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles, fixtures or
switches shall include lighting outlets, smoke detectors, heat
detectors, fluorescent fixtures and receptacles, thermostats, or
motors of one less than one horsepower.
b. The fee for alarm systems shall be as follows:
i. For the R-2 Use Group, the fee for the first 10 devices shall
be $50; each additional 20 devices shall be $10.
ii. For R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, the fee for the first 10 devices
shall be $50; each additional 20 devices shall be $10.
iii. For all other use groups, the fee for the first 10 devices
shall be $50; each additional 20 devices shall be $10.
c. The fee for data systems shall be as follows:
i. For the R-2 Use Group, the fee for the first 10 devices shall
be $55; each additional 20 devices shall be $10.
ii. For R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, the fee for the first 10 devices
shall be $50; each additional 20 devices shall be $10.
iii. For all other use groups, the fee for the first 10 devices
shall be $50; each additional 20 devices shall be $10.
d. The fee for in-floor heating systems shall be the minimum fee
for the first 5 kilowatts. Each additional 5 kilowatts shall be
50% of the minimum fee.
e. The fee for motors shall be the minimum fee or as follows:
i. 1 to 10 horsepower shall be $20.
ii. 10.1 to 50 horsepower shall be $60.
iii. 50.1 to 100 horsepower shall be $100.
iv. 100.1 to 500 horsepower shall be $400.
v. Over 500 horsepower shall be $600.
f. The fee for electrical devices, transformers and generators
shall be the minimum fee or as follows:
i. 1 to 10 kilowatts shall be $20.
§ 15.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 15.04.030
1.01:289
ii. 10.1 to 50 kilowatts shall be $55 for the R-2 Use Group,
$60 for R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, and $100 for all other use
groups.
iii. 50.1 to 100 kilowatts shall be $110 for the R-2 Use Group,
$120 for R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, and $200 for all other
use groups.
iv. 100.1 to 500 kilowatts shall be $330.
v. Over 500 kilowatts shall be $330 plus $120 for each
additional 100 kilowatts or portion thereof over 500
kilowatts.
g. For the purpose of computing the fee, typical electrical device
sizes are listed below, but the proper kilowatt rating for the
applied-for device must be noted on the application so that the
proper fee can be assessed. This typical list is by no way all
inclusive.
i. Dishwasher: approximately 1.2 kilowatts.
ii. Water heater: approximately 4.5 kilowatts.
iii. Electric dryer: approximately five kilowatts.
iv. Apartment/residential-sized range: approximately eight
kilowatts.
v. Electric baseboard heat: approximately 250 watts per foot.
h. The fee for low-voltage service equipment, including service
panels, subpanels and service entrances, shall be as follows:
i. 1 to 199 amperes shall be $50.
ii. 200 amperes shall be $100.
iii. 200.01 to 800 amperes shall be $200.
iv. 800.01 to 2,000 amperes shall be $300.
v. Over 2,000 amperes shall be $300 plus $100 for each
additional 500 amperes or potion thereof over 2,000.
i. High-voltage service over 600 volts shall be $500.
j. Construction of temporary pole service shall be $50.
k. The fee for pools shall be as follows:
i. Aboveground Pools:
[A] R-5 Use Group shall be $70, which includes pumps,
convenient outlet and bonding.
§ 15.04.030 RARITAN CODE § 15.04.030
1.01:290
[B] All other use groups shall be 200% of the minimum
fee, which includes pumps, convenient outlet and
bonding.
ii. In-Ground Pools.
iii. Pool heaters, subpanels, lights and sweepers shall be an
additional fee at the published rates.
iv. Annual pool inspections for commercial pools shall be
$100.
l. Trailer connections shall be $50.
m. The fee for photovoltaic systems shall be based on the
designated kilowatt rating of each solar photovoltaic system as
follows:
i. 1 to 50 kilowatts shall be $140.
ii. 51 to 100 kilowatts shall be $260.
iii. Over 100 kilowatts shall be $260 plus $1 per panel
installed.
5. The minimum Fire Subcode fee shall be $50 for the R-2 Use Group,
$50 for the R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, and $75 for all other use
groups. All other fees shall be as stated below:
a. Sprinkler heads shall be as follows:
i. 1 to 5 sprinkler heads shall be the minimum fee.
ii. 6 to 20 sprinkler heads shall be $100.
iii. 21 to 100 sprinkler heads shall be $150.
iv. 101 to 200 sprinkler heads shall be $250.
v. 201 to 400 sprinkler heads shall be $625.
vi. 401 to 1,000 sprinkler heads shall be $850.
vii. 1,001 to 1,400 sprinkler heads shall be $1,100.
viii. 1,401 to 1,800 sprinkler heads shall be $1,350.
ix. Over 1,800 sprinkler heads shall be $1,600.
b. Standpipe system shall be $300 for each riser.
c. Sprinkler valves shall be as follows:
i. Alarm valves shall be $100 each.
ii. Dry pipe valves and pre-action valves shall be $100 each.
§ 15.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 15.04.030
1.01:291
d. Fire pumps shall be $200 each.
e. Private fire hydrants shall be $100 each.
f. Freestanding Fire Department connection installation shall be
$100.
g. Underground fire service mains shall be as follows:
i. 1 to 100 feet shall be $100.
ii. Each additional 10 feet shall be $20 per 10 feet or portion
thereof.
h. Fire alarms shall be as follows:
i. Alarm, supervisory, monitoring modules and signaling
devices shall be:
[A] For the R-2 Use Group, the fee shall be $50 for the
first 12 devices and $5 for each additional 10 devices.
[B] For R-3 and R-5 Use Groups, the fee shall be $50 for
the first 12 devices and $5 for each additional 10
devices.
ii. For all other use groups, the fee shall be $75 for the first
12 devices and $10 for each additional 10 devices.
iii. Control panels and booster panels shall be $100 each.
i. Pre-engineered wet chemical, FM-200, carbon dioxide,
INERGEN® and foam systems shall be $100 each.
j. Smoke control systems shall be $275 each.
k. Heat-producing devices, including prefabricated fireplaces,
fireplace inserts, solid-fuel stoves, pellet stoves, furnaces,
metal chimneys, chimney liners and generators, shall be $50.
l. Commercial kitchen exhaust systems and hazardous exhaust
systems shall be $220 each.
m. Installation for fuel storage tanks shall be as follows:
i. The fee for the R-5 Use Group shall be $75 each.
ii. All other use groups shall be $120 each.
n. Installation of water storage tanks shall be $250 each for all
use groups.
o. Removal of an underground storage tank shall be $75 each.
p. Removal of aboveground storage tanks shall be as follows:
§ 15.04.030 RARITAN CODE § 15.04.030
1.01:292
i. The fee for R-3 and R-5 Use Groups shall be $50 for each
tank removed.
ii. All other use groups shall be $100 each.
q. Installation of CO2 cylinders shall be $100 for the first 100
pounds and $50 for each additional 100 pounds or portion
thereof.
6. Elevator Subcode Fee. The initial registration fee for each elevator
device in any structure that is not an R-5 Use Group shall be $50. A
reregistration fee of $50 shall be required for each structure
containing one or more elevator devices upon change of ownership.
a. Fees for witnessing acceptance tests and performing
inspections in use groups that are not R-5 shall be as follows:
i. Traction and winding drum elevators with 1 to 10 floors
shall be $225.
ii. Traction and winding drum elevators with over 10 floors
shall be $375.
iii. Hydraulic elevators shall be $200.
iv. Roped hydraulic elevators shall be $225.
v. Escalators and moving walks shall be $200.
vi. Dumbwaiters/platform lifts, chairlifts, stairway chairlifts,
inclined and vertical wheelchair lifts and man lifts shall be
$50.
vii. Additional charges for devices with any of the equipment
listed below shall be as follows:
[A] Oil buffers shall be $40 each.
[B] Counterweight governor and safeties shall be $100
each.
[C] Auxiliary power generators shall be $75 each.
[D] Elevator devices in structures in Use Group R-5 shall
be $150. This fee shall be waived when a signed
statement and supporting inspection and acceptance
test reports are filed by an approved qualified agent or
agency in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.19 and
5:23-2.20.
[E] The fee for witnessing acceptance tests and
performing inspections of alterations shall be $50.
b. Fees for routine and periodic tests and inspections for elevator
devices in structures not in Use Group R-5 shall be as follows:
§ 15.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 15.04.030
1.01:293
i. Six-month periodic/routine inspection of elevator devices
shall be as follows:
[A] Traction and winding drum elevators with 1 to 10
floors shall be $140.
[B] Traction and winding drum elevators with over 10
floors shall be $180.
[C] Hydraulic elevators shall be $100.
[D] Roped hydraulic elevators shall be $140.
[E] Escalators and moving walks shall be $140.
c. One-year periodic inspection and witnessing of tests of
elevator devices, which shall include a six-month routine
inspection, shall be as follows:
i. Traction and winding drum elevators with 1 to 10 floors
shall be $200.
ii. Traction and winding drum elevators with over 10 floors
shall be $240.
iii. Hydraulic elevators shall be $150.
iv. Roped hydraulic elevators shall be $200.
v. Escalators and moving walks shall be $320.
vi. Dumbwaiters/chairlifts shall be $80.
vii. Inclined and vertical wheelchair lifts shall be $120.
d. Additional yearly periodic inspection charges for elevator
devices equipped with the following features shall be as
follows:
i. Oil buffers shall be $40 each.
ii. Counterweight governor and safeties shall be $80.
iii. Auxiliary power generators shall be $50.
e. The fee for the three- or five-year inspection of elevator devices
shall be as follows:
i. Traction and winding drum elevators with 1 to 10 floors
(five-year inspection) shall be $340.
ii. Traction and winding drum elevators with over 10 floors
(five-year inspection) shall be $380.
iii. Hydraulic and roped hydraulic elevators (three-year
inspection) shall be $250.
§ 15.04.030 RARITAN CODE § 15.04.030
1.01:294
iv. Hydraulic and roped hydraulic elevators (five-year
inspection) shall be $150.
f. The fees set forth in Subsection B.6.b above shall be paid
annually in accordance with the following schedule, which is
based on the average of the fees to be collected over a five-year
period:
i. Basic annual fees shall be as follows:
[A] Traction and winding drum elevators with 1 to 10
floors shall be $370.
[B] Traction and winding drum elevators with over 10
floors shall be $450.
[C] Hydraulic elevators shall be $270.
[D] Roped hydraulic elevators shall be $300.
[E] Escalators and moving walks shall be $460.
[F] Dumbwaiters/chairlifts shall be $80.
[G] Chairlifts, stairway chairlifts, inclined and vertical
wheelchair lifts and man lifts shall be $120.
ii. Additional charges for devices equipped with the following
features shall be charged as follows:
[A] Oil buffers shall be $40 each.
[B] Counterweight governor and safeties shall be $80
each.
[C] Auxiliary power generators shall be $50 each.
iii. An administrative fee of 15% will also be charged for each
elevator permit issued.
7. The fees for plan review shall be as follows:
a. The fee for plan review shall be 10% of the amount to be
charged for the construction permit and shall be paid before
the plans are reviewed.
b. The fee for review of any amendment or change to a plan that
has already been released shall be charged at a rate of $70 per
hour, per subcode. Fees shall be rounded to the nearest 1/2
hour. A minimum fee of $35 shall be charged.
8. The fee for variations shall be charged per the building class of the
structure as follows:
a. Class 1 shall be $350.
§ 15.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 15.04.030
1.01:295
b. Class 2 shall be $150.
c. Class 3 shall be $100.
d. Resubmission of a variation shall be charged 50% of the
original fee.
9. The fees for certificates of occupancy shall be as follows:
a. Certificate of Occupancy. The fee shall be in the amount of 10%
of the new construction permit fee. The minimum shall be
$120, except for one- and two-family dwellings (R-5), wherein
the minimum fee shall be $60. This shall apply whether the
certificate of occupancy is temporary or permanent in nature.
b. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. The fee for a temporary
certificate of occupancy or extensions shall not exceed $30.
There shall be no fee charged for the first issuance of a
temporary certificate of occupancy, provided the certificate of
occupancy fee is paid at that time.
c. The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy shall be $150
and shall be required for all changes in occupancy of
nonresidential use groups.
d. A certificate of continued occupancy issued for a finished
basement in a residential use group, in which work was
completed prior to the issuance of a construction permit, shall
be charged a flat fee of $400.
e. The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted to a change of
use shall be $150.
f. Occupancy Placards. No fee for the first issuance. Fees for a
replacement shall be charged the same as those for a
temporary certificate of occupancy as stated in Subsection
B.9.b above.
g. The fee for a certificate of compliance for hazardous
equipment maintained or installed in accordance with the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code, delineating the approval
period, shall be $100.
10. Fees for limited certificates of approval shall be as follows:
a. Limitations. Equipment hereinbelow listed, having been
determined to create a significant potential for hazard to
public health and safety, shall be granted a certificate of
approval by the appropriate subcode official or other approved
agency for the duration specified herein:
i. Elevators shall be six months: $26.
ii. Platform lifts shall be six months: $25.
§ 15.04.030 RARITAN CODE § 15.04.030
1.01:296
iii. Dumbwaiters shall be 12 months: $25.
iv. High-pressure boilers shall be 12 months: as provided by
the state.
v. Refrigeration systems shall be 12 months: as provided by
the state.
vi. Pressure vessels shall be 12 months: as provided by the
state.
vii. Cross connections/backflow preventers (equipped with
test ports only) shall be 12 months: $50 for the first four
devices and $50 for each additional four devices or portion
thereof.
b. Such equipment shall be periodically reinspected or tested in
accordance with the provisions of the regulations prior to the
expiration of such certificate of approval and any violations
corrected before a new certificate may be issued.
c. No such system or assembly shall continue in operation unless
a valid certificate of approval has been reissued. It shall be a
violation of the regulations for an owner to fail to provide for
such periodic inspection testing.
d. The enforcing agency may revoke a certificate of occupancy
whenever a condition of a certificate has been violated.
e. The provisions and regulations do not preclude periodic
certification pursuant to other applicable laws or ordinances.
C. The fee for the reinstatement of lapsed permits, for which no changes
are made or required by mandated code changes, shall be 50% of the
original permit fee prior to lapse.
D. No refund will be given after 90 days of issuance of a permit. Prior to 90
days of issuance, the plan review fee shall be held and remaining fees
may be refunded at the discretion of the Construction Official.
E. The fees for the State of New Jersey are determined by the state and
are as follows:
1. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical
support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act,
the enforcing agency, including the Department when acting as the
local agency, shall collect a surcharge fee of $0.00371 per cubic
foot of volume of new construction. The fee for all other
construction shall be $1.90 per $1,000 of the value of construction.
The minimum permit surcharge fee shall be $1. Said surcharge fee
shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department
of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters
ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 and not
§ 15.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 15.04.030
1.01:297
later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for
which it is due.
2. The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each state
fiscal year to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than
July 31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal
year. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective, said report shall be for the third and fourth (state fiscal
year) quarters.
F. Annual Permits. The fee to be charged for an annual construction
permit shall be charged annually. This fee shall be a flat fee based on
the number of maintenance workers who are employed by the facility
and who are primarily engaged in work that is governed by a subcode.
Managers, engineers and clericals shall not be considered maintenance
workers for the purpose of establishing the annual construction permit
fee. Annual permits may be issued for building, fire protection,
electrical and plumbing. Fees shall be as follows: one to 25 workers
(including foreman) shall be $618 per worker; each additional worker
over 25 shall be $215 per worker.
1. Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training registration
fee of $130 per subcode shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Department of Community Affairs, Construction Code Element,
Training Section, along with a copy of the construction permit
(Form F-170A). Checks shall be made payable to "Treasurer, State
of New Jersey."
G. Hourly charges and fees for development-wide inspection of homes
after issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be in such amount as
may be reasonable and necessary in order to ascertain whether a
violation exists or to verify that any work performed has abated the
violation.
1. The hourly charge shall be the same as the hourly rate set forth in
Subsection D above, times the number of hours spent by the code
officials in determining whether a violation exists or verifying that
any work performed has abated the violations.
H. All penalty monies shall be collected under penalty provision of the
UCC. Any penalties collected shall be retained by the Building
Department and shall be placed in a special trust fund to be applied to
the cost of the Department for training, education, technical support
programs, certification, new equipment and transportation. An
independent fund shall be set up and retained by the Director of
Finance, who shall be the Trustee of this account.
I. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Township Committee, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to
the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 15.04.030 RARITAN CODE § 15.04.040
1.01:298
§ 15.04.040. (Reserved)7
§ 15.04.050. Fee Waivers. [Amended by Ord. 2017-02]
Chapter 15.06
REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTIES
PENDING FORECLOSURE
A. The Flemington-Raritan First Aid and Rescue Squad is hereby
designated as an instrumentality of the Township of Raritan for the
purposes of the State Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.
B. All United States veterans shall be granted a 25% discount on any
municipal fees established by this chapter for work performed on the
primary residence which is owned by such veteran. United States
veterans shall still be required to pay any and all State and third party
enforcing agency fees, as well as any escrow fees for professional
services. For purposes of this subsection, a United States veteran shall
be defined as follows:
1. A person currently serving in the United States Army, Navy, Air
Force, Marines or Coast Guard, or their reserve components, or the
Army National Guard or the Air National Guard; or
2. A person having served in the United States Army, Navy, Air Force,
Marines or Coast Guard for a minimum of four years and having
received a general discharge or higher; or
3. A person having served in any combination of United States Army,
Navy, Air Force, Marines or Coast Guard, or their reserve
components, or the Army National Guard or the Air National Guard
for a minimum of six years and having received a general discharge
or higher.
C. Any person who has a service-connected disability declared by the U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs, or its successor, to be a total or 100%
permanent disability that would entitle them to a property tax
exemption pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.30, shall be entitled to an
exemption from all municipal fees established by this chapter. Any such
person shall still be required to pay any and all State and third party
enforcing agency fees, as well as any escrow fees for professional
services, except that any such person shall not be charged a
construction permit surcharge fee or enforcing agency fee for any
construction, reconstruction, alteration or improvement designed and
undertaken solely to promote accessibility by the disabled veteran to
his own home. N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126e.b.(1).
7. Editor's Note: Former § 15.04.040, Fee Exemptions, was repealed by Ord. 10-6, Ord. 11-20
provided for exemptions in certain zones and was effective from 1-1-2012 through
12-31-2013.
§ 15.04.040 CODE ADOPTION § 15.06.010
1.01:299
§ 15.06.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 15-05]
The intent of this chapter is to provide for the enforcement of the Township
Housing Code, Chapter 15.08, and other applicable laws against and to
vacant and abandoned properties pending foreclosure.
§ 15.06.020. Responsibility for Maintenance of Vacant and
Abandoned Properties in Foreclosure. [Amended by Ord. 15-05]
A creditor serving a summons and complaint in a foreclosure action shall be
responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior
of the vacant and abandoned residential property. If the creditor is located
out of the State of New Jersey, the creditor must appoint an in-State
representative or agent to act for the foreclosing creditor.
§ 15.06.030. Service of Notice, Contents. [Amended by Ord. 15-05]
§ 15.06.040. Responsibilities of Creditor Filing a Foreclosure Action
as to Vacant and Abandoned Property. [Amended by Ord. 15-05]
A. A creditor serving a summons and complaint in a foreclosure action on
residential property located in the Township of Raritan shall, within 10
days of serving the summons and complaint, serve the Township Clerk
with a notice advising that a summons and complaint in a foreclosure
action has been filed against the subject property. The notice shall
contain and include the information set forth in Subsection C below and
shall be provided by mail.
B. Any creditor that has initiated a foreclosure proceeding on any
residential property which is pending in Superior Court shall provide to
the Township Clerk with the Notice as described in paragraph C. below
for any residential properties in the Township for which the creditor has
pending foreclosure actions.
C. The notice shall state:
1. The name and contact information for the representative (located
within the State of New Jersey) of the creditor who is responsible
for property maintenance and will respond to Township
communications regarding the property;
2. Whether the property being foreclosed on is an affordable unit
pursuant to the Fair Housing Act;
3. The street address, lot and block number of the property; and
4. If the creditor is located out of State, the Notice should include the
full name and contact information of the representative/agent
located within the State of New Jersey authorized to act on behalf
of the creditor, accept service on behalf of the creditor, and to
receive and act on notifications regarding maintenance of the
property in foreclosure.
§ 15.06.010 RARITAN CODE § 15.06.040
1.01:300
§ 15.06.050. Violation of State or Local Law at Property on List;
Responsibility of Creditor. [Amended by Ord. 15-05]
If the owner of a residential property vacates or abandons any property
upon which a foreclosure action has been initiated or if a property is
otherwise vacated and/or abandoned subsequent to the filing of the
complaint in a foreclosure action, but prior to the vesting of title in any third
party, the foreclosing creditor shall have the responsibility to abate any
nuisance or correct any violations of the Township Housing Code, Chapter
15.08, or applicable law in the same manner and to the same extent as
the title owner of the property, to such standard or specification as may be
required by the Township Housing Code or applicable law.
§ 15.06.060. Notification of Violation. [Amended by Ord. 15-05]
In the event of a violation of the Township Housing Code, Chapter 15.08,
or applicable law, the Township shall serve the creditor with a Notice that
shall include a description of the condition(s) that gave rise to the violation
and shall provide a period of 30 days, or 10 days if the condition presents
an imminent threat to public health and safety as determined by the Zoning
Officer, for the creditor to remedy the violation or condition. The creditor
must remedy and/or repair the conditions noticed within the specific period.
§ 15.06.070. Repair by Township. [Amended by Ord. 15-05]
If the Township expends public funds in order to abate a nuisance or correct
a violation on a residential property in which the creditor was given notice
pursuant to Subsection 15.06.060 but failed to abate the nuisance or correct
the violation as directed, the Township shall have the same recourse against
the creditor as it would have had against the title owner of the property
A. Any creditor having filed a Complaint in an action in foreclosure on a
property, and that creditor having been notified by the Zoning Officer in
writing that the property appears to be or is abandoned or vacant, shall
be responsible within 30 days of said notification as follows:
1. Investigate and inspect the property as required to determine if the
property is abandoned and vacant, and notify the Zoning Officer in
writing of that determination.
2. Secure the building and structure on the property from
unauthorized entry.
3. Perform such appropriate repairs or maintenance of the exterior
grounds of the property, including yards, fences, sidewalks,
walkways, driveways as may be needed or directed by the Zoning
Officer so that the property is free from trash, debris, or excessive
grass or weed growth, or safety hazards.
4. Continue to maintain the structures in a secure condition and the
grounds in a clean, properly maintained state.
§ 15.06.040 CODE ADOPTION § 15.06.070
1.01:301
including but not limited to the recourse in the Township Housing Code,
Chapter 15.08, or applicable law.
§ 15.06.080. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. 15-05]
The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to enforce this chapter and is
further authorized to contact the New Jersey Bankers Association, with
a current address of 411 North Avenue East, Cranford, New Jersey, for
assistance in enforcing this chapter.
§ 15.06.090. Violation and Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 15-05; Ord.
2016-02]
Any person or corporation shall, upon conviction by any court having
jurisdiction of a violation of this chapter, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$2,500 per day commencing as of the date of the expiration of the tenday
period provided in Section 15.06.030. Any person or corporation upon
conviction by any Court of a violation of Section 15.06.050 and/or Section
15.06.060 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,500 per day, to
commence 31 days after receipt of the notice or, if the violation presented
an imminent risk to public safety and health and was so noticed,
commencing 11 days after receipt of the notice. The maximum aggregate
monetary penalty for any violation of this chapter shall be $25,000.
Chapter 15.07
VACANT PROPERTIES
§ 15.07.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 15-06]
Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ABANDONED BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any property that has not
been legally occupied for a period of at least six months and which meets
any one of the following criteria may be deemed to be an abandoned
building or structure upon a determination by the Zoning Officer that:
The building or structure is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable
judgment of the Zoning Officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place
during that six-month period;
1.
Construction that was initiated on the building or structure and was
discontinued prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for
occupancy, and no construction has taken place for at least six months
as of the date of a determination by the Zoning Officer pursuant to this
chapter;
2.
At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and delinquent
on that property on the date of the determination by the Zoning Officer
pursuant to this chapter; or
3.
§ 15.06.070 RARITAN CODE § 15.07.010
1.01:302
OWNER — Includes the title holder, any agent of the title holder having
authority to act regarding a vacant building or structure, any foreclosing
entity that has filed a notice with the Township Clerk pursuant to Chapter
15.06.
VACANT BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any building or structure which
is not legally occupied or at which all lawful business or construction
operations or renovation work or occupancy have substantially ceased, and
which is in such condition that it cannot legally be re-occupied without
repair or rehabilitation, provided, however, that any property where all
building systems are in working order, where the building and grounds are
maintained in good order, or where the building is in a habitable condition,
and where the building is being actively marketed by its owner for sale or
rental, shall not be deemed vacant for purposes of this chapter.
ZONING OFFICER — The official who is charged with the administration
and enforcement of this chapter, or any duly authorized representative.
§ 15.07.020. Registration Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 15-06]
The owner of any vacant building or structure as defined in this chapter
shall:
The building or structure has been determined to be a nuisance by
the Zoning Officer. A property which contains both residential and nonresidential
space may be considered abandoned as long as 2/3 or more
of the total net square footage of the building was previously legally
occupied as residential or commercial space and none of the residential
or commercial space has been legally occupied for at least six months
at the time of the determination of abandonment by the Zoning Officer
and the property meets the criteria of either paragraph a. or paragraph
d. of this definition for abandoned building or structure.
4.
A. Within 30 calendar days after the building or structure becoming
vacant shall file a registration statement for such vacant building or
structure with the Township Clerk; or
B. Within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of a vacant building
or structure, file a registration statement for such vacant building or
structure with the Township Clerk; or
C. Within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the Township, file a
registration statement for such vacant building or structure with the
Clerk on forms provided by the Township for such purposes. Failure to
receive notice from the Township shall not constitute grounds for failing
to register the building or structure.
1. Each property having a separate block and lot number as
designated on official records of the Township shall be registered
separately.
2. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of a person 21
§ 15.07.010 CODE ADOPTION § 15.07.020
1.01:303
§ 15.07.030. Restoration of Vacant Building or Structure. [Amended
by Ord. 15-06]
Any owner of a vacant building or structure who plans to restore the
property to productive use and occupancy during the twelve-month period
following the date of the initial registration shall file a sufficiently detailed
statement of the owner's plans for restoration of the property with the
registration statement along with a schedule. Any owner who within the
initial registration period completes restoration of the property whereby the
property no longer is defined as vacant may request a 50% refund of the
registration fee from the Township Clerk upon presentation of a Certificate
of Occupancy.
§ 15.07.040. Access to Vacant Buildings or Structures. [Amended by
Ord. 15-06]
The owner of any vacant building or structure registered under this chapter
consents to and shall provide access to the Township to conduct exterior
and interior inspections of the building, structure or property to determine
years of age or older, designated by the owner or owners as the
authorized agent for receiving notices of violations of the Township
Housing Code, Chapter 15.08, and applicable law and for receiving
process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement
proceeding on behalf of such owner or owners in connection with
the enforcement of any applicable law, code or ordinance; and
the name, street address, telephone number, and e-mail address
(if applicable) of the firm and the actual name(s) of the firms
individual principal(s) responsible for maintaining the property.
The individual or a representative of the firm responsible for
maintaining the property shall be available by telephone or in
person on a twenty-four-hour per day, seven-day per week basis.
The two entities may be the same or different persons. Both entities
shown on the statement must maintain offices in the State of New
Jersey or reside within the State of New Jersey.
3. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration for each vacant building or structure registered.
4. The owner shall notify the Township Clerk within 30 calendar days
of any change in the registration information by filing an amended
registration information by filing an amended registration
statement on a form provided by the Township for such purpose.
5. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement or
court proceeding instituted by the Township against the owner or
owners of the building or structure.
6. The registration statement may include any additional information
that the Township Clerk may reasonably require.
§ 15.07.020 RARITAN CODE § 15.07.040
1.01:304
compliance with the Township Housing Code, Chapter 15.08, or applicable
law, upon reasonable notice to the property owner or the designated agent.
Such inspections shall be conducted on weekdays during the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. or such other time as may be mutually agreed upon
between the owner and the Township.
§ 15.07.050. Responsible Owner or Agent. [Amended by Ord. 15-06]
§ 15.07.060. Vacant Building of Structure Owner Requirements.
[Amended by Ord. 15-06]
The owner of any building or structure that has become vacant, and any
person responsible for maintaining any such building or structure that has
become vacant shall, within 30 calendar days of the building or structure
becoming vacant or within 30 calendar days of the owner taking title to the
property, perform the following:
A. An owner who meets the requirements of this chapter regarding the
location of his or her residence or workplace in the State of New Jersey
may designate himself or herself as agent or as the individual
responsible for maintaining the property.
B. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this chapter
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of Township Housing
Code, Chapter 15.08, or other applicable law violations concerning the
registered property and all process in any administrative enforcement
or court proceeding brought to enforce this chapter regarding the
registered building or structure by service of the notice or process on
the authorized agent. Any owner who has designated an authorized
agent under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to consent to
the continuation of the agent's designation for the purposes of this
chapter until the owner notifies the Township Clerk in writing of a
change of authorized agent or until the owner files a new annual
registration statement.
C. Any owner who fails to register a vacant building or structure under the
provisions of this chapter shall further be deemed to consent to receive,
by posting on the building, in plain view, and by service notice at the
last known address of the owner of the property on record with the
Township by regular and certified mail, any and all notices under the
Township Housing Code, Chapter 15.08, or applicable law violations
and all process in an administrative or court proceeding brought to
enforce the Housing Code or other applicable law.
A. Board and secure the building or structure and all unattached
accessory structures, garages or similar structures as provided for by
applicable law.
B. Ensure that the exterior grounds of the building or structure, including
yards, fences, sidewalks, walkways, right-of-ways, alleys, retaining
walls, swimming pools both above or below ground, attached or
§ 15.07.040 CODE ADOPTION § 15.07.060
1.01:305
§ 15.07.070. Fees. [Amended by Ord. 15-06]
The registration for each building or structure shall be as follows:
§ 15.07.080. Violations and Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 2015-06;
Ord. 2016-03]
Chapter 15.08
unattached accessory structures and driveways, are well-maintained
and free from trash, debris, loose litter, grass and weed overgrowth,
and snow and ice.
C. Post a sign affixed and protected from the elements, to the building or
structure indicating the name, address and telephone number of the
owner and the owner's authorized agent for the purpose of service of
process, and the name, address and telephone number of the entity
responsible for maintenance of the property, which may be the same as
the owner or authorized agent. The sign shall include the words "No
Trespassing" and "to report problems with this building, call . . .", shall
be of sufficient size and shall be placed in a location where it is clearly
visible from the nearest public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer.
D. Continue to maintain the building or structure in a secure and closed
condition, keep the grounds in a clean and well-maintained condition,
and ensure that the sign is visible and intact until the building is again
occupied, demolished, or until repair and/or rehabilitation of the
building or structure is complete.
A. Initial registration: $50.
B. If not paid within six months of notification by the Township the
registration payment shall increase to $250.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
greater than $1,250 for each offense. Every day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines
assessed under this chapter shall be recoverable from the owner and
shall be a lien on the property.
B. For purposes of this chapter, failure to file a registration statement
within 30 calendar days after a building or structure becoming vacant
or within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of a vacant
building or structure, whichever is later; or within 10 calendar days of
receipt of notice from the Township, and failure to provide correct
information on the registration statement, failure to comply with the
provisions of Subsection 15.07.030 and Subsection 15.07.060, or such
provisions contained herein shall be deemed to be violations of this
chapter.
C. The maximum aggregate monetary penalty for any violation of this
chapter shall be $25,000.
§ 15.07.060 RARITAN CODE § 15.07.080
1.01:306
HOUSING CODE
§ 15.08.010. Adoption by Reference. [Prior code §§ 9-2.1, 9-2.2]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, the New Jersey
State Housing Code, as approved by the Departments of Health and
Conservation and Economic Development and filed in the Secretary of
State's office, is accepted, adopted and established as a standard to be used
as a guide in determining whether dwellings in this municipality are safe,
sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental. A copy of the New Jersey
State Housing Code is made a part of this section without the text being
included herein.
Three copies of the New Jersey State Housing Code have been placed on
file in the office of the clerk and shall remain on file there for the use and
examination by the public.
§ 15.08.020. Enforcing Authority. [Prior code § 9-2.3; amended by
Ord. 15-07]
The Zoning Officer of the Township is designated as the officer to exercise
the powers prescribed by this chapter, and he shall serve in such capacity
without any additional salary.
§ 15.08.030. Inspection. [Prior code § 9-2.4; amended by Ord.
15-07]
The Zoning Officer is authorized and directed to make inspections to
determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises located within the Township, in order that they may perform their
duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings
and of the general public. For the purpose of making such inspections, the
Zoning Officer is authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable
times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner
or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit, or the person
in charge thereof, shall give the Zoning Officer free access to the dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times for
the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant
of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his or her
agent or employee, access to any part of the dwelling or dwelling unit, or its
premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 15.08.040. Search Warrant. [Prior code § 9-2.5; amended by Ord.
15-07]
The Zoning Officer may, upon affidavit, apply to the Township Judge for
a search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and
§ 15.07.080 CODE ADOPTION § 15.08.040
1.01:307
circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance
or violation of this chapter exists on the premises, and if the Township Judge
is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize
the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of
that part of the premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist. A
search warrant may also be obtained in connection with a general program
of inspection.
§ 15.08.050. Notice of Violation. [Prior code § 9-2.6; amended by
Ord. 15-07]
Whenever the Zoning Officer determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter,
or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he or she shall
give notice of the alleged violation to the person or persons responsible
therefor as hereinafter provided. The notice shall be put in writing, include
a statement of the reasons why it is being issued, allow a reasonable time
for the performance of any act it requires and be served upon the owner or
his or her agent, or the occupant, as the case may require, provided that the
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner or agent, or
upon the occupant, if a copy thereof is served upon him or her personally;
or if a copy is sent by registered mail to his or her last known address; or
if a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected
by the notice; or if he or she is served with the notice by any other method
authorized or required under the laws of this State. The notice may contain
an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will affect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
§ 15.08.060. Hearing Provisions. [Prior code § 9-2.7; amended by
Ord. 15-07]
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with
the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Township Committee, provided that the person shall
file in the office of the Township Clerk a written petition requesting a
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within
10 days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of the petition,
the Township Committee shall set a time and place for the hearing and shall
give the petitioner written notice thereof. At the hearing, the petitioner shall
be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why the notice should
be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than
10 days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided that, upon
application of the petitioner, the Township Committee may postpone the
date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond the ten-day period if, in
its judgment, the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for
the postponement. After the hearing, the Township Committee shall sustain,
modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon its findings as to whether
the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted
§ 15.08.040 RARITAN CODE § 15.08.060
1.01:308
pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Township Committee
sustains or modifies the notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice
served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically become an order if a
written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Township Clerk
within 10 days after the notice is served. The proceedings at the hearing,
including the findings and decision of the Township Committee, shall be
summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record
in the office of the Township Clerk. The record shall also include a copy
of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person
aggrieved by the decision of the Township Committee may seek relief in
any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of the State.
Whenever the Zoning Officer finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he or she may,
without notice of hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he or she deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of
this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom
the order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but, upon petition
to the Township Committee, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
After the hearing, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions
of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
have been complied with, the Township Committee shall continue the order
in effect or modify it or revoke it.
§ 15.08.070. Promulgation of Rules and Regulations. [Prior code
§ 9-2.8; amended by Ord. 15-07]
The Zoning Officer is authorized and empowered to make and adopt such
written rules and regulations as they may deem necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, provided that the rules and
regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, nor in
any way alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions thereof. The Zoning
Officer shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which they may
adopt in their office and in the office of the Clerk of the Township.
§ 15.08.080. Compliance With Housing Code. [Prior code § 9-2.9]
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or rent to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing Code
established hereby as the standard to be used in determining whether a
dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
Chapter 15.12
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
§ 15.08.060 CODE ADOPTION § 15.12.010
1.01:309
§ 15.12.010. Findings. [Prior code § 9-3.1]
It is found and declared that the existence or occupation of any building or
buildings or parts thereof within the Township which are so old, dilapidated
or have become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or
otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use are inimical to
the welfare and dangerous and injurious to the health and safety of the
residents of the Township and that a public necessity exists for the repair,
closing or demolition of such building or buildings or part thereof. The
Township desires to exercise the powers set forth in N.J.R.S. 40:48-2.3 et
seq. and the several supplements and amendments thereto.
§ 15.12.020. Definitions. [Prior code § 9-3.2]
The following terms, whenever used or referred to in this chapter, shall have
the following respective meanings for the purpose of this chapter, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof whether used for
human habitation or otherwise and including any outhouses, sheds and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually adjoined therewith.
OWNER — The holder or holders of title in fee simple.
PARTY IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations or corporations who
have interest of record in a building and any person who is in actual
possession thereof.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The officers authorized by this chapter to exercise the
powers prescribed herein.
§ 15.12.030. Construction Code Enforcement Officer. [Prior code
§ 9-3.3]
The Construction Code Enforcement Officer shall be designated as the
public officer. The public officer shall be authorized and empowered to
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out
and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this section including the
following, in addition to others herein granted.
A. To investigate the building conditions in the Township in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation;
B. To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and review
evidence;
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter;
§ 15.12.010 RARITAN CODE § 15.12.030
1.01:310
§ 15.12.040. Complaint; Notice; Hearing. [Prior code § 9-3.4]
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the Township charging that any building
is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, or if it shall appear to
the public officer, on his or her own motion, that any building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use, the public officer shall, if his or her
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a
hearing shall be held before the public officer at a place therein fixed, not
less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint,
and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the place and
time fixed in the complaint, and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the
courts of this state shall not be controlling.
§ 15.12.050. Determination; Order of Abatement. [Prior code
§ 9-3.5]
If after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
building, buildings, or parts thereof are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact
in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order:
E. To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents as he or she may designate.
A. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building,
buildings or part thereof to be made by the owner, within a reasonable
time, which time shall be set forth in the order. The owner also may
vacate or have the building vacated and closed within the time set forth
in the order.
B. If the building, buildings or parts thereof are in such a condition as to
make it dangerous to the health and safety of persons on or near the
premises, and the owner fails to repair, alter or improve the building,
buildings or parts thereof within the time specified in the order, then
the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the building,
buildings or parts thereof within a reasonable time as specified in the
order of removal.
C. The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he or she finds that conditions exist in
the building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of
the occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings
or other residents of the municipality; such conditions may include the
following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
1. Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities;
§ 15.12.030 CODE ADOPTION § 15.12.050
1.01:311
§ 15.12.060. Noncompliance by Owner; Order for Removal or
Demolition. [Prior code § 9-3.6]
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building, buildings or parts
thereof to be removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or
demolition thereof after advertisement for, and receipt of bids therefor.
§ 15.12.070. Costs of Abatement to Be a Lien Against Real Property.
[Prior code § 9-3.7]
If the building is removed or demolished by the public officer, he or she
shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against
the cost of the removal or demolition thereof, the proceeds of any sale of
such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the total sum
of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the
aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the Tax Assessor
or other custodian of the records of tax liens and a copy thereof shall be
forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If the total credits
exceed such costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior
Court by the public officer, secured in such manner as may be directed
by such court, and disbursed according to the order or judgement of the
court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment
of such court; provided that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the Township to define and declare
nuisances or to cause their removal or statement by summary, proceedings
or otherwise.
The following shall be a municipal lien against real property upon which the
cost was incurred:
2. Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
3. Dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
D. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or
vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on the
main entrance of any building so closed, a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use;
the use or occupancy of this building is prohibited and unlawful." No
person shall own, have, keep, maintain or live in any building on which
there has been posted a placard as herein provided for, or remove or
cause the removal of any such posted placard.
A. The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search fees
and advertising charges, incurred in the course of any proceeding taken
under the provisions of this chapter;
§ 15.12.050 RARITAN CODE § 15.12.070
1.01:312
§ 15.12.080. Service of Complaints or Orders. [Prior code § 9-3.8]
Complaints or orders issued by the public officer pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but
if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence and
the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of
such complaint or order upon such persons made be made by publishing
the same once each week or two successive weeks in a newspaper printed
and published in the Township or in the absence of such newspaper, in
one printed in the county and circulating in the Township. A copy of such
complaint and/or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises
affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall
be duly recorded or lodged for record with the County Recording Officer of
the County of Hunterdon.
§ 15.12.090. Performance by the Township; Recovery of Costs.
[Prior code § 9-3.9]
Any repair, alteration, removal or demolition, as above provided, may be
performed by the Township through its proper officials or employees or the
Township may contract with any person to render such service on behalf of
the Township unless its control and direction, and pursuant to specifications
showing in detail the service to be rendered, and to rules and regulations
adopted by the Township Committee for the same and upon ample security
for proper performance being given to the Township. The procedure to be
followed in adopting any such contract, shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:48-5, The Township may recover the costs thereof from the owner by
action at law, which action shall be in addition to any other remedy provider
for by this chapter and shall not make void any lien upon real estate
provided for by this chapter, nor present the imposition of any penalty
imposed for violation of this or any ordinance of this Township.
§ 15.12.100. Construction of Provisions. [Prior code § 9-3.10]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the Township or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of its
charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations
thereof, and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and
B. The cost of such repairs, alteration or improvements or vacation and
closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance
thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the
sale of materials derived from such building or from any contract for
removal or demolition thereof.
Any owner or party in interest may within 60 days from the date of the filing
of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to
protest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the cost set forth
in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 15.12.070 CODE ADOPTION § 15.12.100
1.01:313
supplemental to the powers conferred upon the Township by any other law
or ordinance. Whenever a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of a zoning, building, fire, health or other law, ordinance or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the provision or requirement which is
more restrictive or which established the highest standard shall apply.
§ 15.12.110. Violations and Penalties. [Prior code § 9-3.11]
Any person or persons who violate any of the provisions of this chapter or
who shall violate an order of the public officer or who shall violate an order
of the public officer or who shall use or occupy any building for human
habitation or occupancy or use after a placard has been posted thereon
declaring the building unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, as
provided herein, or any person who removes such placard from the building,
or any person who shall interfere with the public officer or any other person
authorized to exercise the powers of the public officer shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court, be subject to a fine not exceeding $200, and such
action in and penalties imposed by the municipal court may be in addition
to any other action or proceedings provided in this chapter. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 15.16
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 15.16.010. Definitions. [Prior code § 13-1]
The following meanings of words shall apply:
FENCE — A fence, wall, natural barrier, building or other enclosure or
any combination thereof which shall surround and protect swimming pools,
portable pools or wading pools. Such barriers shall be impenetrable by
toddlers and such barriers shall be at least four feet in height with gates of
equal height equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices maintained
in good working order and which can only be unlatched from the swimming
pool side of the gate and equipped with mechanisms to allow for locking. All
entrances other than those from within a building, shall be self-closing and
equipped with self-latching devices and equipped with mechanisms to allow
for locking.
PORTABLE POOL — Any above surface type of swimming pool or wading
pool not designed or intended to be stationary or permanently fixed and
able to be removed and stored.
SWIMMING POOL — A body of water, artificially constructed in whole or
in part, whether permanently constructed or of the portable type, having
at any point a depth of more than 18 inches below the grade or level
of the ground area surrounding it or any above surface pool or having a
depth of more than 30 inches and located out of doors on a lot or lots and
designed, established and constructed for swimming or bathing purposes
for an individual for use of the members of the household and guests.
§ 15.12.100 RARITAN CODE § 15.16.010
1.01:314
WADING POOL — Includes any shallow pool not included above.
§ 15.16.020. Applicability. [Prior code § 13-5]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to swimming pools existing
November 27, 1972 and swimming pools constructed after November 27,
1972. However, as to swimming pools, portable pools or wading pools
existing November 27, 1972 and not enclosed by the required fence, a fence
as herein described shall be constructed on or before May 15, 1973.
§ 15.16.030. Exemptions. [Prior code § 13-6; amended by Ord.
98-42]
The following shall not be considered a swimming pool under this chapter
notwithstanding the possibility that all or any of the hereinafter named
may occasionally or regularly be used for bathing or swimming and the
hereinafter named are expressly exempted from this chapter.
§ 15.16.040. Fences. [Prior code § 13-2]
A. Any and all indoor swimming pools;
B. Any and all rivers, streams, relocated streams, lakes, natural ponds, or
other natural waterways;
C. Any and all manmade lakes and ponds having a normal water surface
area of more than 1/2 of an acre;
D. Any and all manmade drainage ditches, mill races and other similar
waterways;
E. Any and all manmade fish ponds having a depth of not more than 18
inches;
F. Any and all wading pools having a depth of not more than 18 inches;
G. Any and all aboveground inflated plastic wading pools and other
aboveground wading pools of similar flexible side wall construction
having a depth of not more than 30 inches;
H. Any and all swimming pools which are commercially operated as a
business and as a permitted use or existing nonconforming use under
the terms of the zoning chapter.
Fencing of all pools in any zone shall be in accordance with the development
regulations of the Township.
A. Fence Required. No person shall construct, maintain, use or cause,
suffer or permit to be constructed, maintained or used, a swimming
pool, portable pool or wading pool in the Township unless there shall be
constructed and maintained a fence or as otherwise provided enclosing
the area on which the swimming pool is located.
§ 15.16.010 CODE ADOPTION § 15.16.040
1.01:315
§ 15.16.050. Ladder Requirements. [Prior code § 13-4]
All above surface type swimming pools or portable pools or wading pools
shall have any access ladder or steps used in connection with this type of
pool or portable pool removed from the pool when the same is not in use
unless the pool is enclosed in fencing which satisfies the requirements of
this chapter.
All ladders which are affixed to above surface type pools with a mechanism
to swing the ladder clear of the pool shall be locked with a self-locking
device to obstruct and prevent use of the pool when the same is unattended
or unguarded.
§ 15.16.060. Enforcement. [Prior code § 13-3; amended by Ord.
15-08]
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer of the Township to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 15.20
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
§ 15.20.010. Intent, Purpose and Applicability. [ 2-4-2020 by Ord.
No. 20-018]
B. Alternative to Fence. In addition to the definition of a fence in Section
15.16.010, procedure shall satisfy the design requirements. A pool
cover or guard, containing no openings large enough to pass a ball or
sphere five inches in diameter, over the entire surface of the pool,
adjusted to the top of the pool or to the normal elevation of the surface
of the water in the pool, measured when full which will support weight
of at least 150 pounds when in place and kept in place when the use of
the pool is not under the supervision of a person who is a good
swimmer.
A. This chapter is intended to assure that low- and moderate-income units
("affordable units") are created with controls on affordability and that
low- and moderate-income households shall occupy these units. This
chapter is also intended to ensure that any site that benefits from a
rezoning, variance or redevelopment plan approved by the Township
that results in multifamily residential development of five dwelling units
or more produces affordable housing at a set-aside rate of 20% for forsale
affordable units and at a set-aside rate of 15% for rental affordable
units. This chapter shall apply except where inconsistent with
applicable law.
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 15.20, Affordable Housing, as last
amended by Ord. 08-11.
§ 15.16.040 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.010
1.01:316
§ 15.20.020. Definitions. [2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-01]
The following terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
given in this section:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit with
a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private entrance,
which is created within an existing home, or through the conversion of
an existing accessory structure on the same site, or by an addition to
an existing home or accessory building, or by the construction of a new
accessory structure on the same site.
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.), as has been subsequently amended.
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.9
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for the administration
of affordable units in accordance with this chapter, applicable COAH
regulations and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC)
(N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income at
which restricted units in an affordable housing development are affordable
to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined by COAH in its applicable
regulations or an equivalent controlling New Jersey state agency; in the
case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
B. The Township of Raritan Planning Board shall adopt a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. (hereinafter "Fair Share Plan"). The Fair Share Plan
shall subsequently be endorsed by the governing body. The Fair Share
Plan shall describe how Raritan Township shall address its fair share of
low- and moderate-income housing as documented in the Fair Share
Plan itself, the Settlement Agreement entered into between the
Township and Fair Share Housing Center ("FSHC") on June 14, 2019,
last signed June 18, 2019 (hereinafter "FSHC Settlement Agreement"),
and the Court order approving same, which was entered by the Court
on July 24, 2019, after a properly noticed fairness hearing.
C. The Township of Raritan shall track the status of the implementation of
the Fair Share Plan.
9. Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
§ 15.20.010 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.020
1.01:317
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development, all or a portion
of which consists of restricted units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
the Township's Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to, an
inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100%
affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in the
Township's Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address the
Township's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act, credited pursuant to applicable COAH regulations, the FSHC
Settlement Agreement, or an order of the Court.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that: 1) all the residents of the development where the unit
is situated are 62 years or older; or 2) at least 80% of the units are occupied
by one person that is 55 years or older; or 3) the development has been
designated by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development as "housing for older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2)
of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that require the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Affairs of the State of
New Jersey, which was established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
§ 15.20.020 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.020
1.01:318
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. Inclusionary developments must
have a 20% set-aside of affordable units if the development has five or more
units and is a for-sale project, or a 15% set-aside if the development is a
rental project. This term includes, but is not necessarily limited to: new
construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to residential and
the creation of new affordable units through the reconstruction of a vacant
residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building,
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement or load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable county, as adopted annually by the Department.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median
household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a Class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by Court order.
§ 15.20.020 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.020
1.01:319
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of the
regional median as defined by the Department's adopted regional income
limits published annually by the Department.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or ownership
unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.,
as may be amended and supplemented, but does not include a market-rate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the median household income.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for rehabilitation.
§ 15.20.030. Affordable Housing Programs. [2-4-2020 by Ord. No.
20-01]
The Township of Raritan will use the following mechanisms to satisfy its
affordable housing obligations:
A. A Rehabilitation Program.
1. The Township of Raritan and FSHC have agreed that the
Township's indigenous need rehabilitation obligation is 16 units.
The Township shall continue to sponsor a local rehabilitation
program sufficient to satisfy its present need obligation of 16 units.
The Township shall establish a rehabilitation program manual. In
the event the Township satisfies its rehabilitation obligation, it will
continue to implement its rehabilitation program, and any
§ 15.20.020 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.030
1.01:320
additional units that are rehabilitated may be credited towards any
future affordable housing obligations, if permitted by applicable
law and regulations. The Township will continue its rehabilitation
program to update and renovate deficient housing units occupied
by low- and moderate-income households such that, after
rehabilitation, these units will comply with the New Jersey State
Housing Code pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:28. The Township will
continue to rehabilitate housing units to improve its housing stock
and to continue to provide indigenous need affordable units.
2. All rehabilitated rental and owner-occupied units shall remain
affordable to low- and moderate-income households for a period of
10 years (the control period). For owner-occupied units, the control
period will be enforced with a lien, and for renter-occupied units,
the control period will be enforced with a deed restriction.
3. The Township of Raritan shall dedicate an average of $10,000 for
each unit to be rehabilitated through this program, reflecting the
minimum hard cost of rehabilitation for each unit.
4. The Township of Raritan will continue to administer the
rehabilitation program in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93.1, et seq.10
5. Units in a rehabilitation program shall be exempt from N.J.A.C.
5:93-911 and UHAC requirements, but shall be administered in
accordance with the following:
a. If a unit is vacant, upon initial rental subsequent to
rehabilitation, or if a renter-occupied unit is rerented prior to
the end of controls on affordability, the deed restriction shall
require the unit to be rented to a low- or moderate-income
household at an affordable rent and affirmatively marketed
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-912 and UHAC.
b. If a unit is renter-occupied, upon completion of the
rehabilitation, the maximum rate of rent shall be the lesser of
the current rent or the maximum permitted rent pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-913 and UHAC.
c. Rents in rehabilitated units may increase annually based on
the standards in N.J.A.C. 5:93-914 or the standards issued by a
New Jersey administrative agency with proper authority to
issue such standards.
d. Applicant and/or tenant households shall be certified as
income-eligible in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-915 and UHAC,
10.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
11.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
12.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
13.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
14.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 15.20.030 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.030
1.01:321
except that households in owner-occupied units shall be
exempt from the regional asset limit.
B. Percentage of Mandatory Set-Asides for All Future Residential
Developments.
1. If the Township or a Township Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment permits the construction of multifamily or single-family
attached residential development that is "approvable" and
"developable," as defined at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3,16 the Township or the
Township's Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
require that an appropriate percentage of the residential units be
set aside for low- and moderate-income households. This
requirement shall apply beginning with the effective date of this
chapter to any multifamily or single-family attached residential
development, including the residential portion of a mixed-use
project, which consists of five or more new residential units,
whether permitted by a zoning amendment, a variance granted by
the Township's Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, or
adoption of a redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan
in areas in need of redevelopment or rehabilitation. For any such
development for which the Township's land use ordinances (e.g.,
zoning or an adopted redevelopment plan) already permitted
residential development as of the effective date of this chapter, this
requirement shall only apply if the Township or the Township's
Zoning Board of Adjustment permits an increase in approvable and
developable gross residential density to at least twice the
permitted approvable and developable gross residential density as
of the effective date of this chapter. Nothing in this subsection
precludes the Township or the Township's Zoning Board of
Adjustment from imposing an affordable housing set-aside in a
development not required to have a set-aside pursuant to this
subsection consistent with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311h and other
applicable law. For inclusionary projects in which the low and
moderate units are to be offered for sale, the appropriate set-aside
percentage is 20%; for projects in which the low- and moderateincome
units are to be offered for rent, the appropriate set-aside
percentage is 15%. This requirement does not create any
entitlement for a property owner or applicant for a zoning
amendment, variance, or adoption of a redevelopment plan or
amended redevelopment plan in areas in need of redevelopment or
rehabilitation, or for approval of any particular proposed project.
This requirement does not apply to any sites or specific zones
otherwise identified in the Township's Settlement Agreement with
FSHC dated June 14, 2019, or in the Township's Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, for which density and set-aside standards shall
be governed by the specific standards set forth therein.
15.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
16.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 15.20.030 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.030
1.01:322
2. Furthermore, this section shall not apply to developments
containing four or fewer dwelling units. All subdivision and site
plan approvals of qualifying residential developments shall be
conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this section.
Where a developer demolishes existing dwelling units and builds
new dwelling units on the same site, the provisions of this section
shall apply only if the net number of dwelling units is five or more.
C. Phasing. Inclusionary developments shall be subject to the following
schedule, except where an alternate phasing schedule has been
incorporated into a development or redevelopment agreement:
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units Completed
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 75
100 90
D. Fractional Units. If 15% or 20% of the total number of units in a
development results in a fraction or decimal, the developer shall be
required to provide an additional affordable unit on site.
Example: An eight-unit development requiring an affordable housing
set-aside of 1.6 units is proposed. The developer is required to provide
two on-site affordable units.
E. Integration of Affordable Units. In inclusionary developments, to the
extent possible, low- and moderate-income units shall be integrated
with the market-rate units.
F. Utilities. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source
as market units within the affordable development.
G. Common Elements and Facilities. In inclusionary development, low- and
moderate-income units shall have access to all of the same common
elements and facilities as the market units.
H. Alternative Living Arrangements.
1. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.817 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
a. Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided,
however, that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively
17.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 15.20.030 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.030
1.01:323
§ 15.20.040. New Construction. [2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-01]
The following general guidelines apply to all newly constructed
developments that contain low- and moderate-income housing units,
including any currently unanticipated future developments that will provide
low- and moderate-income housing units.
marketed by the provider in accordance with an alternative
plan approved by the Court;
b. Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3).
2. With the exception of units established with capital funding
through a twenty-year operating contract with the Department of
Human Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative
living arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on
affordability in accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative
commitment is approved by the Court.
3. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall
act as the administrative agent for the purposes of administering
the affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the
alternative living arrangement.
A. Low/Moderate Split and Bedroom Distribution of Affordable Housing
Units:
1. The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit.
2. In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units. If
there is only one affordable unit, it must be a low-income unit.
3. Thirteen percent of all affordable units in the Township, with the
exception of units constructed as of July 1, 2008, and units subject
to preliminary or final site plan approval as of July 1, 2008, shall be
designated as very-low-income households at 30% of the median
income, with at least 50% of all very-low-income units being
available to families. Very-low-income units shall be considered
low-income units for the purposes of evaluating compliance with
the required low/moderate income unit splits, bedroom
distribution, and phasing requirements of this chapter.
4. Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
§ 15.20.030 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.040
1.01:324
a. The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
b. At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units;
c. At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
d. The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
5. Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. The standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility Requirements:
1. The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.18
2. All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
a. An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
b. An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
c. An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
d. An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required
between stories within an individual unit;
e. An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door,
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
f. An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7,19 or evidence that the Township of Raritan has
collected funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of
the adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
i. Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
18.Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
19.Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
§ 15.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.040
1.01:325
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
ii. To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township's Affordable Housing Trust
Fund sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10% of
the affordable units that have been constructed with
adaptable entrances.
iii. The funds deposited under Subsection B.2.f.ii above shall
be used by the Township of Raritan for the sole purpose of
making the adaptable entrance of any affordable unit
accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
iv. The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate for the conversion from adaptable
to accessible entrances to the Construction Official of the
Township.
v. Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meets the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7,20 and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
vi. Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is site
impracticable to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.21
C. Maximum Rents and Sales Prices.
1. In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC utilizing the regional income limits published by HUD, which
includes the regional weighted average of uncapped Section 8
income limits and using calculation procedures approved by the
Court. Income limits for all units that are part of the Township's
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and for which income limits
are not already established through a federal program exempted
from the UHAC pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq. shall be
updated by the Township annually within 30 days of the publication
of determinations of median income by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development ("HUD") as follows:
20.Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
21.Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
§ 15.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.040
1.01:326
a. Regional income limits shall be established for the region that
the Township is located within based on the median income by
household size, which shall be established by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by HUD. To compute this regional income limit, the
HUD determination of median county income for a family of
four is multiplied by the estimated households within the
county according to the most recent decennial Census. The
resulting product for each county within the housing region is
summed. The sum is divided by the estimated total households
from the most recent decennial Census in the Township's
housing region. This quotient represents the regional weighted
average of median income for a household of four. The income
limit for a moderate-income unit for a household of four shall
be 80% of the regional weighted average median income for a
family of four. The income limit for a low-income unit for a
household of four shall be 50% of the HUD determination of
the regional weighted average median income for a family of
four. The income limit for a very-low-income unit for a
household of four shall be 30% of the regional weighted
average median income for a family of four. These income
limits shall be adjusted by household size based on multipliers
used by HUD to adjust median income by household size. In no
event shall the income limits be less than those for the previous
year.
b. The income limits are the result of applying the percentages
set forth in Subsection C.1.a above to HUD's determination of
median income for the fiscal year 2019, and shall be utilized
until the Township updates the income limits after HUD has
published revised determinations of median income for the
next fiscal year.
c. The regional asset limit used in determining an applicant's
eligibility for affordable housing pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.16(b)3 shall be calculated by the Township annually by
taking the percentage increase of the income limits calculated
pursuant to Subsection C.1.a above over the previous year's
income limits, and applying the same percentage increase to
the regional asset limit from the prior year. In no event shall
the regional asset limit be less than that for the previous year.
d. In establishing sale prices and rents of affordable housing
units, the Township's administrative agent shall follow the
procedures set forth in UHAC, utilizing the regional income
limits established pursuant to the process defined above:
i. The resale prices of owner-occupied low- and moderateincome
units may increase annually based on the
percentage increase in the regional median income limit
for each housing region determined pursuant to the above
§ 15.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.040
1.01:327
methodology. In no event shall the maximum resale price
established by the administrative agent be lower than the
last recorded purchase price.
ii. The rent levels of very-low-, low- and moderate-income
units may be increased annually based on the percentage
increase in the Housing Consumer Price Index for the
Northeast Urban Area, upon its publication for the prior
calendar year. This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one
year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to low-income
housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed pursuant to
the regulations governing low-income housing tax credits.
2. The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted low- and moderate-income units shall be affordable to
households earning no more than 52% of median income.
3. The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units.
a. At least 13% of all low- and moderate-income dwelling units
shall be affordable to households earning no more than 30% of
median income.
4. The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different prices
for each bedroom type.
5. In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units other
than assisted living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
a. A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
b. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household;
c. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
d. A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-halfperson
household;
§ 15.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.040
1.01:328
e. A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
6. In determining the initial rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in assisted
living facilities, the following standards shall be used:
a. A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
b. A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household;
c. A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
7. The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
8. The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall
be subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
9. The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
10. The rent of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase
shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed
pursuant to low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be
indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low-income housing
tax credits.
11. Utilities. Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility
allowance shall be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent
with the utility allowance approved by DCA for its Section 8
program.
§ 15.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.050
1.01:329
§ 15.20.050. Affirmative Marketing Requirements. [2-4-2020 by
Ord. No. 20-01]
A. The Township of Raritan shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative
Marketing Plan, subject to approval of the Court, compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented. The initial
Affirmative Marketing Plan shall include the following community and
regional organizations: Fair Share Housing Center, the New Jersey
State Conference of the NAACP, the Latino Action Network, Supportive
Housing Association, NORWESCAP, and the Central Jersey Housing
Resource Center.
B. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
Affirmative Marketing Plan is also intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs all marketing activities
toward Housing Region 4 and covers the period of deed restriction.
C. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 4.
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
Affirmative Marketing Plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals.
E. The administrative agent designated by the Township of Raritan shall
assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units consistent with
the Affirmative Marketing Plan for the municipality.
F. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
G. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
H. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months prior to the expected date of occupancy.
I. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building
and/or the County Library for each county within the housing region;
§ 15.20.050 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.050
1.01:330
§ 15.20.060. Occupancy Standards. [2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-01]
§ 15.20.070. Control Periods for Restricted Ownership Units and
Enforcement Mechanisms. [2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-01]
the municipal administration building and the municipal library in the
municipality in which the units are located; and the developer's rental
office. Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
J. In addition to other affirmative marketing strategies, the administrative
agent shall provide specific notice of the availability of affordable
housing units in the Township of Raritan, and copies of the application
forms, to the following entities: Fair Share Housing Center, the New
Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, the Latino Action Network,
Supportive Housing Association, NORWESCAP, and the Central Jersey
Housing Resource Center.
K. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner,
unless otherwise determined or agreed to by the Township.
A. In referring certified households to specific restricted units, to the
extent feasible, and without causing an undue delay in occupying the
unit, the administrative agent shall strive to:
1. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
2. Provide children of different sex with separate bedrooms;
3. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
4. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
B. Additional provisions related to occupancy standards (if any) shall be
provided in the municipal Operating Manual.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this chapter until the Township of Raritan elects to release the unit
from such requirements; however, and prior to such an election, a
restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as may be amended and supplemented, for at
least 30 years.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
§ 15.20.050 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.070
1.01:331
§ 15.20.080. Price Restrictions for Restricted Ownership Units,
Homeowner Association Fees and Resale Prices. [2-4-2020 by Ord.
No. 20-01]
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as may be amended and supplemented, including:
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value.
D. At the time of the first sale of the unit, the purchaser shall execute and
deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note obligating the
purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors and assigns) to
repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's release from the
requirements of this chapter, an amount equal to the difference
between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its restricted
price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture lien
evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this chapter shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all code standards upon the first
transfer of title that follows the expiration of the applicable minimum
control period provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended
and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The method used to determine the condominium association fee
amounts and special assessments shall be indistinguishable between
the low- and moderate-income unit owners and the market unit owners.
The master deeds shall also not contain any distinction between the
condominium or homeowner association fees and special assessments
paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers and those paid by market
purchases.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements. Eligible capital improvements
shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger household or the
addition of a bathroom.
§ 15.20.070 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.090
1.01:332
§ 15.20.090. Buyer Income Eligibility. [2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-01]
§ 15.20.100. Limitations on Indebtedness Secured by Ownership
Unit; Subordination. [2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-01]
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income, and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income. Very-low-income units shall be reserved for
households with a gross household income of less than 30% of median
income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the administrative agent may, upon
approval by the Township Committee, and subject to the Court's
approval, permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a low-income
unit, if and only if the administrative agent can demonstrate that there
is an insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers in the
housing region to permit prompt occupancy of the unit, and all other
reasonable efforts to attract a low-income purchaser, including pricing
and financing incentives, have failed. Any such low-income unit that is
sold to a moderate-income household shall retain the required pricing
and pricing restrictions for a low-income unit.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year. Violations of this
provision shall be subject to the applicable enforcement provisions of
Section 15.20.150 of this chapter.
D. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's certified monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the administrative agent shall determine in writing that
the proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this section.
B. With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a
control period, neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or
permit the total indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to
§ 15.20.090 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.100
1.01:333
§ 15.20.105. Capital Improvements to Ownership Units. [2-4-2020
by Ord. No. 20-01]
§ 15.20.110. Control Periods for Restricted Rental Units. [2-4-2020
by Ord. No. 20-01]
exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale price of that unit, as such
price is determined by the administrative agent in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air-conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale, provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air-conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
chapter until the Township of Raritan elects to release the unit from
such requirements pursuant to action taken in compliance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq., as may be as may be amended and supplemented, and
prior to such an election, a restricted rental unit must remain subject to
the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as may be amended and
supplemented, for at least 30 years.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
§ 15.20.100 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.110
1.01:334
§ 15.20.120. Price Restrictions for Rental Units; Leases. [2-4-2020
by Ord. No. 20-01]
§ 15.20.130. Tenant Income Eligibility. [2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-01]
County of Hunterdon. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to
the administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this chapter, despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
1. Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
2. Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
3. The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units, except
for units in an assisted living residence, and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as
stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted
rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
chapter.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this chapter.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
1. Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of median
income.
2. Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
§ 15.20.110 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.130
1.01:335
§ 15.20.140. Administration. [2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-01]
3. Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
1. The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
2. The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
3. The household is currently in substandard or overcrowed living
conditions;
4. The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
5. The household documents proposed third-party assistance from an
outside source such as a family member in a form acceptable to the
administrative agent and the owner of the unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection B.1 through B.5 above
with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
A. The position of Municipal Housing Liaison (MHL) for the Township of
Raritan is established by this chapter. The Township shall make the
actual appointment of the MHL by means of a resolution.
1. The MHL must be either a full-time or part-time employee of the
Township of Raritan.
2. The person appointed as the MHL must be reported to the Court
and thereafter posted on the Township's website.
3. The MHL must meet all the requirements for qualifications,
including initial and periodic training, if such training is made
available by COAH or the DCA.
4. The MHL shall be responsible for oversight and administration of
the affordable housing program for the Township of Raritan,
§ 15.20.130 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.140
1.01:336
including the following responsibilities, which may not be
contracted out to the administrative agent:
a. Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents and interested households;
b. The implementation of the Affirmative Marketing Plan and
affordability controls.
c. When applicable, supervising any contracting administrative
agent.
d. Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township's
Fair Share Plan;
e. Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as
required;
f. Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable; and
g. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by the Affordable Housing Professionals of
New Jersey (AHPNJ), if such continuing education
opportunities are made available by COAH or the DCA.
B. The Township of Raritan shall designate by resolution of the Township
Committee, subject to the approval of the Court, one or more
administrative agents to administer newly constructed affordable units
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:9322 and UHAC.
C. An Operating Manual shall be provided by the administrative agent(s)
to be adopted by resolution of the governing body. The Operating
Manual shall be available for public inspection in the office of the
Municipal Clerk and in the office(s) of the administrative agent(s).
D. The administrative agent shall perform the duties and responsibilities
of an administrative agent as are set forth in UHAC, including those set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 5:80-26.16, and 5:80-26.18 thereof, and
shall have authority to take all actions necessary and appropriate to
carry out its responsibilities, which includes:
1. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by the Affordable Housing Professionals of
New Jersey (AHPNJ).
2. Affirmative Marketing:
22.Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired 10-16-2016.
§ 15.20.140 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.140
1.01:337
a. Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market
affordable housing units in accordance with the Affirmative
Marketing Plan of the Township of Raritan and the provisions
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
b. Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
3. Household Certification:
a. Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
b. Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
c. Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
d. Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
e. Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located;
f. Employing a random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Raritan when
referring households for certification to affordable units; and
g. Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable
housing units in the Township of Raritan: Fair Share Housing
Center, the New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, the
Latino Action Network, the Supportive Housing Association,
and the Central Jersey Housing Resource Center.
4. Affordability Controls:
a. Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
b. Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
§ 15.20.140 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.140
1.01:338
c. Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the Hunterdon County Register of Deeds or
Hunterdon County Clerk's office after the termination of the
affordability controls for each restricted unit;
d. Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
e. Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
5. Resale and rerental:
a. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rerental;
b. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- (or very-low-) and
moderate-income households regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or rerental.
6. Records retention;
7. Processing requests from unit owners;
a. Reviewing and approving requests for determination from
owners of restricted units who wish to take out home equity
loans or refinance during the term of their ownership that the
amount of indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the
terms of this chapter;
b. Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the
depreciated cost of central air-conditioning systems;
c. Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a
restricted unit;
d. Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted
units for hardship waivers.
8. Enforcement, though the ultimate responsibility for retaining
controls on the units rests with the municipality.
a. Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee
owners, and notifying all such owners that they must either
move back to their unit or sell it;
§ 15.20.140 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.140
1.01:339
§ 15.20.150. Enforcement of Affordable Housing Regulations.
[2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-01]
b. Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
c. Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family
homes), a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together
with the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
d. Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
e. Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund;
f. Creating and publishing a written Operating Manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the
administrative agent, to be approved by the Township
Committee and the Court, setting forth procedures for
administering the affordability controls.
9. Additional Responsibilities:
a. The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all
actions necessary and appropriate to carry out its
responsibilities hereunder.
b. The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet
the Court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this chapter.
c. The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as
needed.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal fines, a requirement for
household recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a
mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a sale in the violation of the
regulations, and injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the
regulations, entry on the premises, and specific performance.
§ 15.20.140 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.150
1.01:340
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action against the owner, developer or tenant for
any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after service
of the written notice:
1. The municipality may file a Court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation, or violations, of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is found by the Court to have violated any provision of the
regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
a. A fine of not more than $10,000 or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate and
specific violation of these provisions and not as a continuing
offense;
b. In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment into the Township of Raritan
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected;
c. In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's
reasonable relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
2. The municipality may file a Court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment which would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be enforceable as if the
same were a judgment of default of the First Purchase Money
Mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- and moderateincome
unit.
C. Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the municipality,
by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which time the low- and
moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall be sold at a sale price
which is not less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off
any First Purchase Money Mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality, including
attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have the right to possession
terminated as well as the title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
D. The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the
First Purchase Money Mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the lowand
moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied to
§ 15.20.150 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.150
1.01:341
reimburse the municipality for any and all costs and expenses incurred
in connection with either the Court action resulting in the judgment of
violation or the Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the
Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible for and to
the extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred
by the municipality in connection with collecting such deficiency. In
the event that a surplus remains after satisfying all of the above, such
surplus, if any, shall be placed in escrow by the municipality for the
owner and shall be held in such escrow for a maximum period of two
years or until such earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance within
the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of such
balance to the municipality. Any interest accrued or earned on such
balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and shall be paid to
the municipality, whether such balance shall be paid to the owner or
forfeited to the municipality.
E. Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the restrictions
of the regulations governing affordable housing units as the same apply
to the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The owner
determined to be in violation of the provisions of this plan and from
whom title and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale
shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
F. If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient amounts
are bid to satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage and any prior
liens, the municipality may acquire title to the low- and moderateincome
unit by satisfying the First Purchase Money Mortgage and any
prior liens and crediting the violating owner with an amount equal to
the difference between the First Purchase Money Mortgage and any
prior liens and costs of the enforcement proceedings, including legal
fees and the maximum resale price for which the low- and moderateincome
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be treated in the
same manner as the excess which would have been realized from an
actual sale as previously described.
G. Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at the
Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall obligate the owner to
accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser which may be
referred to the owner by the municipality, with such offer to purchase
being equal to the maximum resale price of the low- and moderateincome
unit as permitted by the regulations governing affordable
housing units.
§ 15.20.150 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.150
1.01:342
§ 15.20.160. Annual and Periodic Monitoring of Implementation of
Township's Affordable Housing Plan. [2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-01]
H. The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
A. Beginning one year after the entry of the Township's Round 3 Judgment
of Compliance and Repose, the Township will provide annual reporting
through July 1, 2025, of the status of all affordable housing activity and
of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity within the Township
through posting on the municipal website with a copy of such posting
provided to Fair Share Housing Center, using forms previously
developed for this purpose by the Council on Affordable Housing or any
other forms endorsed by the Special Master and Fair Share Housing
Center. In addition to the foregoing, the Township may also post such
activity on the Council on Affordable Housing Tracking and Monitoring
(CTM) System and/or file a copy of its report with COAH or its
successor agency at the state level. The reporting shall include an
accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the
source and amount of funds collected and the amount and purpose for
which any funds have been expended.
B. The Fair Housing Act includes two provisions regarding action to be
taken by the Township during its ten-year repose period. The Township
will comply with those provisions as follows:
1. For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1, 2020,
as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Township will post
on its municipal website, with a copy provided to Fair Share
Housing Center, a status report as to its implementation of its plan
and an analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled
mechanisms continue to present a realistic opportunity and
whether the mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Such posting shall invite any interested party to
submit comments to the Township, with a copy to Fair Share
Housing Center, regarding whether any sites no longer present a
realistic opportunity and should be replaced and whether the
mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a
hearing before the Court regarding these issues.
2. For the review of very-low-income housing requirements required
by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1 et seq., within 30 days of the third
anniversary of the entry of the Township's Judgement of
Compliance and Repose, and every third-year thereafter, the
Township will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to
Fair Share Housing Center, a status report as to its satisfaction of
its very-low-income requirements, including the family very-lowincome
requirements referenced herein. Such posting shall invite
any interested party to submit comments to the Township and Fair
§ 15.20.150 CODE ADOPTION § 15.20.160
1.01:343
§ 15.20.170. Appeals. [2-4-2020 by Ord. No. 20-01]
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent designated pursuant
to this chapter shall be filed with the Superior Court of New Jersey,
Hunterdon County.
Chapter 15.24
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Share Housing Center on the issue of whether the Township has
complied with its very-low-income housing obligation under the
terms of this settlement.
3. In addition to the foregoing postings, the Township may also elect
to file copies of its reports with COAH or its successor agency at the
state level.
§ 15.20.160 RARITAN CODE § 15.20.170
1.01:344
ARTICLE 1
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
§ 15.24.010. Statutory Authorization. [Amended by Ord. 09-16]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry.
§ 15.24.020. Findings of Fact. [Amended by Ord. 09-16]
§ 15.24.030. Statement of Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 09-16]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
A. The flood hazard areas of Township of Raritan are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
§ 15.24.010 CODE ADOPTION § 15.24.030
1.01:345
§ 15.24.040. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Amended by Ord.
09-16]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 15.24.030 RARITAN CODE § 15.24.040
1.01:346
ARTICLE 2
Terminology
§ 15.24.050. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 09-16]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Engineer's interpretation of any
provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percentannual
or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the flood plain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building (i) built in the case of a
building in an Area of Special Flood Hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an Area of Special Flood
Hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of flood waters.
§ 15.24.050 CODE ADOPTION § 15.24.050
1.01:347
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
2.
D.
§ 15.24.050 RARITAN CODE § 15.24.050
1.01:348
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area [including
basement]. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the flood plain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is [i] built on a single chassis;
[ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
For other than new construction or substantial improvements under
the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348) includes substantial
improvements and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such
as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
A.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor
B.
§ 15.24.050 CODE ADOPTION § 15.24.050
1.01:349
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
ordinance.
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
§ 15.24.050 RARITAN CODE § 15.24.050
1.01:350
ARTICLE 3
General Provisions
§ 15.24.060. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Amended by
Ord. 09-16]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Raritan, County of Hunterdon, State of New
Jersey.
§ 15.24.070. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood
Hazard. [Amended by Ord. 09-16]
§ 15.24.080. Penalties For Noncompliance. [Amended by Ord.
09-16]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
ordinance and other applicable regulations. Any person who violates this
ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more
than 90 days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs
and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the Township of Raritan from taking such other lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 15.24.090. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Amended by
Ord. 09-16]
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Raritan,
Community No. 340240, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
1. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Hunterdon County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September
25, 2009.
2. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Hunterdon County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 34019C0235F,
34019C0242F, 34019C0244F, 34019C0245F, 34019C0253F,
34019C0261F, 34019C0262F, 34019C0263F, 34019C0264F,
34019C0268F, 34019C0331F, 34019C0332F, 34019C0334F,
34019C0351F, 34019C0352F, 34019C0353F, 34019C0354F,
34019C0356F; whose effective date is September 25, 2009.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this ordinance. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 1
Municipal Drive, Flemington, New Jersey 08822.
§ 15.24.060 CODE ADOPTION § 15.24.090
1.01:351
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 15.24.100. Interpretation. [Amended by Ord. 09-16]
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall
be:
§ 15.24.110. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Amended by Ord.
09-16]
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and,
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the area of
special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Raritan, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 15.24.090 RARITAN CODE § 15.24.110
1.01:352
ARTICLE 4
Administration
§ 15.24.120. Establishment of Development Permit. [Amended by
Ord. 09-16]
§ 15.24.130. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Amended by
Ord. 09-16]
The Township of Raritan Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 15.24.140. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator.
[Amended by Ord. 09-16]
Duties of the Engineer shall include, but not be limited to:
A. A Development Permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in Section 15.24.070. Application for a Development Permit shall be
made on forms furnished by the Engineer and may include, but not be
limited to; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and
the location of the foregoing.
B. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been flood proofed.
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.24.170.B and
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
§ 15.24.120 CODE ADOPTION § 15.24.140
1.01:353
§ 15.24.150. Variance Procedure. [Amended by Ord. 09-16]
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of Section 15.24.180.A are met.
B. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with Section
15.24.3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
Engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other
source, in order to administer Section 15.25.170.A, Specific Standards,
Residential Construction, and Section 15.24.170.B, Specific Standards,
Nonresidential Construction.
C. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved flood proofed structures:
a. Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
b. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section
15.24.120.B.3.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this ordinance.
D. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section
15.24.150.
§ 15.24.140 RARITAN CODE § 15.24.150
1.01:354
A. Appeal Board.
1. The Planning Board as established by the Township of Raritan shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this ordinance.
2. The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Engineer in the enforcement or
administration of this ordinance.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New
Jersey, as provided by law.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this ordinance, and:
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
d. The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
e. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
f. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
g. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
h. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and flood plain management program of that area;
i. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
j. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and,
k. The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
§ 15.24.150 CODE ADOPTION § 15.24.150
1.01:355
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A.4 of this section
and the purposes of this ordinance, the Planning Board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary
to further the purposes of this ordinance.
6. The Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the
Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the
items in Subsection A.4.a through k have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
a. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
b. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
c. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A.4, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
§ 15.24.150 RARITAN CODE § 15.24.150
1.01:356
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 15.24.150 CODE ADOPTION § 15.24.150
1.01:357

ARTICLE 5
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 15.24.160. General Standards. [Amended by Ord. 09-16]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into flood waters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
§ 15.24.160 CODE ADOPTION § 15.24.160
1.01:359
§ 15.24.170. Specific Standards. [Amended by Ord. 09-16]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in Section 15.24.070, Basis For Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in 15.24.140.B, Use of Other Base Flood
Data, the following standards are required:
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage;
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to or
above base flood elevation;
2. Within any AO zone on the Township's DFIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
B. Nonresidential Construction.
1. Either:
§ 15.24.160 RARITAN CODE § 15.24.170
1.01:360
§ 15.24.180. Floodways. [Amended by Ord. 09-16]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section
15.24.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
a. New Construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to
the level of the base flood elevation; and
b. Within any AO zone on the Township's DFIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified
in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). And,
require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures;
2. Or:
a. Be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water;
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in Section 15.24.140.C.2.b.
C. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Section
15.24.160.A.2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
§ 15.24.170 CODE ADOPTION § 15.24.180
1.01:361
B. If Subsection A of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements must comply with Article 5, Provisions For
Flood Hazard Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 15.24.180 RARITAN CODE § 15.24.180
1.01:362
Chapter 15.28
COMMERCIAL MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 15.28.010. Purpose.
The purpose of this Commercial Maintenance Code (this chapter) is to
protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum
standards for the maintenance of such premises; to fix responsibilities and
duties upon owners, operators and occupants; to authorize and establish
procedures for the inspection of commercial premises; to fix penalties for
the violations of this Code; and to provide for the right of access to permit
repairs when necessary. This Code is hereby declared to be remedial and
essential for the public interest, and it is intended that this Code be liberally
construed to effectuate the purpose as stated herein.
§ 15.28.020. Definitions.
The following terms, wherever used herein, shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY — Includes, but is not limited to, gasoline
stations, parking lots, retail sales, automobile sales, professional activities
and/or offices, such as, but not limited to, medical, legal, architectural,
accounting, etc.; personal services, such as, but not limited to, real estate
offices, banks, insurance, nurseries, barbershops, hairdressers, kennels and
other animal boarding facilities; repair shops of all kinds, such as, but
not limited to auto body shops, auto repair, etc.; industrial and similar
type uses, such as, but not limited to: wholesale and distribution uses,
storage facilities, etc.; private and public uses, such as, but not limited to,
schools, essential services, telecommunication towers and related facilities,
restaurants, hotels, etc.; recreational facilities, such as, but not limited
to golf courses, movies, skating rinks, bowling alleys, amusement areas,
etc. Commercial activity shall not include the sale of agricultural products
produced on the premises, but shall include the sale of agricultural products
produced on the premises if such products are sold from a building
permanently affixed to the land.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — A lot or tract of land on which, or on any part
of which, commercial activity of any kind takes place.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building which are exposed
to public view, and the open space of any premises outside of any building
erected thereon.
HARBORAGE — Any condition, manmade or natural, which affords a
breeding place or hiding place for rodents, insects or other pests.
INFESTATION — The presence of rodents, vermin, or other pests on the
premises which constitute a health hazard.
§ 15.24.180 CODE ADOPTION § 15.28.020
1.01:363
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANT — Any person or entity having actual possession of the
premises or any part thereof.
OPERATOR — Any person or entity who has charge, care or control of
the commercial premises or any part thereof, whether with or without the
consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person or entity who, alone or jointly or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to any commercial premises, with
or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or shall have charge,
care or control of any commercial premises as owner or agent of the
owner or as fiduciary, including but not limited to executor, executrix,
administrator, administration, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate
or as a mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such possession was
obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part or
all of any commercial premises shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the
lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises
sublet or assigned by said lessee.
SHOPPING AREA — One or more buildings or parts thereof designed as a
unit, to be occupied by one or more businesses for the conduct of business
and conducted as an integrated planned area development.
§ 15.28.030. Scope and Application.
Any common law nuisance or as provided by the laws of the State of
New Jersey or the ordinances of the Township of Raritan.
A.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of children whether in a building or upon a lot. This includes but
is not limited to any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber,
trash, fences, debris or vegetation, such as poison ivy, poison oak or
poison sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
B.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist.
C.
Unsanitary conditions or anything unreasonably offensive to the senses
or dangerous to health in violation of this Code.
D.
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the
health of human beings.
E.
F. Fire hazards.
A. Every commercial premises and any building situated thereon in the
Township of Raritan used or intended to be used for commercial activity
or occupancy shall comply with the provisions of this code, whether or
not such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired
before or after the enactment of this chapter. This chapter establishes
minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of
all such commercial buildings and does not replace or modify standards
§ 15.28.020 RARITAN CODE § 15.28.030
1.01:364
§ 15.28.040. Liability of Owner.
Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities
prescribed in this code, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from
any such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend any charge or
violation thereof by reason of the fact, that the occupant is also liable
therefore and in violation thereof.
§ 15.28.050. Liability of Occupant.
Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
Sections 15.28.110 through 15.28.160 of this chapter, and the occupant
shall not be relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor be entitled
to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that
the owner or operator is also responsible therefore and in violation thereof.
§ 15.28.060. Premises to Be Maintained Free of Hazards.
The extent of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of
all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and
other persons utilizing the premises and free of unsanitary conditions, and
any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or
operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the premises
free of hazards, which include but are not limited to the following:
otherwise established for the construction, repair, alterations or use
of such commercial buildings or premises contained therein. Where
there is mixed occupancy with commercial and other uses on the same
premises, all such uses shall be nevertheless re-regulated by and
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher
standard than is set forth in any other ordinances of the Township of
Raritan or under the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the standards
as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this impose a
lower standard than any other ordinances of the Township of Raritan or
the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained
in any other such ordinance or law shall prevail.
A. Refuse. Broken glass, filth, garbage, trash, litter and debris.
B. Natural growth. Brush, weeds, ragweeds, stumps, roots and obnoxious
growths and dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth
which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm
damage, constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees
shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
C. Over hangings. Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of
ice and now which, by reason of location above ground level, constitute
a danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof.
§ 15.28.030 CODE ADOPTION § 15.28.060
1.01:365
§ 15.28.070. Landscaping.
Premises shall be kept landscaped, and lawns, hedges and bushes shall be
kept trimmed and kept from becoming overgrown. Plantings required by
site plan approval shall be replaced when the same have died.
§ 15.28.080. Signs.
All signs, pavement markings and printed matter and pictures or
illustrations contained thereon, permitted by reasons of other regulations
or as a lawful nonconforming use, shall be maintained in good repair.
§ 15.28.090. Maintenance of Exterior Buildings.
In order to preserve property value and eliminate safety hazards and
protect adjacent properties and the neighborhood from blighting influences,
the exterior of every structure or accessory structure including fences, shall
be maintained in good repair, for purposes of preservation and appearance,
free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick or excessive
peeling paint.
D. Ground surface hazards or unsanitary conditions; holes; broken or
missing pavement; loose stone, excavations, breaks, projections,
obstructions, ice, uncleared snow; and excretion of pets and other
animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas and
other parts of the premises which are accessible to and used by persons
on the premises. All such holes and excavations shall be filled and
repaired; walks and steps shall be repaired; and other conditions shall
be removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary
conditions with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery. It shall be the
responsibility of owners and operators to take reasonable steps to
discover any such hazards or unsanitary conditions which may exist on
their premises.
E. Recurring accumulations of storm water. Premises shall be graded and,
where necessary, provided with runoff drains to eliminate any recurrent
or excessive accumulation of storm water. Parts of premises regularly
used by occupants shall drain within one hour of the termination of any
storm creating surface waters; all others shall drain within four hours
of the cessation of any such storm.
F. Sources of infestation.
A. Unsafe exterior facilities. Unsafe exterior facilities include exterior
porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes, all of which shall
be kept structurally sound and in good repair and shall be provided with
banisters or railings properly designed and maintained.
B. Signs and billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to
public view permitted by applicable zoning laws, and regulated by the
Construction Code or other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming
§ 15.28.060 RARITAN CODE § 15.28.090
1.01:366
use shall be maintained in good repair. Any sign or billboard which has
weathered excessively or faded or the paint on which has excessively
peeled or cracked shall, with its supporting members, be removed
forthwith or put into a state of good repair. All non-operative or broken
electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting
members, be removed forthwith.
C. Windows exposed to public view. All windows exposed to public view
shall be kept clean and free of marks and foreign substances and be
unbroken. Any broken or cracked windows must be replaced within two
weeks unless broken glass constitutes a safety hazard which must be
removed or replaced immediately. All screening of interiors shall be
maintained in a clean and attractive manner and in a good state of
repair.
D. Awnings or marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying
structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or other
portion of the premises shall be so maintained as to not constitute a
nuisance or safety hazard. In the event any such awning or marquee is
not properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing, it shall,
together with its supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the
event any such awning or marquee is made of cloth, plastic or of similar
materials, said materials, where exposed to public view, shall be
maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of excessive
weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing or other deterioration.
Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any encroachment of an
awning, marquee or its accompanying structural members on streets,
sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
E. Temporary scaffolding or equipment. No temporary painting scaffold or
other temporary equipment used for construction, repair or
maintenance shall be permitted to remain in place beyond a period
necessary to reasonably complete the purpose for which such
equipment was intended to be used without permission of the public
officer.
F. Store fronts. All store fronts shall be maintained in good repair, and all
surfaces thereof shall be kept painted when necessary for purposes of
preservation and appearance. In the event repairs to a portion of a store
front are made, such repairs shall be performed with materials identical
or compatible with the materials used in the area not undergoing
repair, to the end that the appearance of the store front shall be uniform
and attractive and shall not constitute a blighting factor depreciating
adjoining properties.
G. Leaders and drain pipes. Leaders and drain pipes shall be securely
fastened to the building and maintained in good condition free of leaks,
kept clean and free of obstructions and shall direct storm water in to
draining systems and away from the foundation walls of the structure.
§ 15.28.090 CODE ADOPTION § 15.28.100
1.01:367
§ 15.28.100. Maintenance of Parking Lots or Areas.
Parking lots or parking areas, including the entrances and exits thereto,
shall be kept in a good state of repair and maintained so as to comply with
Section 15.28.060 hereof. Signing of ownership and use restrictions shall
be maintained in good repair, clearly visible to potential parkers. Striping,
where appropriate, shall indicate spaces, direction of flow and entrances
and exits and be maintained so as to assure visibility.
§ 15.28.110. Removal of Garbage and Refuse.
The owner, operator and occupant shall have the duty and responsibility of
removing refuse and garbage at least on a weekly basis, but if once weekly
pickup is not sufficient to remove all garbage that accumulates, removal
more often shall be required. Likewise, if the refuse is of such a nature, that
the amount, size, or method of containment will not create an overflow, or
health or safety hazard, less periodic removal will be satisfactory.
§ 15.28.120. Maintenance of Sidewalks.
Every day that the premises is open for business, the occupant shall be
responsible for removing litter from the sidewalk or other pedestrian areas,
if any, in front of the occupant's commercial premises. The area shall be
swept as often as necessary to maintain it free of litter, spillage and other
debris, and in the winter season, there shall be full compliance with the
Township ordinances on the removal of snow, ice and other weather related
accumulations.
§ 15.28.130. Occupant to Report Violations.
Upon discovery by an occupant of any condition of the premises which
constitutes a violation of this chapter by the owner or operator, the
occupant shall report same to the Police Department, Construction Code
Official or Zoning Officer, who shall be responsible for enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 15.28.140. Occupant to Maintain Premises in Clean and Sanitary
Manner.
All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition, and the occupant shall refrain from
performing any acts which would render other parts of the premises
unclean or unsanitary or which would obstruct the owner or operator from
performing any duty required hereunder or maintaining the premises in a
clean and sanitary condition.
§ 15.28.150. Premises to Be Kept Free of Infestation.
Every operator and occupant shall be responsible for the elimination of
infestation in and on the premises subject to his or her control.
§ 15.28.100 RARITAN CODE § 15.28.160
1.01:368
§ 15.28.160. Littering Prohibited.
No person shall deposit any litter on the ground of or in any commercial
premises.
§ 15.28.170. Maintenance Requirements for Shopping Areas.
The owner and operator of every shopping area shall be responsible for
providing, maintaining and policing the following:
§ 15.28.180. Proper Parking Required.
It shall be the duty of owners and operators, where parking spaces and
lanes are provided for their customers, to see that all parking is done in
conformity with the spaces provided and that the flow of traffic conforms
to the directional arrows painted in the lanes between the parking spaces.
There shall be no overnight parking on the premises unless approved for
such use in a resolution of the Planning Board of Board of Adjustment.
§ 15.28.190. Inspections.
All buildings and premises subject to this code are subject to inspection
from time to time by the Construction Code Official, Zoning Officer, Police
Department or any other Township official charged with the duty of
enforcing regulations governing any aspect or conduct of the activity
housed in said premises. At the time of such inspections, all parts of
the premises must be available and accessible for such inspections, and
the owner, operator and occupant are required to provide the necessary
arrangements to facilitate such inspections. Such inspections shall be made
during open hours of the business occupying said premises unless there is
reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an immediate
threat to health or safety requiring inspection and abatement without delay.
A. Means of ingress and egress shall be clearly marked by signs.
B. Parking spaces shall be clearly indicated by painted lines, including
proper signage and marking of all handicapped parking spaces.
C. Lanes for the movement of traffic in each direction shall be indicated by
arrows indicating one-way traffic which shall be painted in these lanes
at both ends.
D. A trash basket with at least a twenty-gallons capacity shall be provided
for each 150 feet of store frontage in the shopping area or as indicated
on an approved site plan. These baskets shall be placed in the walking
or pedestrian area and shall be provided with tight-fitting covers fitted
with hinged doors and shall not be allowed to overflow.
E. Fire zones shall be kept clear of all vehicular traffic and parking, as
designated by the Fire Marshal of the Township of Raritan.
§ 15.28.160 CODE ADOPTION § 15.28.200
1.01:369
§ 15.28.200. Emergent Correction of Violation; Abatement by
Municipal Officers.
Where the violation or condition existing on the premises is of such a
nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life and limb unless abated
without delay, the Police Department, Construction Code Official or Zoning
Officer may order the owner, operator or occupant to correct the violation
or condition within the period of time consistent with the hazard involved
and with the measures necessary to remove the hazard, and upon the failure
of the operator, owner or occupant to correct said condition, the Police
Department, Construction Code Official or Zoning Officer shall abate said
condition immediately thereafter.
§ 15.28.210. Lien for Abatement.
Where abatement of any nuisance, as defined herein, or correction of a
defect on the premises or the maintenance of the premises in a proper
condition to conform to applicable ordinances of the Township of Raritan or
the laws of the State of New Jersey requires expenditure of the Township
of Raritan's moneys therefore, the Police Department, Construction Code
Official or Zoning Officer shall present a report of the work accomplished
to the Governing Body of the Township of Raritan, along with a summary
of the proceedings undertaken to secure compliance, including any notice
served upon owners, operators, occupants or their agents, as the case may
be, personally or by telephone, telefax, letter, etc. The Governing Body
shall then approve the expenditures made and assess the same against
the premises, as a lien thereon, collectible as provided by law. A copy of
the resolution approving said expenses shall be certified by the Township
Clerk and filed with the Tax Collector of the Township of Raritan, who
shall be responsible for the collection thereof, and a copy of the report and
resolution shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
owner.
§ 15.28.220. Procedure Upon Discovery of Violations.
A. Except as provided in 15.28.200 hereof, where violations of this chapter
or the regulations hereunder are found to exist, a written notice from
the Construction Code Official, Zoning Officer or Police Officer shall be
served on the owner, and/or operator, and/or occupant.
B. Notice shall be served personally or by certified mail, addressed to the
last known address of the person to be served. In the case of an
occupant, notice may be posted upon the main entrance door of the
building, and in the case of an owner who does not reside within the
Township of Raritan, the last known address shall be the address of the
owner as shown in the office of the Tax Collector.
C. The notice shall specify the violation or violations committee, what
must be done to correct the same, a reasonable period of time, not to
exceed 30 days, to abate the violation, the right of the person served to
request a hearing and that the notice shall become an Order of the
§ 15.28.200 RARITAN CODE § 15.28.220
1.01:370
§ 15.28.230. Violations and Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 00-28]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Code or any
order promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction, be punished by one
or more of the following: a fine not exceeding $1,000; and/or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days; and/or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
and each day that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to be a
separate and distinct violation.
Title 16: Land Development Code
Chapter 16.02
PURPOSE, ADMINISTRATION AND DEFINITIONS
Construction Code Official, Zoning Officer, or Police Officer in 10 days
after service, unless a hearing is requested pursuant to these
provisions.
D. After 10 days of the date of service of a notice, the notice shall
constitute a final order unless any person affected by the notice
requests a hearing thereon by serving a written request within the tenday
period in person or be certified mail on the Township Administrator.
Such request for a hearing shall set forth briefly the reasons for which
the request for a hearing is made and the factual matters contained in
the notice of violation upon which the hearing is requested. The
Township Administrator, upon receipt of the request for hearing,
immediately refer the matter to the Raritan Township Municipal Court
Administrator, who shall, within 30 days therefrom and upon five days'
notice to the parties so requesting, schedule a hearing.
E. The hearing shall be referred to and conducted by the Township of
Raritan Community Dispute Resolution Panel (C.D.R.), who shall hear
all parties, and a determination shall be made within 10 days from the
completion of the hearing. The C.D.R. Panel shall then issue an order
incorporating the determinations and directions contained in the
original notice, or modifying said notice if the C.D.R. Panel so deems
necessary. The C.D.R. Panel may extend the time for correction of the
violations where the C.D.R. Panel deems necessary.
F. In the event the violation is not abated, removed, cured or otherwise
fully remedied within the time period prescribed in the initial notice
(which has become an order after 10 days) or extended time period as
permitted by the C.D.R. Panel, summons shall then be issued against
such person or persons charged with the violations, and signed by the
Township Official initiating the original notice.
§ 15.28.220 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.010
1.01:371
§ 16.02.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-1.1]
The purpose of this Title is to establish rules, regulations, standards and
procedures for review of all development in order to:
§ 16.02.020. Approving Agency. [Prior code § 15-1.2]
The provisions of this Title shall be administered by the Township Planning
Board and, where applicable, the Township Board of Adjustment in
accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291, P.L., 1975, R. S.
40:55D-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented.
§ 16.02.030. Definitions. [Prior code § 15-1.3; amended by Ord.
85-28; Ord. 87-27; Ord. 87-30; Ord. 91-13; Ord. 94-5; Ord. 95-2;
Ord. 98-1; Ord. 98-47; Ord. 98-50; Ord. 01-9; Ord. 02-21; Ord.
02-47; Ord. 02-53; Ord. 02-54; Ord. 02-58; Ord. 04-22; Ord. 06-11;
A. Further the purposes set forth in the Municipal Land Use Law (Chapter
291 Laws of New Jersey, 1975);
B. Preserve existing natural resources and give proper consideration to
the physical constraints of the land;
C. Provide for safe and efficient vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian
circulation;
D. Provide for appropriate screening, landscaping, signing and lighting;
E. Ensure efficient, safe and aesthetic land development;
F. Provide for compliance with appropriate design standards to ensure
adequate light and air, proper building arrangements and minimum
adverse effect on surrounding property;
G. Develop proper safeguards to minimize any adverse impact on the
environment;
H. Ensure the provisions of adequate water supply and quality drainage
and stormwater management, sanitary facilities and other utilities and
services;
I. Provide for appropriate recreation, open space and public use areas;
J. Promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of
the Township and to carry out the objectives of the Municipal Land Use
Law;
K. Ensure the orderly growth and development, the conservation,
protection and proper use of land and adequate provisions for
circulation, utilities and services;
L. Ensure the conservation and environmental protection of all land, water
and air resources within the jurisdiction of Raritan Township and
throughout the region.
§ 16.02.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:372
Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-30; Ord. 10-7; Ord. 10-27; Ord. 11-3; Ord. 12-5;
3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1]
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of this title. The word "building"
shall include the word "structure," the word "used" shall include the words
"arranged," "designed," "constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented,"
"leased" or "intended to be used"; and the word "abut" shall include the
words "directly across from," "adjacent to" and "next to."
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained housing unit incorporated
within an existing residential structure originally designed for single-family
residence and not substantially altered for the new unit.
ACCESSORY USE, STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A use, structure or
building subordinate to the principal use of a building on the same lot and
serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of the principal building.
In the case of an accessory structure or building, it shall be detached
from the principal building. All structures or buildings on nonresidential
lots are considered principal structures on the lot and shall conform to
requirements for principal structures.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Township Planner and/or Zoning
Officer.
ADVERTISING DISPLAY — See "sign."
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Any housing unit with an acquisition price or
rent level not exceeding the maximum resale or rent level for low- and
moderate-income housing and as further defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq.
AGENT — One or more persons designated to represent the applicant
before the Planning Board.
AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH FACILITY — A use primarily concerned with
the scientific study of farm animals and agricultural products, located in a
farm environment, and where no products are manufactured or produced
on the premises for sale.
AGRICULTURAL/HORTICULTURAL USE — See "farm."
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, means a change
or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities, or an
enlargement, whether by extension of a side or by increasing in height or
by moves from one location or position to another.
ALTERED PARKING AREA — Existing parking areas which are to be
surfaced, resurfaced, redesigned, restriped to indicate a new layout,
curbed, redesigned to accommodate a new traffic pattern, and similar
changes which require review by the Board.
ALTERED SPACE — The square footage of an existing building which will
undergo a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the means
of egress to the space, or where the use of the space will be moreintensively
utilized, such as the change from a storage area to an office,
retail or manufacturing area, or from a residential to a nonresidential use.
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:373
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A building or portion thereof designed or used for
the care, examination or treatment of domestic animals.
APARTMENT — One of several individual dwelling units designed and
erected as an integrated development in one or several buildings with
singleness of use and operation and which utilizes such common facilities
as pedestrian walks, parking and garage areas, open space or recreation
areas, and utility and sanitary systems.
APPLICANT — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land to be
subdivided or developed. The holder of an option or contract to purchase, or
other person or persons having an enforceable proprietary interest in such
land, may be considered to be an applicant for the purpose of this title. Such
person may also be known as the "developer."
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by this title for approval of a site plan
and/or subdivision.
APPROVED FORMS — Forms required and supplied by the Planning Board
and Board of Adjustment to be submitted with an application for each
submission.
ASSISTED-LIVING FACILITIES — A facility containing residences for the
elderly that provides rooms, meals, personal care assistance and the
supervision or administration of medications. The facility must be licensed
by the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services, the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs, or another appropriate agency. A
designated number of beds in the facility shall be restricted to low- and
moderate-income households per Medicaid requirements. Assisted-living
facilities may include programs to meet the needs of residents with
Alzheimer's disease or other dementias. Such programs shall provide
individualized care based upon assessment of the cognitive and functional
abilities of Alzheimer's and dementia residents who have been admitted to
the program.
ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit which is physically linked
to one or more other dwelling units forming a single dwelling structure.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD — Any yard and/or structure used or
intended to be used for the conducting and operating of the business of
selling, buying, storing or trading in used or discarded metal, glass, paper,
cordage, or any used or disabled fixtures, vehicles or equipment of any kind.
BARBER- AND BEAUTY SHOP — A building or part thereof in which a
service is provided to men, women and children by shampooing, cutting,
styling, tinting or treatment of hair, by giving manicures, pedicures or
facial treatments or by the use of cosmetic products. Said use may include
accessory retail sales of goods and services associated with the specific use
conducted on site.
BILLBOARDS, SIGNBOARDS or ADVERTISING DEVICES — See "sign
(street graphics)."
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:374
BLOCK — The area bounded by one or more streets or a municipal
boundary, of sufficient size to accommodate a lot or lots of the minimum size
required in the Zoning Ordinance of the Township and as further specified
herein.
BOARDER or ROOMER — A person who is not related to the head of the
household and who pays for the privilege of boarding or rooming.
BUFFER STRIP — A strip of land providing a natural vegetation screen or
a fence or other means so as to continually restrict a clear view beyond the
buffer strip.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the mean level
of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between the
highest and lowest points of the roof, but not including chimneys, spires,
towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal plane
at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the exterior
surface of the building on any side. In case of a cantilevered section of the
building, the vertical plane will coincide with the most-projected surface. All
yard requirements are measured to the building line.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL or PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A structure in which
is conducted the principal use of the site on which it is situated. In any
residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a principal building
on the zone lot on which it is located.
BUSINESS OFFICE — A building or portion thereof which is used for
conducting the affairs of a business, service, industry or government and
within which a product or merchandise for sale to the public is not offered.
However, personal services, such as barber- and beauty shops, and repair
services, such as radio and television repair shops, are not to be included
within the definition of "business office." A bank, trust company, savings
and loan or similar establishment for the custody, loan, exchange or issue
of money, for the extension of credit and for facilitating the transmission of
funds is not to be included within the definition of "business office."
CALIPER — A standard measure of tree size for trees to be newly planted.
The measurement is taken six inches above the ground for trees four inches
in diameter or less, and 12 inches above the ground for trees over four
inches in diameter.
CAMP — A predominantly-open-space facility designed for outdoor
recreational use by persons residing on the site for short periods in seasonal
quarters.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the Construction
Official upon completion of construction, alteration or change in occupancy
of a building. Said certificate shall acknowledge compliance with all
requirements of this title, such adjustments thereto granted by the Board of
Adjustment and/or all other applicable requirements.
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:375
CERTIFICATION — A written endorsement of a plan for soil erosion and
sediment control by the Township Engineer which indicates that the plan
meets the standards promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee
as set forth in the latest Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey.
CHANGE OF USE — The change from one enumerated principal use to
another enumerated principal permitted use on a lot or within a structure
or building.
CHANNEL — A watercourse with a definite bed and banks which confine
and conduct continuously or intermittently flowing water.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — Any facility which is maintained for the care,
development or supervision of six or more children under 13 years of age
who attend the facility for less than 24 hours a day, and which is subject
to state licensure or life-safety approval, pursuant to the provisions of the
Child Care Licensing Act, P.L. 1983, c. 492 (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-a to 30:5B-15).
CHURCH — A building or group of buildings, including customary
accessory buildings, designed or intended for public worship. For the
purpose of this title, the word "church" shall include chapels,
congregations, cathedrals, temples or similar designations, as well as parish
houses, convents and such accessory uses.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means
as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and
conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals,
stations, warehouses and other storage building or transshipment points.
CIVIC USE — A use of a building, structure or lot by a federal, state,
or municipal agency, or its duly appointed agent, including yards, parks
and recreational facilities, educational facilities, public hospitals, public
museums, public libraries, public community centers, theaters, public
stadiums and arenas.
CLEAR-CUTTING — The removal of all standing trees on a lot or a portion
of a lot.
CLUB, LODGE and FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION — A social or service
organization not organized or conducted for profit and which is not an
adjunct to or operated by or in conjunction with a public tavern, cafe or
other place of business.
CLUSTER RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A residential development of
detached dwelling units planned as a single entity in accordance with the
provisions of this title and which has common or public open space as an
appurtenance.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION OF FUELS — Storage of refinery products
for distribution or resale.
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:376
COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE — The raising of plants within a greenhouse
for income, but not including retail sales from within the greenhouse unless
the greenhouse is located in a business zone where such sales are
permitted.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES — Any motor vehicle, other than a passenger car,
having more than two axles and/or four wheels and/or exceeding a loading
capacity of 1/2 ton.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a site
designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development, and containing
such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate for the enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNITY FOREST — Forest resources owned and managed by a public
entity. In the Township, this includes trees and forests on municipal
properties such as the municipal buildings and facilities, parks and open
space owned in part or in whole by the Township.
COMPLETE APPLICATION —
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such a use in a specified location will comply with the
conditions and standards for the location or operation of such as contained
in the Zoning Ordinance and upon the issuance of authorization therefor by
the Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — A legal arrangement providing for individual ownership
of a portion of a building and/or land parcel, and including arrangements
for the maintenance responsibilities of such building and/or land parcel.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The municipal official specified in the
Building Code and designated as such by the Township Committee.
An application form completed as specified by this title and the rules
and regulations of the Planning Board and all accompanying documents
required by this title for approval of an application. However, if the
application is found incomplete, the developer shall be notified, in
writing, of the deficiencies within 45 days of the submission of such
application, or it shall be deemed properly submitted.
A.
The Planning Board may require such additional information, not
specified by this title, or any revisions in the accompanying documents,
as are reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to
whether the requirements necessary for the approval of the application
have been met. The application shall not be deemed incomplete for
the lack of any such additional information or any revisions in the
accompanying documents so required by the Board. An application
shall be certified as complete immediately upon the meeting of all
requirements specified in this title and in the rules and regulations
of the Planning Board and shall be deemed complete as of the day
it is so certified by the administrative officer for purposes of the
commencement of the time period for action by the Planning Board.
B.
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:377
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — An authorization to build issued by the
Township Construction Official after a determination that all applicable
Township requirements have been met.
CUL-DE-SAC or DEAD-END STREET — A minor street or a portion of a
minor street in which accessibility is limited to only one single means of
ingress and egress.
CUT — A portion of land surface of an area from which earth has been
removed or shall be removed by excavation; the depth below original
ground surface to excavated surface.
DAYS — Calendar days, including weekends and holidays.
DEPARTMENT — The State Department of Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the owner of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any
mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required by the Township.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person, partnership,
association, company or corporation for the improvement of property as
permitted by COAH rules.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT — The diameter of a tree measured 4 1/
2 feet (forestry method) above the ground level on the downhill side for
existing trees. Diameter at breast height may appear as the abbreviation
"DBH" (diameter at breast height).
DISTRICT or ZONE — Any portion of the territory of the Township of
Raritan within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or
various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this title.
DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, excavating, storing,
grading, filling or transporting of soil or any other activity which causes soil
to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
DIVERSION — A channel, with or without a supporting ridge on the lower
side, constructed across or at the bottom of a slope.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff to minimize
erosion sedimentation during and after construction or development, and
means necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation
of flooding.
DRIPLINE — A limiting line established by a series of perpendicular drop
points marking the maximum radius of the crown of an existing tree, but not
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:378
less than six feet from the trunk, whichever is greater; and within which no
construction or disturbance shall occur.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof designed or used primarily as
the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons. A "dwelling" is not a
mobile home, a hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home, dormitory, fraternity or
sorority house, rooming house, boardinghouse, or similar structure under
the terms of this title.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms, including cooking facilities, in a
structure designed as a unit for occupancy by not more than one family for
living and sleeping purposes.
DWELLING, QUADRUPLEX or QUADRUPLEX DWELLING — Four attached
dwellings in one building in which each unit has two open space exposures
and shares one or two walls with an adjoining unit or units or shares a
common garage wall with an adjoining unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY or SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A
detached building or dwelling unit designed for or occupied exclusively by
one or more persons living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED or SEMIDETACHED
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A one-family dwelling attached to another
one-family dwelling by a common vertical wall, with each dwelling located
on a separate lot.
ECHO UNIT or ELDER COTTAGE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY UNIT — A
separate living quarters, accessory to a primary residence on the premises,
not exceeding 750 square feet of gross floor area, for the use of and
occupancy by not more than two persons who are relatives by blood,
marriage or adoption of an owner/occupant of the primary residence on the
premises. One of the ECHO unit occupants shall be 60 years of age or older.
ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST — A request for modification of an
existing wireless tower or base station that does not constitute a
"substantial change" (as defined herein) and involves co-location of new
transmission equipment; removal of transmission equipment; or
replacement of transmission equipment.[Added 5-21-2019 by Ord. No.
19-08]
EMBANKMENT — A man-made deposit of soil, rock or other materials.
ENCROACHMENT — Any obstruction within a delineated floodway.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The Raritan Township Environmental
Commission.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined by
the Municipal Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure that all
property in the municipality is assessed at the same assessment ratio or
ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of building permit may be
obtained by the Tax Assessor utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final
equalized assessed value will be determined at project completion by the
Municipal Tax Assessor.
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:379
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission or distribution systems, including electric substations,
telephone dial center, towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by
such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies, or for the
public health or safety or general welfare. "Essential services" shall include
firehouses, and first-aid and emergency-aid squads, whether provided by a
municipal or nonprofit agency.
EXCAVATION — See "cut."
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the ground surface prior to
cutting or filling.
FAMILY — Two or more persons related by blood or marriage or legal
adoption, or up to four unrelated individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling.
FARM — A parcel or parcels of land comprised of or in aggregate total
of five or more acres, exclusive of a minimum of one acre used for a
dwelling and any additional area covered by municipal, county or state
roads. Said five or more acres shall be devoted to either the production for
sale or consumption by the owner of plants and animals generally accepted
as useful to man, including, but not limited to, forages and crops; grain
and feed crops; dairy animals and products; poultry and poultry products;
livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, horses, ponies, mules, hogs, dairy
cattle or goats, including the breeding and grazing of any and all such
animals; bees and apiary products; fur-bearing animals; and trees and
forest products; including the processing and sale of these products on the
property where produced. Land shall be deemed a farm when devoted to
the production of fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries;
vegetables; and nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products,
including the processing of these products on the property where produced.
FARM PRODUCT SALES — The sale of seasonal products raised on the
premises only and which may be sold from a table or other similar portable
display.
FARM STAND — A structure designed for the display and sale of seasonal
farm produce, 50% of which is raised on the premises and/or other farm
parcel owned or cultivated by the farm stand operator. Such use shall
require a conditional use permit.
FARM STRUCTURE — Any structure used for the storage of agricultural
equipment or farm produce, or housing livestock or poultry. All farm
structures shall be considered accessory structures, whether or not a
principal structure exists on the same lot.
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:380
FARMER'S MARKET — The seasonal selling or offering for sale at retail
of vegetables or produce, flowers, or orchard products, occurring in a
predesignated area, where the vendors are individuals who have raised the
vegetables or produce or have taken the same on consignment for retail
sale.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — A retail food service operation in which a
limited or specialized list of quickly prepared or preprepared food items
is offered for on-premises and off-premises consumption, or where a driveup
window exists for ordering food items, or where vehicle food service or
consumption of food within a vehicle exists on the premises.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or any other manufactured material or combination of materials.
FILL — Sand, gravel, earth or other materials of any composition
whatsoever placed or deposited by any person.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed.
FINISHED GRADE — The final elevation of the ground surface conforming
to the proposed design.
FIXTURE — The assembly that holds the lamp (bulb) in a lighting system.
It includes the elements designed to give light output control, such as
a reflector (mirror) or refractor (lens), the ballast, housing, and the
attachment parts.
FLOOD MAP —
FLOODLIGHT — A luminaire or bulb which projects light in a specific
direction in a wide beam, typically 100° or more.
FLOODPLAIN — The 100-year floodplain as shown on the Federal
Emergency Management, National Insurance Program, Flood Insurance
Rate Maps.
FLOODPLAIN (500-YEAR) — The 500-year floodplain as shown on the
Federal Emergency Management, National Flood Insurance Program, Flood
Insurance Rate Maps.
Means:
A map prepared by the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, Federal Insurance Administration, No. H 01-12,
dated July 26, 1974;
1.
The Natural Resource Inventory Floodplain/Soils Map for Raritan
Township.
2.
A.
When no flood maps are available, the Township Engineer shall
determine the extent of flooding in any particular area based on
available data and information.
B.
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:381
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The quotient achieved by dividing the gross floor
area by the net area of the lot.
FLY ASH — Particles of gas-borne matter, not including process material,
arising from the combustion of solid fuel, such as coal or wood.
FOOTCANDLE (fc) — A unit of illuminance on a surface one foot square in
area onto which there is a uniform flux of one lumen.
FOOTLAMBERT (fl) — A unit of luminance of a surface reflecting or emitting
light at the rate of one lumen per square foot. The average luminance of
any reflecting surface in footlamberts is the product of the illuminance in
footcandles striking the surface times the reflectance of the surface.
FULL-CUTOFF (fco) — A light fixture which cuts off all upward transmission
of light.
FULLY SHIELDED — A fixture with housing or attachment thereto which
prevents a line of sight to the bulb when viewed from another property and
which prevents a line of sight to any part of the light source at or above a
horizontal plane running through the lowest portion of the fixture.
GARAGE, PRIVATE or PRIVATE GARAGE — A detached or attached
structure used only for the storage of vehicles owned or rented by the
occupant of the principal structure or his or her family.
GARAGE, PUBLIC or PUBLIC GARAGE — Any garage other than a private
garage which is open to the public and used for the storage of motor
vehicles.
GASOLINE FILLING STATION AND PUBLIC AND REPAIR GARAGE — A
building or place of business where gasoline, oil and grease, batteries,
tires and automobile accessories are supplied and dispensed directly to
the motor vehicle trade, at retail, and/or where repair service and related
vehicle services may be rendered. Car wash facilities are included in this
definition as accessory uses.
GLARE — The discomfort experienced by an observer with a direct line of
sight to a light source which often results in annoyance, discomfort or loss
of visual performance causing visual impairment.
GRADING — Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, or any combination
thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.
GRADING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Township Engineer to
authorize work to be performed under this title in situations not requiring
subdivision approval or site plan approval.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed path, usually broad and
shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct surface
water from a field diversion or other feature.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several
stories of a building. Floor area shall not include cellar space or any floor
space where the average floor-to-ceiling height is less than seven feet.
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:382
GROUP HOME — A community residence for the developmentally disabled
or a shelter for victims of domestic violence, as defined by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.2, housing more than six persons, excluding staff.
HARD SURFACE — Those surfaces which do not absorb water. All
structures, surfaced parking areas, streets, driveways, sidewalks, and any
areas in concrete, asphalt and packed stone shall be considered "hard
surface" within this definition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Includes, but is not limited to, inorganic
mineral acids of sulfur, fluorine, chlorine, nitrogen, chromium,
phosphorous, selenium, and arsenic and their common salts; lead, nickel
and mercury and their inorganic salts or metallo-organic derivatives;
petroleum products and radioactive material; and coal tar acids, such as
phenols and creosols, and their salts.
HELISTOP — An area that is used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters,
but without any auxiliary facilities such as helicopter parking areas, waiting
rooms, fueling or maintenance equipment.
HOME BACKUP POWER GENERATOR — An electrical generation unit
which is installed outside of a home and is designed to act as a source of
backup power during temporary electrical outages.[Added 3-5-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-01]
HOME BUSINESS — A single business conducted from a portion of an
existing single-family dwelling, or from another building on property on
which there is an existing single-family dwelling. Home businesses shall
be limited to retail specialty shops and activities, artisans' workshops and
offices and shops, including antique, gift, book, bakery, bicycle and candy
sales; galleries; photography and art studios; coin, stamp and beauty shops;
cabinet making; tutoring; tailoring; professional occupations; shoe
repairing; private and nursery schools; dog care; barbershops; caterers;
hobby shops; fruit and vegetable markets; florists; real estate agencies; and
insurance brokers.
HOME OCCUPATION — A physician, dentist, lawyer, optometrist, architect,
engineer, planner, artist, accountant, real estate or insurance agent, where
clients or patients visit the premises on which the home occupation is
located. Home occupations require a conditional use permit and parking
facilities.
HOME OFFICE — An area of a residence not exceeding 200 square feet and
used by an occupant of such residence for office or studio purposes only,
provided that there is no exterior indication of such office or studio use,
and provided that such use does not require parking, deliveries or other
external traffic other than that normally required by the residential use.
This definition includes the tutoring of not more than five children and the
traffic associated therewith.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An incorporated nonprofit organization
operating in a development under recorded land agreements, through
which each lot owner shall be a member, and each dwelling unit is subjected
to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:383
activities and maintenance, including any maintenance costs levied against
the association by the Township, and each owner and tenant has a right to
use the common property.
HORIZONTAL (OR VERTICAL) FOOTCANDLES — The amount of light
striking a vertical or horizontal plane.
HOSPITAL — Any building containing beds for four or more patients and
used for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human ailments and
staffed by licensed physicians.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations, with no
provision for cooking in any individual room or suite, to the general public
and providing additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and
recreational facilities.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — See "church."
IESNA — The Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, an
organization that recommends standards for the lighting industry.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing low- and
moderate-income units. This term includes, but is not necessarily limited to,
new construction, conversion of a nonresidential structure to a residential
structure, and the creation of new low- and moderate-income units through
the substantial rehabilitation of a vacant residential structure.
INCLUSIONARY ZONING — Development regulations governing the use
and development of land for low- and moderate-income units.
INSTITUTION — A nonprofit or quasi-public use, such as a church, school,
library or hospital, or a municipally owned or operated building, structure
or land used for public or quasi-public purpose.
INTERESTED PARTY —
INVASIVE SPECIES — The specific species which are not native to New
Jersey and have been recognized to overwhelm species native to the area.
JUNKYARD — A yard, building, covered space or space kept, maintained
or existing for the purpose of buying or selling, exchanging or storing of
rags, old metals, old bottles and glassware, old paper, old plumbing fixtures,
salvaged items, debris, dismantled vehicles or parts thereof, unlicensed
vehicles, and any other old material commonly called "junk," and including
In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceedings, any citizen of the State of
New Jersey; and
A.
In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative
proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing
within or without the Township, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy
property is or may be affected by any action taken under the provisions
of this title, or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property under this
title or under any other law of this state or of the United States have
been denied, violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under
this title.
B.
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:384
dismantling operations of the above materials and items. A junkyard shall
not include the storage of old material to be used by the person or firm
storing the same for permitted on-site manufacturing purposes.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL or COMMERCIAL KENNEL — An establishment,
the principal function of which is the sale of dogs or services related
to dogs. It shall include an establishment for the boarding, trimming,
grooming, training and/or breeding of dogs for which a fee is charged.
KENNEL, NONCOMMERCIAL or NONCOMMERCIAL KENNEL —
LAND — Any ground, soil or earth, including marshes, swamps, drainways
and areas not permanently covered by water.
LANDFILL — The filling of low areas, surface deposition or the raising of
the surface of the ground by the dumping, depositing or placing of waste
materials, vehicles, building materials, household waste, or junk, vegetated
or developed.
LIGHT INDUSTRY — A land use where the primary activity involved is
one of the fabricating or assembling of standardized parts as contracted to
a processing activity which would change the nature or character of the
product or raw material.
LIGHT SOURCE — The bulb and lens, diffuser, or reflective enclosure.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Light projected onto a property from a fixture not
located on that property.
LIVING AREA — The area within the wall exteriors above the main grade
level, but excluding cellars, attics, garages or porches.
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions
by description and area as on a subdivision of record, or survey map, or
by metes and bounds for purpose of sale, lease or separate use. A street
passing through land shall be considered as having divided the land into
lots. A building lot shall be one meeting the minimum area and dimension
requirements as specified in the Township Zoning Ordinance and fronting
on an approved and improved street.
An accessory use of a single-family dwelling by a breeder or dog fancier
who is a resident thereof, where six or more dogs of a licensable age are
kept for the principal purpose of hunting, breeding for enhancement or
perpetuation of a given breed, for practice tracking, for exhibition in
dog shows, for field or obedience trials, or for guarding or protecting of
the householder's property.
A.
The surplus offspring of dogs bred by a hobby breeder may be sold,
and such sales shall not be considered commercial breeding, provided
there are no more than two litters per year, and provided further that
the sale of the offspring is not the primary function of the kennel. There
shall be no more than a total of 20 dogs of licensable age; otherwise,
the standards of a commercial kennel shall apply.
B.
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:385
LOT AVERAGING — The reduction in size of some lots in a subdivision, and
the corresponding increase in the size of other lots in the same subdivision,
in order to achieve an improvement in lot layout without any change in
overall development intensity.
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Affordable according to Federal Department of
Housing and Urban Development or other recognized standards for home
ownership and rental costs and occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross income equal to 50% or less of the median gross
household income for households of the same size within the housing region
in which the housing is located, and is subject to affordability controls.
LUMENS — Measure of brightness of the illumination exiting a bulb.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by the Township for the maintenance of any improvements
required by this title.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — A plan of major development of one or more lots on
which is shown:
LOT AREA — The computed area contained within the lot lines,
excluding any street rights-of-way.
A.
LOT, CORNER or CORNER LOT — A lot abutting upon two or more
streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street, which
streets or parts of the same street form an interior angle of less than
135°. The point of intersection of the street lot lines is the corner.
B.
C. LOT DEPTH — The mean distance between the front and rear lot lines.
D. LOT, INTERIOR or INTERIOR LOT — Any lot not a corner lot.
PROPERTY LINES BOUNDING THE LOT —
LOT LINE, FRONT or FRONT LOT LINE — The dividing line
between the lot and a street.
1.
LOT LINE, REAR or REAR LOT LINE — The lot line opposite and
most distant from the front lot line.
2.
LOT LINE, SIDE or SIDE LOT LINE — A lot line other than a front
or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is called
a "side street lot line."
3.
E.
LOT, THROUGH — Any lot, not a corner lot, which connects two
generally parallel streets.
F.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the two side lot lines measured at
the required setback line.
G.
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including, but not
necessarily limited to, topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways;
A.
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:386
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the Township, which shall have
been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
MATURE WOODLAND — An area of mature deciduous and/or nondeciduous
trees covering one acre or more, contributing either 30% or more largely
deciduous and/or nondeciduous canopy trees having a ten-inch or greater
caliper or any grove of deciduous and/or nondeciduous trees consisting of
eight or more trees having an eighteen-inch or greater caliper.
MINIMUM REQUIRED IMPROVABLE ACREAGE — The largest contiguous
acreage of a lot, excluding existing or proposed street rights-of-way,
freshwater wetlands and their associated transition areas as determined
and/or verified by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
floodplains, stormwater detention and/or retention facilities, existing
easements precluding structures, buffer yards as required under
§ 16.18.110 and state open waters.
MINIMUM REQUIRED IMPROVABLE AREA — The largest contiguous area
of a lot, excluding existing or proposed street rights-of-way, freshwater
wetlands and their associated transition areas as determined and/or verified
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, floodplains,
stormwater detention and/or retention facilities, existing easements
precluding structures, buffer yards as required under § 16.18.110 and state
open waters.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — Expansions of 25% or less of the existing floor
area and/or hard surface area; and/or a change of use within the existing
site and structures thereon; and/or new floor area up to and including
5,000 square feet; but not involving planned development, new streets or
extensions of any off-tract improvements prorated pursuant to Section 30
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42) of the Municipal Land Use Law.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown:
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, and
screening devices; and
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to this title requiring review
and approval of site plans by the Planning Board.
C.
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including, but not
limited to, tracts proposed for development; location of existing and
proposed structures, driveways and parking areas; existing structures,
driveways and parking areas; existing streets, rights-of-way and
easements; and information regarding surrounding properties; and
A.
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:387
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision resulting in not more than two
lots, fronting upon an existing street, not involving any new street, planned
development, or the extension of any off-tract improvement. The remaining
land shall not be considered as one of the two lots.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to
Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or other
recognized standards for home ownership and rental costs and occupied
or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household income
equal to more than 50% but less than 80% of the median gross household
income for households of the same size within the housing region in which
the housing is located and is subject to affordability controls.
MOTEL — A series of attached dwelling structures, where each unit has
convenient access to parking space for the use of the unit's occupant. The
units, with the exception of the manager's or caretaker's, are designed to
provide sleeping accommodations for automobile transients or overnight
guests without the provision for cooking in any room or suite. A singlefamily
home on the motel property, occupied by the owner/manager, is a
permitted accessory use.
MULCHING — The application of plant or other suitable materials on the
soil surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in establishing
plant cover.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — Three or more residences in a single
structure.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Township Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, or the governing body when acting pursuant to this title.
NATURAL GROUND SURFACE — The ground surface in its original state
before any grading, excavating or filling.
NET ACREAGE — The acreage of a lot, excluding the area of existing or
planned street rights-of-way, and excluding the area of any easements which
preclude the development of structures.
NET AREA OF LOT — See "net acreage."
NEW MOTOR VEHICLE AGENCY — A business licensed by the State of New
Jersey for the sale of new, or new and used, vehicles.
NONCOMMERCIAL ACCESSORY TOWER — Any vertical structure
accessory to, but not attached to, the principal structure on any residential
lot.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a Zoning
Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to this title requiring review
and approval of site plans by the Planning Board.
B.
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:388
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of
a Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSERY — A commercial operation engaged in growing plants and/or
trees under intensive management practices for use in another location.
OBSTRUCTION — Includes, but is not limited to, any structure, fill,
excavation, channel modification, rock, gravel, refuse or matter in, along,
across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or flood hazard area
which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water,
either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or
that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to
pose a danger to life or property.
OFF SITE — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor in a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law, Chapter 291, Laws of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2 et seq., or any
prior act authorizing such adoption, and which map shall be deemed to be
conclusive with respect to the location and width of streets, public parks
and playgrounds, drainage rights-of-way, flood control basins, public areas
and historic sites.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application, or in a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or
enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space. Such areas may be improved
with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street parking and
other improvements that are designated to be incidental to the natural
openness of the land.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON or COMMON OPEN SPACE — Land within or
related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public
use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of
the residents of the development, and may include such complementary
structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate.
ORCHARD — A commercial operation engaged in the cultivation of trees
bearing fruit or nuts or providing other products, such as, but not limited
to, maple syrup.
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:389
OUTSIDE STORAGE — The storage of goods, materials, equipment, etc.,
outside an enclosed building.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same
under this title. Such person may also be known as the "developer."
PARKING ACCESS — Entrances and exits to parking areas.
PARKING AREA — An open area, other than a street or public way, used
for the parking of automobiles or other vehicles and available to the public,
whether for a fee, free, or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE OR STALL — An off-street space available for the parking
of a motor vehicle and which has an area of at least 162 square feet,
exclusive of passageways, driveways and access aisles appurtenant thereto
and giving access thereto.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property, and all
owners of property and governmental agencies entitled to notice under
§ 16.08.050.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by a
municipality, including cash, provided that a municipality shall not require
more than 10% of the total performance guarantee in cash.
PERMEABILITY TEST — A test designed to determine the ability of ground
to absorb water.
PERMITTED USE — Any use which shall be allowed subject to the
provisions of this title.
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances labeled, designed,
intended for or capable of use in preventing, destroying, repelling,
sterilizing or mitigating any insects, rodents, nematodes, predatory
animals, fungi, weeds and other forms of plant life or viruses, except viruses
on or in living man or other animals. The term "pesticide" shall also include
any substance or mixture of substances labeled, designed or intended for
use as a defoliant, desiccant, or plant regulator.
PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY — See "solar or photovoltaic energy."
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential development, residential cluster,
planned commercial or planned industrial development.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area developed as a single
entity according to an approved plan and containing a variety of dwelling
unit types, open space and recreation areas, and commercial and/or public
and quasi-public uses, all primarily for the benefit of the residential
development.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the Township of Raritan.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision or site plan.
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:390
PLAT, FINAL or FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the
subdivision, which is presented to the Planning Board for final approval
in accordance with the regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed
with the County Clerk for recording in accordance with the law. A plat
that received final approval shall have been prepared by a New Jersey
licensed professional engineer or land surveyor in accordance with all of the
provisions of Chapter 141, Laws of 1960, N.J.S.A. 46:26-9.9 et seq.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY or PRELIMINARY PLAT — A map of a major
subdivision containing information required in this title and submitted in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this title for the purpose of
securing preliminary approval.
PLAT, SKETCH or SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision,
of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and
classification, and meeting the requirements of Chapter 16.18.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights prior to final
approval after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed
upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which any lot and/or building is
used.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession maintained for the conduct of his or her profession. Such
professions shall be limited to those of medicine, law, planning,
architecture, engineering, art, religion, music and other professions which
require a similar degree of training and experience.
PROHIBITED USE — Any use which shall not be allowed under any
circumstances.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreation areas; other public open spaces; scenic and historic sites; and
sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAYS — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing
for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood damage,
sedimentation and erosion.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, Board of Education, state or
county agency or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
PUBLIC SEWER — Sanitary effluent from a building or structure carried
in force mains, collectors, interceptors and trunks to a central sewage
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:391
treatment facility owned and operated by the Raritan Township Municipal
Utilities Authority.
PUBLIC USE — Any public building, structure or land used primarily for
public, quasi-public or public franchise purposes.
PUBLIC WATER (PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM) —
RAINFALL EXCESS — The portion of rainfall which becomes direct surface
runoff.
RECREATION FACILITY, PRIVATE, NONCOMMERCIAL or PRIVATE
NONCOMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY — Clubs or recreation
facilities operated by a nonprofit organization and open only to bona fide
members of such nonprofit organization.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, COMMERCIAL or COMMERCIAL
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Recreation facilities operated as a business
and open to the general public for a fee. This definition shall include
training facilities as defined elsewhere in this chapter.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY, PUBLIC — Any use or structure owned and
managed by a federal, state, or municipal agency, or its duly appointed
agent, for the purpose of active recreational activities.
RECREATIONAL TRAINING FACILITY — A building or part thereof in which
the training and education of person(s) in various forms of recreational
activities is performed for gain or profit. Said use may include accessory
retail sales of goods and services associated with the specific recreational
activity conducted on the site. Examples shall include: karate/martial arts,
swimming, scuba, tennis, batting, fencing, gymnastics, dancing, boxing, and
wrestling.
RELIGIOUS USE — A church, mosque, synagogue, temple or other similar
place of worship.
REPLACEMENT TREE — A nursery-grown, certified tree, properly balled,
marked with a durable label indicating genus, species and variety, and
A water supply, storage and distribution system that is operated by
the Township of Raritan, the Borough of Flemington or the holder of
a franchise water utility and consisting of a system of water mains
bringing water into the Township, to storage facilities and to
distribution lines for service and distribution to multiple users (as
differentiated from a single home, single subdivision or commercial or
industrial tract or user).
A.
For the purpose of this Title, the provision of public water to a
development shall mean connection into the existing water supply and
distribution system as above described or extension of such system as
above described to the site of the development. Water supply primarily
from groundwater via a well or wells specifically provided for a
development, whether on site or off tract, shall not be considered public
water irrespective of whether such well or wells are privately owned
and operated or owned and/or operated by a franchise water utility.
B.
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:392
satisfying the standards established for nursery stock and installation
thereof set forth by the American Association of Nurseryman.
RETAIL — Establishments engaged in the selling of goods or merchandise
to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering
services incidental to the sale of such goods.
RIDING ACADEMIES AND BOARDING STABLES — Uses and structures
designed for the quartering of horses and/or for providing instruction in
horsemanship.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — That line determining the limit of the street rights
of the public, either existing or contemplated.
ROOFLINE — The highest continuous horizontal line of a roof. On a sloping
roof, the roofline is the principal ridgeline or the highest line common to
one or more principal slopes of the roof. On a flat roof, the roofline is the
highest continuous line of the roof or parapet, whichever is higher.
SCHOOL (PRIVATE, PUBLIC OR PAROCHIAL) — A facility having regular
sessions of instruction conducted by regularly employed instructors and
teachers who teach those subjects which are fundamental and essential
in general education, and which provides education under the supervision
of the New Jersey Department of Education or a lawfully constituted
ecclesiastical governing body, or a corporation meeting the requirements of
the New Jersey Department of Education.
SCHOOL BUS DEPOT — A building and premises for the storage of buses
used primarily for the purposes of transporting children to and from
educational institutions, such as, but not limited to, elementary schools and
high schools. Accessory uses may include the repair and maintenance of the
buses that are stored on site but shall not include the pickup or dropoff of
passengers.
SECRETARY — The person designated by the Planning Board as Secretary
to the Board.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site or origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier or dam built across a waterway or at other
suitable locations to retain rock, sand, gravel, or silt or other material.
SEDIMENT POOL — The reservoir space allotted to the accumulation of
submerged sediment during the life of the structure.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SELECTIVE CUTTING — The removal of larger trees on an individual basis
while leaving trees of lesser size.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — Multifamily dwelling units designed to meet
the special needs of the elderly and located in developments generally
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:393
characterized by higher densities and lower parking requirements than
other multifamily housing developments.
SERVICES — Establishments providing services for entertainment as
opposed to products to the general public, including eating and drinking
places; finance; real estate; insurance; personal services; motion pictures;
amusement and recreation services; health, educational and social services;
and museums and galleries.
SHOP — A business totally contained within the building.
SHOPPING CENTER — Two or more commercial establishments in excess
of 50,000 square feet of gross floor area in one or more structures, designed
and operated as a coordinated, integrated unit with respect to parking
service, signs, etc. Uses may include retail and service establishments,
offices and office structures, theaters, recreational facilities, motels and
hotels, and auto service stores where gasoline, oil and grease, batteries,
tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed directly to
the motor vehicle trade, and where minor repair service is rendered, and
uses accessory to all such permitted uses.
SIGN (GRAPHIC) —
Any announcement, declaration, demonstration, billboard, display,
illustration, bulletin board, letters, numbers, logos, models, statues,
banners, flags, pennants, clocks, plants, thermometers, or lights or
combination of lights used to promote or advertise the interest of any
person, group of persons, corporation, place or product when the same
is placed, erected, attached, painted, printed or grown so as to be
visible to the general public.
A.
A sign shall not include any display of official court or public office
notices, or any official traffic control device, nor shall it include the flag,
emblem or insignia of a nation, state, county, municipality, school or
religious group.
B.
Sign Terms.
ADVERTISING SIGN —
a. See "off-premises sign."
Advertising sign means:
Movement of a sign or any segment thereof, such as
rotating, revolving, moving up or down, or any other type
of action involving a change of position, of a sign body or
segment thereof, whether caused by mechanical, illusional
or other means;
i.
A lighted sign on an intermittent or flashing circuit or the
movement of any light used in connection with any sign,
such as blinking, traveling, flaring or changing degree of
intensity or color.
ii.
b.
1.
C.
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:394
AREA OF FACADE — The area of the wall of a building, not
including roof areas of any type.
2.
BANNERS and PENNANTS — Advertising devices affixed to poles,
wires or ropes, and made of cloth or plastic materials, etc.
Government flags are excluded from this definition.
3.
4. BROKEN PLANE — Discontinuous surfaces separated by air space.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign attached to and suspended from an
overhang or ceiling.
5.
CUT-OUT LETTER OR NUMBER — Any figures cut out in the
shape of a letter or number and supported independently on an
awning or directly on a wall of a building. Any frame or artificial
background support enclosing any letters excludes a letter from
the classification of cut-out.
6.
7. GRAPHIC — Any device used for visual communication.
GROUND SIGN — A freestanding sign mounted on any support
other than a structure in which people live, work or congregate.
8.
INDIRECT LIGHTING — The use of fluorescent (and other vapor
light) or incandescent lighting set apart from, but directed towards,
the surface of the sign.
9.
INTERIOR LIGHTING — The use of fluorescent (and other vapor
light) or incandescent lighting to illuminate a sign from behind the
lettering or from inside the sign structure.
10.
KIOSK — A small, many-sided structure placed in a public area,
upon which posters, signs, messages, etc., are affixed.
11.
LANDSCAPE SIGNS — Signs placed on the ground created through
the use of plant materials, ground forms, rocks and other natural
materials.
12.
MARQUEES, CANOPIES or AWNINGS — Various forms of
permanent, temporary or portable roof-like coverings for
entrances, windows, etc.
13.
NEIGHBORHOOD IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign identifying the
entrance to a particular subdivision or other housing project which
is recognized by a given name.
14.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a
business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the lot or premises
where the sign is located.
15.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a
business, profession, commodity, service or entertainment
16.
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:395
SILVICULTURE — The management of any wooded tract of land to ensure
its continued survival and welfare, whether for commercial or
noncommercial purposes, pursuant to a plan approved by the New Jersey
Bureau of Forestry.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
SLOPE — The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually
expressed in percent or degree.
SOIL — An all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever
origin on the immediate surface of the earth that serves as a natural
medium for the growth of terrestrial plants; it generally overlies bedrock
and can be readily excavated.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL — A scheme which fully
indicates necessary land treatment measures, including a time schedule
for their installation, which shall effectively control soil erosion and
sedimentation. Such measures shall be equivalent to or exceed standards
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee.
SOLAR OR PHOTOVOLTAIC ENERGY — The definition for solar or
photovoltaic energy facility or structure shall mean a facility or structure
for the purpose of supplying electrical energy produced from solar or
conducted, sold or offered on the lot or premises where the sign is
located or to which it is affixed.
ORGANIZATION SIGN DISPLAY — A sign which combines all of the
civic, service, religious, etc., signs normally found scattered along
the roadside into one well-designed graphic.
17.
POLITICAL SIGNS — Graphics advertising candidates for political
office or involving a ballot issue.
18.
PROJECTING SIGN — A graphic attached to a building or other
structure and extending from the building wall or structure.
19.
RESIDENTIAL NAMEPLATE — A graphic permitted for the sole
purpose of identifying the following: inhabitants residing therein,
the house name or address.
20.
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including, but not
necessarily limited to, topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways;
A.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility service, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, and
screening devices; and
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to this title requiring review
and approval of site plans by the Planning Board.
C.
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:396
photovoltaic technologies, whether such a facility or structure is a principal
use, a part of the principal use, or an accessory use or structure.
SPECIMEN AND HISTORIC TREES — Any tree with a DBH of 24 inches or
greater.
SPOTLIGHT — A luminaire or bulb which projects light in a specific
direction in a narrow beam, typically 45° or less.
STATE SOIL CONSERVATION COMMITTEE — An agency of the state
established in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et seq.
STORMWATER DETENTION — Any storm drainage technique which
retards or detains runoff, such as a detention or retention basin, parking lot
storage, rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells, or any combination
thereof.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor above it or, if there is no floor above it, then
the space between the floor and the ceiling next to it.
STREAM ENCROACHMENT PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department
under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 58:1-26.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, or
which is approved by official action, or which is shown on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power
to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters,
curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
STREET, ARTERIAL or ARTERIAL STREET — Interstate or state highways
carrying the major portion of through traffic in the Township.
STREET, COLLECTOR or COLLECTOR STREET — A street which carries
traffic from minor streets to the secondary, primary and arterial roads. They
shall include the principal entrance street(s) of a residential development.
STREET, INTERNAL OR SERVICE or INTERNAL OR SERVICE STREET —
Minor ways used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side
of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS or MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A street
which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial or primary road and which
provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic
and does not impede traffic flow on the major road.
STREET, MINOR or MINOR STREET — A street which is used primarily for
access to the abutting properties and not for through traffic. Such a street
is also known as a "local street" and includes culs-de-sac.
STREET, PRIMARY or PRIMARY STREET — State and county roads carrying
through traffic and traffic from one part of the Township to another.
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:397
STREET, SECONDARY or SECONDARY STREET — County and local roads
designed to move traffic originating in the Township to the primary and
arterial highways.
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes or disturbs the vegetation
surface cover, including clearing and grubbing operations.
STRUCTURE — Any assembly of materials above or below the surface of
land or water, including, but not limited to, buildings, paving, fences, dams,
levees, bulkheads, dikes, jetties, embankments, wharves, piers, docks,
landings, obstructions, pipelines, causeways, culverts, roads, railroads,
bridges, and the facilities of any authority, utility, municipality, county, state
or other governmental agency.
SUBDIVIDER — Any person or other legal entity commencing proceedings
under the provisions of this title to effect a subdivision of land hereunder
for himself or herself or for another.
SUBDIVISION —
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the purpose of
reviewing this title and such duties relating to land subdivision which may
be referred to this Committee by the Board.
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A modification that substantially changes the
physical dimensions of an eligible support structure, as defined by 47 CFR
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The following
shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of the title if
no new streets are created:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size;
1.
2. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order, including, but not limited
to, judgments of foreclosure;
3.
Consolidation of existing lots of deed or other recorded
instruments; and
4.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts, or parcels
of land, owned by the same person or persons, and all of which
are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to
the requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance and are shown
and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map
of the Township.
5.
A.
B. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:398
1.50001(c), as may be amended, but which currently provides the following
criteria:[Added 5-21-2019 by Ord. No. 19-08]
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by COAH approving a
municipality's housing element and fair share plan in accordance with the
provisions of the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the
regulations promulgated thereunder. A grant of substantive certification
shall be valid for a period of six years in accordance with the terms and
conditions contained therein.
For towers other than towers in the public right-of-way, it increases
the height of the tower by more than 10% or by the height of one
additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing
antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible
support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more
than 10% or more than 10 feet, whichever is greater [changes in height
should be measured from the original support structure in cases where
deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings'
rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured
from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally
approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved
prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act, 47 CFR § 1.40001(b)(7)(i)(A)];
A.
For towers other than towers in the public right-of-way, it involves
adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude
from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width
of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever
is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an
appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the
edge of the structure by more than six feet;
B.
For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than
the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology
involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public
right-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new
equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no preexisting ground
cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of
ground cabinets that are more than 10% larger in height or overall
volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;
C.
D. It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site;
It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support
structure; or
E.
It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval
of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or
base station equipment; provided, however, that this limitation does not
apply to any modification that is noncompliant only in a manner that
would not exceed the thresholds identified in Subsections A through D
of this section.
F.
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.02.030
1.01:399
TEMPORARY PROTECTION — Stabilization of erosive or sedimentproducing
areas.
THINNING — The removal of undesirable, competitive, diseased or
damaged trees so as to cultivate and improve the development of remaining
trees on the lot.
TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling with two common or party walls,
meeting fire wall construction standards, separating it from adjacent units
on both sides, or one party wall in the case of a building at the end of a
group of attached dwellings.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The municipal official designated by the
Township Committee as the Township Engineer.
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or a
reproduction thereof.
TREE — Any self-supporting woody plant which reaches a typical mature
height of 12 feet or more at maturity and has a typical DBH of four inches
or greater.
TREE CANOPY — The top layer or crown of mature trees.
TREE FARM — A commercial operation engaged in growing trees under
intensive management practices for use in another location.
TUTORING — The teaching or instruction of academic subjects to not more
than four students simultaneously.
TWO-FAMILY HOUSING — Two units connected by a common wall but
having separate, complete living accommodations, including kitchen and
bathroom.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the
provisions of this title pursuant to § 16.04.030.
VEGETATION PROTECTION — Stabilization of erosive or sedimentproducing
areas by covering the soil with permanent seeding, producing
long-term vegetative cover; short-term seeding, producing temporary
vegetative cover; or sodding, producing areas covered with a turf or
perennial sod-forming grass.
WAREHOUSE — Any building or structure in which the principal use
involves the storage of goods and materials.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or artificial waterway, stream, river, creek,
ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or
wash in which water flows in a definite direction or course, either
continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed and
banks, and shall include any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by
reason of overflow of floodwater.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — Any building, premises or land in which or upon
which the principal business, operation or industry involves any handling
and resale of goods in comparatively large quantities to others, but not
usually to the ultimate consumer of an individual item.
§ 16.02.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.02.030
1.01:400
YARD — An open space which lies between the principal building or group
of buildings and the nearest lot line and which is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as herein permitted.
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Zoning Board of Adjustment of
the Township.
ZONING OFFICER — See "administrative officer."
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer:
Chapter 16.04
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 16.04.010. Establishment, Appointment, Organization and
Removal. [Prior code § 15-2.1]
YARD, FRONT or FRONT YARD — An open space extending the full
width of the lot between a principal building and the front lot line,
unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as may
be specified elsewhere in this title.
A.
YARD, REAR or REAR YARD — An open space extending the full width
of the lot between a principal building and the rear lot line, unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as may be specified
elsewhere in this title.
B.
YARD, SIDE or SIDE YARD — An open space extending from the front
lot line to the rear lot line between a principal building and the nearest
lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except
as may be specified elsewhere in this title.
C.
Which is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building; and
A.
Which acknowledges that such structure or building complies with the
provisions of the Municipal Zoning Ordinance or variance therefrom
duly authorized by the appropriate municipal agency.
B.
A. Establishment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment, heretofore
established, is continued.
B. Appointment. Pursuant N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69, the Board of Adjustment
shall consist of seven members and two alternate members who shall
not hold any elective office or position in the Township. Each shall be
appointed by the Township Committee for a term of four years, in the
case of regular members, and two years in the case of an alternate
member, running from January 1st of the year appointed. The terms
shall be arranged so to provide that no more than two terms expire in
any one year. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Township
Committee for the unexpired term.
§ 16.02.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.04.010
1.01:401
§ 16.04.020. Compensation. [Prior code § 15-2.2]
No member of the Board of Adjustment shall receive any compensation for
his or her services on the Board.
§ 16.04.030. General Duties and Powers. [Prior code § 15-2.3]
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
C. Removal. All members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
subject to removal for cause upon written charges after notice of such
charges and public hearing by the Township Committee.
D. Alternates. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings, but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
Number One shall vote.
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement decision or refusal made by an
Administration Officer based on or made in the enforcement of the
zoning ordinance;
B. Hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of any such
ordinance, requests for interpretation of the zoning map or ordinance
or for decisions upon other special questions upon which such Board is
authorized to pass by any zoning or official map ordinance in
accordance with this Title;
C. Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a
specific piece of property, or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the strict
application of any regulation pursuant to Article 3 of the Municipal
Land Use Law would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of
such property, grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such
property, a variance from such strict application of such regulation so
as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, including a variance for
conditional use; provided, however, that no variance shall be granted
under this section to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use; and provided further that the proposed
development does not require approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with which the
Planning Board shall review a request for a variance pursuant to
Section 47a of the Municipal Land Use Law;
D. In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to allow
departure from Article 3 of the Municipal Land Use Law, including, but
not limited to, allowing a structure or use in a district restricted against
§ 16.04.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.04.030
1.01:402
such structure or use, but only by affirmative vote of at least five
members.
No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and zoning
ordinance. An application under this section may be referred to any
appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board pursuant
to Section 17 of the Municipal Land Use Law, for its report; provided
that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act;
E. Where the enforcement of Section 16.64.090.E of the zoning ordinance
would entail practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, or where the
circumstances of the case do not require the building or structure to be
related to a street, the Board of Adjustment may upon application or
appeal, vary the application or Section 16.64.090.E and direct the
issuance of a permit subject to conditions that will provide adequate
access for firefighting, ambulances and other emergency vehicles
necessary for the protection of health and safety and that will protect
any future street layout shown on the official map or on the general
circulation plan element of the Township Master Plan;
F. Direct issuance of permit pursuant to Section 25 of the Municipal Land
Use Law for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to Section 23 of the Municipal Land Use Law;
G. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to Subsection E of this section for
a building or structure not related to a street;
H. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Chapters 16.18 and 16.20
or conditional use approval pursuant to Article 3 of the Municipal Land
Use Law whenever the proposed development requires approval by the
Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to Subsection D of this
section. The developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of the variance and a subsequent application for
any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The
separate approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon grant of all
required subsequent approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No such
subsequent approval shall be granted unless such approval can be
granted without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the
zone plan and zoning ordinance. The number of votes of Board
members required to grant any such subsequent approval shall be as
otherwise provided in this chapter for the approval in question, and the
special vote pursuant to Subsection D of this section shall not be
required;
§ 16.04.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.04.030
1.01:403
§ 16.04.040. Appeals and Applications to the Board. [Prior code
§ 15-2.4]
§ 16.04.050. Stay of Proceedings by Appeal — Exception. [Prior
code § 15-2.5]
An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
I. Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant to
Subsections A through D of this section, the Board of Adjustment shall
grant or deny approval of the application within 120 days after
submission by a developer of a complete application to the
Administrative Officer or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. In the event that the developer elects to submit
separate consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to
the application for approval of the variance. The period for granting or
denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this
Code. Failure of the Board of Adjustment to act within the period
described shall constitute approval of the application and a certificate
of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Board of Adjustment
to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval;
J. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by Sections 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (C-40:27 - 6.3), in
the case of a subdivision, or Sections 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(C-40:27-6.6), in the case of a site plan, the Board of Adjustment shall
condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or approval by
the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the
required time.
An application under this section may be referred to any appropriate
person or agency, including the Planning Board for its report; provided
that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. Appeals. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by an
interested party affected by any decision of an Administrative Officer of
the Township based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning
ordinance or official map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by
filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal is taken
specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. Application by Developer. A developer may file an application for
development with the Board of Adjustment for action under any of its
powers without prior application to an Administrative Officer.
§ 16.04.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.04.050
1.01:404
was made. Unless the officer, from whose action the appeal is taken,
certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with him or her that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate,
a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause eminent peril to life or property.
In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the
superior court upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
§ 16.04.060. Modification on Appeal. [Prior code § 15-2.6]
The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or
may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and to that end have all the powers of the
Administrative Officer from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 16.04.070. Appeals to the Township Committee. [Prior code
§ 15-2.7; amended by Ord. 98-50]
Refer to Section 16.08.110.
§ 16.04.080. Written Inquiries to Board of Adjustment. [Prior code
§ 15-2.8; amended by Ord. 98-50]
Inquiries as to whether a proposed land use is permissible under the zoning
ordinance or official zoning map shall be submitted in writing to the Board
of Adjustment which shall issue a written response within 45 days after the
next meeting following receipt of the request or within such additional time
as may be consented to by the inquirer.
Chapter 16.06
PLANNING BOARD
§ 16.06.010. Establishment. [Prior code § 15-3.1]
The Planning Board heretofore established is continued pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 16.06.020. Membership. [Prior code § 15-3.2; amended by Ord.
92-2; Ord. 98-50]
A. Number of Members. The Planning Board shall consist of seven
members and two alternate members.
B. Classes of Members. The members shall consist of and be divided into,
for the convenience in designating the manner of appointment, the
following four classes:
Class I: the Mayor.
§ 16.04.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.06.020
1.01:405
§ 16.06.030. Terms of Office — Removal — Compensation. [Prior
code § 15-3.3]
Class II: one of the officials of the Township other than a member of
the Township Committee, to be appointed by the Mayor; provided the
member of the Conservation Commission who is also a member of the
Planning Board as required by N.J.S. 40:56A-1 et seq., shall be deemed
to be the Class II Planning Board member for purposes of this act in the
event that there be among the Class IV members of the Planning Board
both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the
Board of Education.
Class III: a member of the Township Committee to be appointed by it.
Class IV: four citizens of the Township, to be appointed by the Mayor.
C. Class IV Members — Restrictions — Exceptions. The members of Class
IV shall hold no other Township Office. The member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning
Board, as required by N.J.S. 40:56A-1 et seq., shall be a Class IV
Planning Board member.
D. Two alternate members shall be appointed to the Planning Board by the
Mayor, and shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment by
the Mayor as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the
alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms of not
more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided,
however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members
first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than
by expiration of the term shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired
term only.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
E. No member or alternate member shall be permitted to act on any
matter on which he or she has either directly or indirectly any personal
or financial interest. Any member may, after public hearing if he or she
requests one, be removed by the Governing Body for cause.
A. Terms of Office — Removal. The term of the member composing Class I
shall correspond to his or her official tenure. The terms of the members
composing Class II and Class III shall be one year or terminate at the
completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs first,
except for a Class II member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission. The terms of a Class II or Class IV member,
§ 16.06.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.06.030
1.01:406
§ 16.06.040. Class IV Members Disqualified From Other Office —
Exceptions. [Prior code § 15-3.4]
The members of Class IV shall hold no other Township Office, except as
provided in Section 16.06.020.C.
§ 16.06.050. Powers of the Planning Board. [Prior code § 15-3.5]
who is also a member of the Environmental Commission, shall be for
three years or terminate at the completion of his or her term of office
as a member of the Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first.
The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board
of Adjustment or Board of Education shall terminate whenever he or
she is no longer a member of such body or at the completion of his
or her Class IV term, whichever occurs first. The term of each Class
IV member shall be four years. If a vacancy in any class shall occur
otherwise than by expiration of the Planning Board term, it shall be
filled by appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired term. Any
member, other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he or she
requests one, may be removed by the Township Committee for cause.
B. Compensation Prohibited. All members of the Planning Board shall
serve without compensation.
A. The Planning Board shall follow the provisions of this Title and shall
accordingly exercise its power in regard to:
1. The master plan pursuant to Article 3 of the Municipal Land Use
Law;
2. Subdivision control and site plan review pursuant to Chapters
16.18 and 16.20;
3. The official map pursuant to Article 5 of the Municipal Land Use
Law;
4. The zoning ordinance including conditional uses pursuant to Article
3 of this Title;
5. The capital improvements program pursuant to Article 4 of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
B. The Planning Board may:
1. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state and federal law or regulation;
2. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process; and
3. Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by this
Code or resolution of the Township Committee for the aid and
assistance of the Township Committee or other agencies or officers.
§ 16.06.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.06.050
1.01:407
§ 16.06.060. Informal Review. [Prior code § 15-3.6]
At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an informal
review of a concept plan for a development for which the developer intends
to prepare and submit an application for development. The developer shall
not be required to submit any fees for such an informal review. The
developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for which review is
requested, and the Planning Board shall not be bound by any such review.
Chapter 16.08
MEETINGS, HEARINGS, NOTICES AND APPEALS
§ 16.08.010. Definitions. [Prior code § 15-4.1]
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall be as defined in the definition
section of the Municipal Land Use Law. N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8, and Section
16.02.030 of this Title.
§ 16.08.020. Administrative Procedures, Organization, Staff and
Meetings. [Prior code § 15-4.2]
C. The Planning Board, when reviewing applications for approval of
subdivision plats, site plans or conditional uses, shall have the power to
grant to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Board of Adjustment:
1. Variances pursuant to Section 16.04.030.C.;
2. Direction pursuant to Section 25 of the Municipal Land Use Law for
issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a
mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin or public
area reserved pursuant to Section 23 of the Municipal Land Use
Law; and
3. Direction pursuant to Section 16.04.030.E for issuance of a permit
for a building or structure not related to a street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this chapter, notice of the hearing
on the application for development shall include reference to the request
for a variance, or direction of issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
A. Administrative Procedures. The Municipal Agency shall adopt, and may
amend reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the
provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law or this Code for the
administration of its functions, powers and duties, and shall furnish a
copy thereof to any person upon request and may charge a reasonable
fee for such copy. Copies of all such rules and regulations and
amendments thereto shall be maintained in the Office of the Township
Planner.
§ 16.06.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.08.020
1.01:408
§ 16.08.030. Meetings. [Prior code § 15-4.3]
B. Organization Officials. The Municipal Agency shall elect its own
Chairman and Vice-Chairman from its own membership. In the case of
the Planning Board, they shall be elected from the Class IV
membership. The Municipal Agency shall select a Secretary who may or
may not be a member of said agency or a Township employee.
C. Employment — Compensation of Experts and Staff. The Planning Board
may employ, or contract for and fix the compensation of legal counsel,
other than the Township Attorney, and experts, and other staff and
services as it may deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or
grants, the amount appropriated by the Township Committee for its
use.
D. Conflict of Interest. No member of the Municipal Agency shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or
indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
A. Meetings — Regular and Special. The Municipal Agency shall by its
rules fix the time and place for holding its regular meetings for business
authorized to be conducted by such agency. Regular meetings of the
Board shall be scheduled not less than once a month and shall be held
as scheduled unless cancelled for lack of applications for development
to process. The Board may provide for special meetings, at the call of
the Chairman, or on the request of any two of its members, which shall
be held on notice to its members and the public in accordance with
Township regulations. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a
quorum being present. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of
the members of the Board present at the meeting, except as follows:
1. A permit for buildings or structures in the bed of any street, public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area shown on the
official map shall require an affirmative vote of a majority of the full
authorized membership.
2. Granting a variance to allow a structure or use in a district
restricted against such structure or use shall require five
affirmative votes of the Board of Adjustment membership.
B. Open to the Public. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall
be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in
accordance with Township regulations. An executive session for the
purpose of discussing and studying any matters to come before the
Board shall not be deemed a regular or special meeting.
C. Minutes. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and
shall include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Planning Board and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action
taken by the Board, the findings, if any, made by it; and reasons thereof.
The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public inspection
§ 16.08.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.08.030
1.01:409
§ 16.08.040. Hearings and Minutes. [Prior code § 15-4.4]
during normal business hours at the office of the Township Planner.
Any interested party shall have the right to compel production of the
minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the
subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may be charged
a reasonable fee for reproduction of the minutes for his or her use.
A. Hearings. The following shall apply:
1. The Municipal Agency shall hold a hearing on each application for
development, or adoption, revision or amendment of the master
plan. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a
hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection at least
10 days before the date of the hearing during normal working
hours in the office of the Planning Board. The applicant may
produce other documents, records or testimony at the hearing to
substantiate or classify or supplement the previously filed maps
and documents.
2. The Chairman of the Municipal Agency presiding at the hearing or
such person as he or she may designate shall have the power to
administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and the production of relevant evidence, including
witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953.c.38, C.2A:67A-1 et seq., shall apply.
3. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or directly if not represented, subject to the discretion
of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as to time and
number of witnesses.
4. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing,
but the agency may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
5. The Municipal Agency shall provide for the verbatim recording of
the proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic
means. The Board shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording
in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at his or her
expense.
The Municipal Agency, in furnishing a transcript of the proceedings
to an interested party at his or her expense, shall not charge
such interested party more than the maximum permitted in N.J.S.A.
2A:11-15. Said transcript shall be certified in writing by the
transcriber to be accurate.
§ 16.08.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.08.040
1.01:410
§ 16.08.050. Notice of Hearings on Applications for Development.
[Prior code § 15-4.5; amended by Ord. 98-18]
6. Each decision on any application for the development shall be
reduced in writing as provided in this subsection and shall include
findings of facts and conclusions based thereon.
Failure of a motion to approve an application for development to
receive the number of votes required for approval shall be deemed
an action denying the application.
The Municipal Agency may provide such written decision and
findings and conclusions either on the date of the meeting at which
the board takes to grant to deny approval; or, if the meeting at
which such action is taken occurs within the final 45 days of the
applicable time period for rendering a decision on the application
for development, within 45 days of such meetings by the adoption
of a resolution of memorialization setting forth the decision and the
findings and conclusions of the Board thereon. An action resulting
from the failure of a motion to approve an application shall be
memorialized by resolution as provided above, notwithstanding the
time at which such action occurs within the applicable time period
for rendering a decision on the application.
The adoption of a resolution of memorialization pursuant to this
subsection shall not be construed to alter the applicable time
period for rendering a decision on the application for development.
Such resolution shall be adopted by a vote of a majority of the
members of the Board who voted for the action previously taken,
and no other members shall vote thereon.
Whenever a resolution of memorialization is adopted in accordance
with this subsection, the date of such adoption shall constitute
the date of the decision for purposes of the mailings, filings and
publications required by Subsections A.7. and A.8.
7. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days
of the date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to
his or her attorney, without separate charge and to all who request
a copy of the decision for a reasonable fee. A copy of the decision
shall also be filed by the board in the office of the Township Planner.
The Township Planner shall make a copy of such filed decision
available to any interested party for a reasonable fee and available
for public inspection at this office during reasonable hours.
8. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publications shall be arranged
by the Clerk of the Board. The period of time in which an appeal of
the decision may be made shall run from the first publication of the
decision.
§ 16.08.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.08.050
1.01:411
A. Notice of Application. Notice pursuant to Subsections A.1., A.2., A.4.,
A.5., A.6. and A.7. shall be given by the applicant. Notice shall be given
at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
1. Public notice of a hearing on an application for development shall
be given, except for: (a) conventional site plan review (minor,
preliminary and/or final site plans) pursuant to Chapter 16.20
wherein fewer than five off-street parking spaces are proposed, or
fewer than five off-street additional parking spaces are proposed;
(b) minor subdivision; and (c) final subdivision approval pursuant to
Chapter 16.16, provided that public notice shall be given in the
event that relief is requested pursuant to Section 16.04.030, as part
of an application for development otherwise excepted herein from
public notice. Public notice of a hearing shall be provided for
conventional site plan review as set forth in this Subsection A.1.
above and for any site plan application requesting a waiver or
waivers pursuant to Section 16.20.010A, and for any modification
to a site plan previously approved and for which public notice of a
hearing was provided. Public notice shall be given by publication in
an official newspaper of the Township and by personal service in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
2. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to Subsection
A.1. shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on
the current tax duplicate within 200 feet in all directions of the
property which is the subject of such hearing; provided that this
requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the: (1)
condominium association, in the case of any owner whose unit has
a unit above or below it; or (2) horizontal property regime, in the
case of any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or
below it. Notice shall be given by: (1) serving a copy thereof on the
property owner as shown on the current tax duplicate, or his or her
agent in charge of the property; or (2) mailing a copy thereof by
certified mail to the property owner at his or her address as shown
on the current tax duplicate.
Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, vice-president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing,
may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without
further notice to unit owners, co-owners, or homeowners on
account of such common elements or areas.
3. Upon the written request of an applicant, the office of the Tax
Collector shall within seven days, make a certified list from the
§ 16.08.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.08.050
1.01:412
§ 16.08.060. Notice of Hearings on Master Plan, Capital
Improvements Program or Official Map. [Prior code § 15-4.6]
Such notice shall be given in accordance with:
current tax duplicates required to give notice pursuant to this
subsection. The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the
information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any
owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
A sum of $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater, shall be
charged for such list.
4. Notice of hearings on application for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality.
5. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to an existing county map or on
the county master plan, adjoining other county land or situated
within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
6. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
7. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director or the Division of State and Regional Planning of a hearing
on an application for development of a property which exceeds 150
acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice shall include a copy of any
maps or documents required to be on file with the Township Clerk
pursuant to Chapter 16.14.
8. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the
Planning Board in the event that the applicant is required to give
notice pursuant to this subsection.
9. Notice pursuant to Subsections A.4., A.5., A.6., and A.7. shall not be
deemed to be required, unless public notice pursuant to Subsection
A.1. and notice pursuant to Subsection A.2. are required.
B. Effect of Mailing Notice. Any notice made by certified mail shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
C. Proof of Service — Affidavit. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof
of service with the Board at the time of the hearing.
A. Master plan: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-13:
B. Capital improvements program or official map: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-15.
§ 16.08.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.08.070
1.01:413
§ 16.08.070. Contents of Notice of Hearing. [Prior code § 15-4.7]
Contents of a notice of a hearing on an application for development or
adoption of a master plan shall state the date, time and place of the hearing,
the nature of the matters to be considered and, in the case of notices
pursuant to an application for development, an identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot
and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Township
Tax Assessor's Office, and the location and time at which any maps and
documents for which approval is sought are available pursuant to Chapter
16.14.
§ 16.08.080. Voting Notwithstanding Absence. [Prior code § 15-4.8]
A member of a Planning Board who was absent for one or more of the
meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on the matter
upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his or her absence
from one or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such board
member has available to him or her the transcript or recording of all of the
hearing from which he or she was absent, and certifies in writing to the
Board that he or she has read such transcript or listened to such recording.
§ 16.08.090. Fees. [Prior code § 15-4.9; amended during 3-00
supplement; Ord. 85-6]
The following fees shall accompany each application for development to the
appropriate Board or Official.
A. Site Plan Approval. As stated in Section 16.20.050.
B. Subdivision Approval. As stated in Section 16.18.
C. Planned Residential Development Fees. Total of subdivision and site
plan review fees for the appropriate stage of approval.
D. Variance Fees. Fees for variances from the zoning ordinance and the
cost of taking testimony shall be as set forth in Section 16.78.050.
E. Site Plan Inspection Fees. As stated in Section 16.20.
F. Subdivision Inspection Fees. As stated in Section 16.18.
G. Conditional Use Application. Two hundred dollars plus appropriate
subdivision and appropriate site plan fee. [Amended by Ord. 06-14]
H. Sign Permits. Twenty-five dollars for a ground sign and $20 for a wall
sign. [Amended by Ord. 06-14]
I. Zoning permits. Issued pursuant to Section 16.78.020: $15 for
generators, central air conditioning units and propane tanks; and $30
for decks, fences, sheds, finished basements, interior renovations, oil
tanks, and other accessory structures; $50 for additions (residential
and nonresidential); $150 for single-family residential (new structure);
§ 16.08.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.08.090
1.01:414
§ 16.08.100. Fees for Appeal or Application — Cost of Taking
Testimony. [Prior code § 15-4.10]
Refer to Section 16.78.060(B).
§ 16.08.110. Appeals to the Township Committee. [Prior code
§ 15-4.11]
$100 per unit for multifamily/attached residential (new structure); $250
for commercial nonresidential (new structure). [Amended by Ord.
06-14; Ord. 09-24; 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-31]
J. Special Meeting Requests. Applicants requesting a single applicant
meeting which is agreed to by the Municipal Agency shall pay an
additional fee of $1,000 per single applicant special meeting.
K. Zoning Certificate of Reoccupancy: $20.
L. Zoning Certifications: $30. [Amended by Ord. 06-14]
M. Temporary Signs: $10.
A. Any interested party desiring to appeal any final decision of the Board
of Adjustment approving an application for development pursuant to
Subsection 16.04.030D may appeal to the Township Committee. Such
appeal shall be made within 10 days of date of publication of such final
decision pursuant to Section 16.08.040A.8. The appeal to the Governing
Body shall be made by serving the Township Clerk in person or by
certified mail with a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof,
and the name and address of the appellant, and the name and address
of his or her attorney, if represented. Such appeal shall be decided by
the Governing Body only upon the record established before the Board
of Adjustment.
B. Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given by the
Township Committee by personal service or certified mail to the
appellant, to those entitled to notice of a decision pursuant to Section
16.08.050, and to the Board from which the appeal is taken at least 10
days prior to the date of the meeting. The parties may submit oral and
written argument on the record at such meeting, and the Township
Committee shall provide for verbatim recording and transcripts of such
to Section 16.08.040A.5.
C. The appellant shall: (1) with five days of service of the notice of appeal
pursuant to Subsection A of this section, arrange for a transcript
pursuant to Section 16.08.040A.5. for use by the Township Committee
and deposit of $50 or the estimated cost of such transcription,
whichever is less; or (2) within 35 days of service of the notice of
appeal, submit a transcript as otherwise arranged to the Township
Clerk; otherwise, the appeal may be dismissed for failure to prosecute.
§ 16.08.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.08.110
1.01:415
Chapter 16.10
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT FEES
§ 16.10.010. Findings and Purposes. [Amended by Ord. 09-13]
The Township Committee shall conclude a review of the record below
not later than 95 days from the date of publication of notice of the
decision below pursuant to Section 16.08.040A.8., unless the applicant
consents in writing to an extension of such period. Failure of the
Township Committee to hold a hearing and conclude a review of the
record below and to render a decision within such specified period shall
constitute a decision affirming the action of the Board.
D. The Township Committee may reverse, remand or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify the final decision of the Board of Adjustment.
E. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of
the Township Committee shall be necessary to reverse, remand or
modify the final action of the Board of Adjustment.
F. An appeal to the Township Committee shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed was
made unless the Board from whose action the appeal is taken certifies
to the Township Committee, after the notice of appeal shall have been
filed with such board, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a
stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
G. The Township Committee shall mail a copy of the decision to the
appellant or, if represented, then to his or her attorney, without
separate charge, and for a reasonable charge to any interested party
who has requested it, not later than 10 days after the date of the
decision. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Township. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Township Clerk.
A. The Township Committee of the Township of Raritan finds and declares
that the creation and preservation of affordable housing in the
Township serves the public interest. Maintaining and improving a stock
of sound affordable housing requires affirmative steps by local
government working cooperatively with public bodies at all levels and
with the private sector.
B. The New Jersey Supreme Court in Holmdel Builder's Ass'n v. Holmdel
Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990), determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution.
C. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations
§ 16.08.110 RARITAN CODE § 16.10.010
1.01:416
§ 16.10.020. Basic Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 09-13]
§ 16.10.030. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 09-13]
necessary for the establishment, implementation, review, monitoring
and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust funds and
corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under the
jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and have
a COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential
development.
D. The purpose of this subsection is to establish standards for the
collection, maintenance and expenditure of development fees in
accordance with COAH's rules and regulations, and in accordance with
P.L. 2008, c.46, Section 8 and 32-38. Fees collected pursuant to this
subsection shall be used for the sole purpose of providing low- and
moderate-income housing. This subsection shall be interpreted within
the framework of COAH's regulations on development fees, including
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8, and as may be amended.
A. This chapter 16.10 shall not be effective until approved by COAH
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
B. The Township of Raritan shall not spend development fees until COAH
has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8:10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:97-9.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is
not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a 100% affordable development.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — Any housing unit proposed or created pursuant
to the Fair Housing Act of 1985, credited pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-4, or
funded through the Township's affordable housing trust fund.
COAH or COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act of 1985, which has primary
jurisdiction for the administration of affordable housing obligations in
accordance with sound regional planning considerations in the State.
CONSTRUCTION — New construction and additions, but does not
include alterations, reconstruction, renovations, and repairs as those
terms are defined under the State Uniform Construction Code
promulgated pursuant to the "State Uniform Construction Code Act,"
P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.)
§ 16.10.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.10.030
1.01:417
§ 16.10.040. Development Fee Schedule. [Amended by Ord. 09-13]
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other individual,
person, partnership, association, company, or corporation having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ration of assessed to true value for the
Township as determined in accordance with Sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L.
1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through N.J.S.A. 54:1-35c). Estimates
at the time of building permit may be obtained by the Tax Assessor
utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final equalized assessed value
will be determined at project completion by the Tax Assessor.
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A modification or elimination of a
significant condition or conditions in a memorializing resolution or any
significant modification in the design or layout of the subdivision plan
previously approved which require a revised or amended subdivision
plan application.
A. Residential Development.
1. Within all residential and nonresidential zones now existing, or as
may hereafter be created, including, but not limited to, the R-1,
R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-6LM, R-7, R-8, R-9, and AR Zone
Districts, in the Township of Raritan, residential developers, except
for the developers of the types of development specifically
exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed
value for the residential development provided no increased
density is permitted.
2. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers shall pay a development fee of 6% of the equalized
assessed value for each additional unit that may be realized.
However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the two-year
period preceding the filing of such a variance application, the base
density for the purposes of calculating the bonus development fee
shall be the highest density permitted by right during the two-year
period preceding the filing of the variance application. Example: If
an approval allows four units to be constructed on a site that was
§ 16.10.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.10.040
1.01:418
§ 16.10.050. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and
Exemptions. [Amended by Ord. 09-13]
zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1 1/2% of the equalized
assessed value on the first two units; and the specified higher
percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed value for the two
additional units, provided zoning on the site has not changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance
application.
B. Nonresidential Development.
1. Within all non-residential or residential zones now existing, or as
may hereafter be created, including, but not limited to, the I-1, I-2,
O-1, O-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5, and PCOS Zone Districts, in the
Township of Raritan, non-residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements, for all new non-residential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
2. Non-residential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for non-residential
purposes.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
non-residential structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on the difference
between the equalized assessed value of the pre-existing land and
improvements and the equalized assessed value of the newly
improved structure, i.e. land and improvement, at the time final
certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation required under
this section results in a negative number, the non-residential
development fee shall be zero.
A. Affordable housing developments, developments where the developer is
providing for the construction of affordable units elsewhere in the
Township, and developments where the developer has made a payment
in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units shall be exempt from
development fees.
B. Residential developments that have received preliminary or final site
plan approval prior to the effective date of the initial development fee
ordinance codified in this subsection shall be exempt from paying a
development fee, unless the developer seeks a substantial change in the
approval. Where a site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or
building permit shall be synonymous with preliminary and final site
plan approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on
the date that the building permit is issued.
§ 16.10.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.10.050
1.01:419
C. Development fees shall not be imposed when an existing residential
structure is expanded (including additions, alterations, renovations or
reconstruction work).
D. The non-residential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market rate
development shall be subject to the 2.5% development fee, unless
otherwise exempted below.
E. The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from alterations, change in use within existing footprint,
reconstruction, renovations and repairs to non-residential
developments.
F. Non-residential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
non-residential development fees in accordance with the exemptions
required pursuant to the Statewide Non-residential Development Fee
Act, P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1, et seq., as specified in the
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption" Form. Specifically, all non-residential
construction of buildings or structures on property used by churches,
synagogues, mosques, and other houses of worship, and property used
for educational purposes, which is tax exempt pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:4-3.6, shall be exempt from the imposition of a non-residential
development fee, provided that the property continues to maintain its
tax exempt status under the statute for a period of at least three years
from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. In addition, the
following shall be exempt from the imposition of a non-residential
development fee:
1. Parking lots and parking structures, regardless whether the
parking lot or parking structure is constructed in conjunction with
a non-residential development, such as an office building, or
whether the parking lot is developed as an independent nonresidential
development;
2. Any non-residential development which is an amenity to be made
available to the public, including, but not limited to, recreational
facilities, community centers, and senior centers, as defined by the
Statewide Non-residential Development Fee Act, which are
developed in conjunction with or funded by a non-residential
developer;
3. Non-residential construction resulting from a relocation of or an
on-site improvement to a nonprofit hospital or a nursing home
facility;
4. Projects that are located within a specifically delineated urban
transit hub, as defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 34:1B-208;
5. Projects that are located within an eligible municipality, as defined
under N.J.S.A. 34:1B-208, which a majority of the project is located
§ 16.10.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.10.050
1.01:420
§ 16.10.060. Collection of Development Fees.
within a one-half mile radius of the midpoint of a platform area for
a light rail system; and
6. Projects determined by the New Jersey Transit Corporation to be
consistent with a transit village plan developed by a transit village
designated by the Department of Transportation.
G. Any exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by that
developer. A developer of a non-residential development exempted from
the non-residential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46 shall be
subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer applies,
and shall make the payment of the non-residential development fee, in
that event, within three years after that event or after the issuance of
the final certificate of occupancy of the non-residential development,
whichever is later.
H. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a nonresidential
development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt from
property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the fees
required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the termination of
the property tax exemption. Unpaid non-residential development fees
under these circumstances may be enforceable by the Township of
Raritan as a lien against the real property of the owner.
I. Owner-occupied residential structures demolished and replaced as a
result of fire, flood or natural disaster shall be exempt from paying a
development fee.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval,
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official or other designated Township
official responsible for the issuance of a building permit.
B. For non-residential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The Developer of a non-residential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the non-residential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official or other Township Official responsible for the
issuance of a building permit shall notify the Township Tax Assessor of
the issuance of the first building permit for a development which is
subject to a development fee.
§ 16.10.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.10.060
1.01:421
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Township Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy shall notify the Tax Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Township Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Township fail to determine or notify the developer of the
amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the request
for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and
pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth
in Subsection b. of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c.46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. The Township may collect up to 50% of the calculated development fee
at the time of the issuance of the building permit, with the remaining
portion to be collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
The developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at the issuance of the building permit and that
determined at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
1. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the Hunterdon County Board of Taxation.
Pending a review and determination by the Board, collected fees
shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account by the
Township of Raritan. Appeals from a determination of the Board
may be made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of
the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq.,
within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing
party.
2. A developer may challenge non-residential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account
by the Township of Raritan. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1
et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination.
Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the
prevailing party.
§ 16.10.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.10.070
1.01:422
§ 16.10.070. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 16.10.080. Use of Money. [Amended by Ord. 09-13]
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer of the Township for the
purpose of depositing development fees collected from residential and
non-residential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, which shall be designated as the "Affordable
Housing Trust Fund."
B. The following additional funds may be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
1. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
2. Developer contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
3. Rental income from municipally operated units;
4. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
5. Recapture funds;
6. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
7. Any other funds collected in connection with the Township of
Raritan's affordable housing program.
C. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Township shall provide COAH with written authorization, in the form of
a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality, the bank,
and COAH to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as
provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
D. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund may
be used for any activity approved by COAH to address the Township of
Raritan's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving
loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited to:
preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or
implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of
affordable housing units and related costs, accessory apartment,
market to affordable, or regional housing partnership programs,
conversion of existing non-residential buildings to create new
affordable units, green building strategies designed to be cost saving
and in accordance with accepted national or state standards, purchase
§ 16.10.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.10.080
1.01:423
of land for affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for
affordable housing, extensions or improvements of roads and
infrastructure to affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed
to increase affordability, administration necessary for implementation
of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in the
approved spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township for past
housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
1. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
2. Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low or
moderate income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
3. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. The Township may contract with a private or public entity to administer
any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the
requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:96-18.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees,
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing
program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of
the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for
such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for
income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and
rental units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements.
Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
sites or objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not
eligible uses of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 16.10.080 RARITAN CODE § 16.10.090
1.01:424
§ 16.10.090. Monitoring. [Amended by Ord. 09-13]
The Township shall complete and submit to COAH all monitoring reports
included in the monitoring requirements related to the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of construction affordable units on site, funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls, barrier free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds
collected in connection with the Township's affordable housing program,
as well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan
certified by COAH.
§ 16.10.100. Ongoing Collection of Development Fees. [Amended by
Ord. 09-13]
Chapter 16.11
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 16.11, Growth Share Affordable Housing Production, as
amended by Ords. 06-5 and 08-20, was repealed 2-4-2020 by Ord. No.
20-01.]
Chapter 16.12
RIGHT TO FARM
§ 16.12.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 94-37]
As used in this chapter:
COMMERCIAL FARM — Any farm producing agriculture or horticultural
products worth $2,500 or more annually which products are farmed
A. The Township's ability to impose, collect and expend development fees
shall expire with its substantive certification unless the Township has
filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has
petitioned for substantive certification, and has received COAH's
approval of this subsection. If the Township fails to renew its ability to
impose and collect development fees prior to the expiration of its
substantive certification, it may be subject to forfeiture of any of all
funds remaining within its Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Any funds so
forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing
Trust Fund" established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c.222
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). The Township shall not impose a residential
development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final
site plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance, nor shall the Township retroactively impose a
development fee on such a development. The Township shall not expend
development fees after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance.
§ 16.10.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.12.010
1.01:425
principally for sale or distribution to others, and which meet the eligibility
requirements for differential property, taxation pursuant to the Farmland
Assessment Act of 1964 N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq. Farm product sales, farm
stand, farm structure: See Section 16.02.030 for definitions.
HOME AGRICULTURE — The production principally for home use or
consumption of plants, animals or their products, and for sale to others on
the premises only (and may be sold from a table or other similar portable
display) where such sales are incidental, including, but not limited to,
gardening, fruit production, and poultry and livestock products for
household use only.
§ 16.12.020. Right to Farm. [Amended by Ord. 94-37]
A. The right to farm land is recognized to exist in the Township and is
declared a permitted use in the following zones and subject to the
standards and regulations as set forth in the Development Regulations
of the Township: R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-6, I-1, I-2, O-2.
The following farming activities shall be deemed established as
acceptable, recognized and entitled to encouragement and protection
as the collective embodiment of the right to farm, subject in all cases,
however, to any supervening applicable federal, state, county or
municipal laws or regulations respecting the public health, safety or
otherwise:
1. Produce agricultural and horticultural crops, trees and forest
products, livestock, poultry and other related commodities;
2. Sell home agricultural goods and farm products in accordance with
the provisions of Article 3 of this Title; and establish farm stands as
a conditional use in accordance with the provisions of Section
16.68.060.H.
3. Replenish soil nutrients, including, but not limited to, the spreading
of manure and applying environmentally approved chemical and
organic fertilizers;
4. Use federally approved products, in accordance with labeled
instructions, as recommended by the New Jersey Agricultural
Experiment Station and the U.S. and N.J. Environmental Protection
Agencies for the control of pests, predators, varmints, diseases
affecting plants and livestock, and for the control of weed
infestation;
5. Clear woodlands using accepted techniques and install and
maintain vegetative and terrain alterations and other physical
facilities for water and soil conservation and surface water control
in wetlands areas;
§ 16.12.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.12.020
1.01:426
§ 16.12.030. Notice of Farm. [Amended by Ord. 94-37]
For the purpose of giving due notice of nearby farming uses to proposed,
new residential areas adjacent to unimproved land then being farmed or
suitable therefor, the Planning Board shall require any applicant for an
adjacent major or minor subdivision, as a condition of approval of such
application, to include a provision in each and every deed conveying all
or any portion of the lands thereby subdivided, as well as on filed final
subdivision maps, the following record notice to grantees of such present or
future proximate farming uses, which provision shall be made to run with
the land:
Grantee hereby acknowledged NOTICE that there are presently, or may
in the future be farm uses adjacent or in close proximity to the within
described premises from which farm use may emanate noise, odors, dust,
6. Use irrigation pumps and equipment and undertake aerial and
ground seeding and spraying, using tractors and other necessary
equipment;
7. Hire and utilize necessary farm labor, except that any housing of
laborers shall only be permitted in existing residential dwellings on
the property and subject to all other standards set forth in this
chapter and any other governmental regulations;
8. Construct and maintain fences for orderly control of livestock;
9. Transport large, slow-moving equipment over roads within the
Township;
10. The use of farmland for a limited recreational use (noncommercial
and non-income producing), e.g., snowmobiling shall be done only
with the permission of the farm owner. Any expanded recreational
use of the farmland which changes the underlying agricultural
nature of the use shall be subject to the usual prior site plan review,
variance application and all permits where otherwise required.
B. The foregoing uses, activities and rights when reasonable and
necessary for farming, livestock or fowl production and when
conducted in accordance with generally accepted agricultural
practices, may occur on holidays, Sundays and weekends by day or
night and shall include the attendant or incidental noise, odors, dust
and fumes associated with these practices.
C. It is determined that whatever nuisance may be caused to others by
these uses and activities is more than offset by the benefits from
farming to the neighborhood community and society in general by
preservation of open space, the beauty of the countryside and clean air.
The preservation and continuance of farming operations in Raritan
Township and New Jersey is a source of agricultural products for this
and future generations and saves a nonreplenishable resource, i.e., the
land.
§ 16.12.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.12.030
1.01:427
and fumes associated with agricultural practices permitted under the
Raritan Township Right to Farm Ordinance.
Chapter 16.13
IMPACT ON NEIGHBORING NON-RESIDENTIAL USES
§ 16.13.010. Right to Non-Residential Use of Land. [Amended by
Ord. 02-43]
§ 16.13.020. Notice of Non-Residential Use. [Amended by Ord.
02-43]
For the purpose of giving notice of an existing non-residential use or the
right to expand such use; or to develop a non-residential use nearby or
adjacent to proposed, new residential areas, the Planning Board/Board of
Adjustment shall require any applicant for a major or minor residential
subdivision, as a condition of approval of such application, to include a
provision in each public offering statement and homeowner documents, as
well as each and every Deed conveying all or a portion of the lands thereby
subdivided, as well as a Note on the final subdivision map, the following
record notice to prospective purchasers and grantees of such present or
future non-residential use:
A. The Development Regulations of the Township of Raritan establish
various zoning districts within the Township, several of which permit
non-residential type uses. Under these regulations, various industrial,
manufacturing, business, commercial, retail and other type uses of the
same and similar nature set forth in the said Development Regulations
have been established, or are permitted to be established and built
upon lands located within those zones, and in accordance with the
Development Regulations and the powers thereunder granted to the
Planning Board and Board of Adjustment of the Township.
B. The right to conduct, use or develop such non-residential uses within
the various zoning districts established in the Township namely: the B-1
Neighborhood Business; B-2 Commercial; B-3 Community Commercial;
B-4 Highway Business; B-5 Low Intensity Highway Commercial; I-1
Restricted Industrial; I-2 Major Industrial; O-1 Professional Office; O-2
Business Office; P - Public and Institutional; H - Hospital District; and
additional districts which may be hereinafter added by way of
amendment to the Development Regulations of the Township and
including the non-residential type uses permitted in the residential
zones of the Township (R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-6LM, R-7,
R-8, R-9) is hereby declared, reaffirmed as to all zoning districts
established under the Development Regulations of the Township, and in
accordance with the standards and regulations as set forth in the
Development Regulations of the Township, or as may be amended
hereafter.
§ 16.12.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.13.020
1.01:428
"The prospective purchaser and/or grantee, by accepting the within
document, hereby acknowledges NOTICE that there are presently, or in the
future may be, non-residential uses conducted on adjacent properties, or
in close proximity to the within described premises, or neighboring zoning
districts, from which may emanate or may generate byproducts such as, but
not limited to, noise, odors, fumes, dust, traffic, glare, etc. to emanate from
such permitted uses and which are attendant and accessory to or arise from
the conduct of such permitted uses."
Chapter 16.14
APPLICATION FILING PROCEDURES
§ 16.14.010. General Procedures for Subdivision and Site Plan
Approval. [Prior code § 15-5.1; amended by Ord. 10-26; Ord. 11-2]
Any applicant wishing to develop land within the Township shall apply
for and obtain the approval of the Planning Board in accordance with
the following procedure. The applicant or his or her agent shall appear
at all regular meetings of the Planning Board whenever the application
is being considered. Failure to appear shall give the Planning Board the
right to postpone action on the application for that particular meeting if
the absence of the applicant or his or her agent deprives the Planning
Board of information necessary to make a decision. No development shall
take place within the Township nor shall any lands be cleared or altered,
nor shall any watercourse be diverted or its channel or floodplain dredged
or filled, nor shall any parking or loading areas or drives, accessory or
otherwise, be constructed, installed or enlarged, nor shall any outside
storage commence, nor shall any building permit, zoning permit, certificate
of occupancy, conditional use permit or other required permit be issued
with respect to such structure, land or parking area, except in accordance
with an approval of such development granted pursuant to this chapter,
unless exempted in accordance with Subsection G of this section or Section
16.14.020.
A. Filing and Referral. The Administrative Officer shall review each
application for completeness in accordance with this Title. If the
application is found to be incomplete, applicant shall be so notified
within 45 days of original submission to the Administrative Officer and
shall be advised in writing of the reasons why the application is found
incomplete. If complete, the application shall be referred to the
Development Review Advisory Committee, if one has been established,
the County Planning Board as appropriate, and other agencies or
officials as required by law and as designated by the Planning Board.
The applicant shall be notified of the hearing date so that the applicant
can comply with any public notice requirements. Refer to Section
16.02.030 for the definition of a "complete application."
B. Conditional Approvals.
§ 16.13.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.14.010
1.01:429
1. In the event that a developer submits an application for approval
proposing a development that is barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or other party to protect the public health and welfare,
or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health and welfare, the Planning Board shall process such
application in accordance with this Title and, if such application
complies with all Township regulations, the Planning Board shall
approve such applications conditioned on removal of such legal
barrier to development.
2. In the event that development proposed by an application for
approval requires an approval by a governmental agency other
than the Planning Board, the Planning Board shall, in appropriate
instances, condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of
such governmental agency. The Planning Board shall make a
decision on any application for approval within the time period
provided in this Title or within an extension of such period as has
been agreed to by the applicant unless the Planning Board is
prevented or relieved from so acting by the operation of law.
C. Period of Approval Extended. In the event that, during the period of
approval heretofore or hereafter granted to an application for approval,
the developer is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development otherwise permitted under such
approval by a legal action instituted by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health or welfare, and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able
to proceed with the development, the running of the period of approval,
under this Title shall be suspended for the period of time such legal
action is pending or such directive or order is in effect.
D. Approving Authority.
1. Planning Board. The provisions of this Title shall be administered
by the Planning Board of the Township, except as noted in
Subsection D.2.
2. Zoning Board of Adjustment. The provisions of this Title shall be
administered by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in applications
before the Board involving a use variance provided for in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-76(2)b of the Municipal Land Use Law.
E. County Planning Board Action. Where review or approval of the
application by the County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.6, the Township Planning Board shall condition any approval
that it grants upon the timely receipt of a favorable report by the
County Planning Board. The absence of a report from the County
Planning Board within the review period shall be considered an
approval by the County Planning Board.
§ 16.14.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.14.010
1.01:430
§ 16.14.020. Waivers of Site Plan Review. [Prior code § 15-5.2]
The Planning Board may waive the requirement of site plan review if the
proposed development:
§ 16.14.030. Minor Developments — Minor Site Plans and Minor
Subdivisions. [Prior code § 15-5.3]
F. Certificate of Approval. Certificates of approval shall be issued by the
Administrative Officer in accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
G. Exceptions from Site Plan Review.
1. Farm structures on farms (excluding farm stands and other sales
buildings), single-family and two-family residential structures, and
structures and uses incidental thereto permitted as of right under
applicable zoning regulations are exempt from site plan review
requirements of this Title, unless otherwise required by the
floodplain ordinance.
2. Change of use from one principal permitted use to another
principal permitted use within an existing structure which complies
with all zoning requirements and performance standards for the
new use, including but not limited to use, bulk, area, parking, hard
surface requirements, coverage and floor area requirements is
exempt from site plan review requirements of this Title, unless
otherwise required by the floodplain ordinance. This exception
expressly does not apply to the construction or reconstruction
which involves the enlargement of any building, or other structure
as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-7.
A. Secured previous site plan approval under the terms of this Title and
the proposed development has insignificant impact; or
B. Involves normal repair, maintenance or replacement such as a new roof,
painting, new siding or similar activity; or
C. Does not affect existing circulation, drainage, building arrangements,
landscaping buffering, lighting, and other considerations of site plan
review.
A. Distribution of Plats. If an application is classified as a minor site plan
or minor subdivision, two copies of the plats shall be retained by the
Board and copies of the plat shall be forwarded to the following for
review and comment:
1. Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority;
2. Township Engineer;
3. County Planning Board, three copies;
§ 16.14.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.14.030
1.01:431
4. Township Health Officer;
5. Township Construction Official;
6. Township Tax Assessor;
7. Environmental Commission;
8. Other agencies as may be determined by the Planning Board or as
required by law.
B. Action on a Minor Development Application. The Planning Board shall
act on a minor development or sketch plat application within 45 days
after acknowledgement of a complete application to the Planning
Board. If approved, a notation to that effect shall be made on the plat,
and it shall be signed by the Planning Board Chairman and the Planning
Board Secretary and returned to the applicant within one week
following the next regular meeting of the Planning Board. If rejected,
the reasons for rejection shall be noted on all copies of the application
form, one of which shall be returned to the applicant. The Planning
Board may attach conditions of approval to any minor development
application.
C. Filing of Minor Subdivisions with County Recording Officer. If approved
as a minor subdivision, a plat drawn in compliance with Chapter 141 of
the Laws of 1960, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., or a deed stamped with the
date of Planning Board approval shall be filed by the applicant with the
County Recording Officer within 190 days from the date of approval.
Failure to file within 190 days shall void such subdivision approval.
D. Dedications. When right-of-way, sight, drainage, conservation,
floodplain or other dedications or easements are required by the
Planning Board, the applicant shall execute the appropriate Township
easement form for recording with the County Recording Officer and
shall attach a metes and bounds description of the easements or
dedication or shall attach an eight and one-half by fourteen-inch map
showing the easement or dedication and all distances and bearings of
easement or dedication boundaries. The map shall indicate the purpose
of the easement or dedication.
E. Lands Resulting from Minor Subdivisions. Any lands, lots or parcels
resulting from a minor subdivision shall not be resubmitted as a minor
subdivision for a twelve-month period from the date of initial approval
as a minor subdivision.
F. Approved Minor Subdivision — Municipal Distribution. The secretary
shall distribute copies of the approved subdivision to each of the
following:
1. Township Clerk;
2. Township Engineer;
§ 16.14.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.14.030
1.01:432
§ 16.14.040. Major Developments — Site Plan and Subdivision
Review. [Prior code § 15-5.4]
3. Township Building Inspector;
4. Township Tax Assessor;
5. Tax Collector.
G. Effect of Minor Development Approval. The granting of minor
development approval shall guarantee that the zoning requirements
and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or otherwise,
upon which minor approval was granted, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date of approval; provided that, in the case
of a minor subdivision, it shall have been duly recorded as provided in
Subsection C of this section.
A. Sketch Plat Review. Applicants for development approval are
encouraged to submit sketch plats for discussion and
recommendations. The sketch plats shall be used as a basis for changes
and redesign, and to avoid undue expense and delay in preparing more
detailed preliminary plats and specifications. The Planning Board shall
not be governed by any statutory time limits in a review of sketch plats,
and it is expressly understood that sketch plat approval shall not bind
the Planning Board or applicant in subsequent deliberations. Applicants
may submit informal plans for purposes of discussion with the
Development Review Advisory Committee; however, formal action on a
sketch plat by the Planning Board requires a submission in accordance
with this section.
B. Submission of Sketch Plats.
1. Procedure. An applicant for the development of land shall submit to
the Administrative Officer an application for subdivision or site
plan, together with a certificate from the Tax Collector that no
taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent
as of the date set forth in the application, the required application
fee as specified in Section 16.08.090, and 15 copies of a sketch plat
containing the information required in Chapters 16.18 or 16.20 at
least two weeks prior to a regular meeting of the Planning Board.
The Administrative Officer shall inform the applicant in writing of
any deficiencies.
2. Classification. The Administrative Officer shall review the plat for
completeness in accordance with this Title and other appropriate
chapters and checklists. If the application is found to be
incomplete, the applicant shall be so notified within 45 days of the
original submission to the Administrative Officer. If complete, the
application shall be referred to the agencies or individuals noted in
Section 16.14.030(A). Upon receipt of a complete notification from
the Administrative Officer, the Planning Board shall acknowledge
§ 16.14.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.14.040
1.01:433
receipt of the application, shall rule on any application submission
waiver requests, and shall classify it. On-site inspections may be
scheduled by the Board.
C. Application by Corporation or Partnership. A corporation or partnership
applying to a Planning Board or a Board of Adjustment shall list the
names and addresses of all stockholders or individual partners owning
at least 10% of its stock of any class or at least 10% of the interest in the
partnership, as the case may be.
D. Disclosure of Ownership Interest of Corporation or Partnership. If a
corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of a
corporation, or 10% or greater interest in a partnership subject to
disclosure pursuant to Subsection C of this section, that corporation or
partnership shall list the names and addresses of its stockholders
holding 10% or more of its stock, or greater interest in the partnership,
as the case may be; and this requirement shall be followed by every
corporate stockholder or partner in a partnership until the names and
addresses of the no corporate stockholders and individual partners,
exceeding the 10% ownership criterion established in this act, have
been listed.
E. Preliminary Approval. The Planning Board shall act upon, at a hearing
within the time period provided, every application for preliminary
approval.
F. Effect of Preliminary Approval. Preliminary approvals shall, except as
provided in Subsection G of this section, confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size, yard dimensions, and on-site
and off-tract improvements; and any requirements peculiar to the
specific plan. The Township may modify by ordinance such general
terms and conditions of a preliminary approval as they may relate
to public health and safety, provided that such modifications are in
accord with amendments adopted by ordinance subsequent to
approval;
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or section or
sections of a particular plan.
G. Extension of Preliminary Approval. The applicant may apply for and the
Planning Board may grant extensions on such preliminary approval for
additional periods of at least one year, but not to exceed a total
extension of two years, provided that if the design standards have been
revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
§ 16.14.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.14.040
1.01:434
In the case of a plan for an area of 50 acres or more; the Planning Board
may grant the rights referred to above for such period of time, longer
than three years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to
be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval;
economic conditions; and the comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval; the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area of the section or sections awaiting final approval; economic
conditions; and the comprehensiveness of the development, provided
that if the design standards have been revised, such revised standards
may govern.
H. Exhibits Required of Major Subdivisions Prior to Public Hearing. The
following shall be submitted to the Planning Board by the applicant:
1. Copy of Advertisement. A copy of the advertisements required
under Section 16.08.070.
2. Affidavit. Affidavit of notice of public hearing to persons and
agencies served giving a list of the names, addresses, and lot and
block number of owners so notified, how served, date of service,
and copy of the notice and mail receipt.
3. Water Supplier. If public water is to be used, a letter from the water
supplier stating that the water system as proposed is adequate for
the development and all future extensions thereof.
4. Sewerage Authority. Where public sewers are required or proposed
to be installed, a letter from the Township Municipal Utilities
Authority approving the proposed sewer plans shall be submitted
to the Planning Board.
I. Final Site Plan Review Simultaneous with Preliminary Site Plan Review.
The Planning Board may grant final approval at the time of preliminary
approval, provided that all of the requirements for final approval are
met at the time of preliminary approval. Large scale developments or
very detailed developments are discouraged from this procedure in
order to save the applicant the expense of prematurely preparing costly
detailed final plats before the conceptual arrangement of the
development has been finalized and agreed upon.
J. Final Approval. The final plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board
for final approval within three years from the date of preliminary plan
approval or within such extensions as provided in Subsection G of this
section. One original tracing, one translucent cloth copy, two cloth
prints, and 10 black and white prints in the case of a major subdivision;
and 15 prints in the case of a site plat, with three copies of an
§ 16.14.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.14.040
1.01:435
§ 16.14.050. Variances, Major and Minor Site Plans and Subdivision
Approval — General Provisions. [Prior code § 15-5.5; amended by
Ord. 91-13]
application for final approval and the appropriate fees as required in
Section 16.20.050 shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer at
least two weeks prior to the regular meeting of the Planning Board.
Unless the preliminary plan was approved without changes, the final
plan shall have incorporated all changes or modifications required
by the Planning Board including conditions of preliminary approval.
The applicant shall submit an affidavit indicating no changes or those
changes noted.
1. Distribution. Copies of the final plat shall be distributed to the
following:
a. Township Engineer;
b. County Planning Board, three copies;
c. Township Construction Official;
d. Township Tax Assessor;
e. Township Health Officer;
f. Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority;
g. Other municipal, county agencies or authorities as may be
required.
2. Variances and Conditional Use Permits. Applicants for use
variances and conditional use permits may submit an application
for formal sketch plat approval in accordance with Subsection B of
this section along with the use variance or conditional use
application, rather than submit a plat meeting the requirements for
preliminary approval. Separate action may first be taken on the use
variance aspects if requested by the applicant. Upon receipt of the
variance or conditional use, the applicant shall then develop and
submit applications for preliminary and for final plan review as
appropriate.
A. Complete Applications. A complete application for the various stages of
plan approval shall consist of the submission of the following maps,
documents and fees;
1. Completed municipal application and fees;
2. Completed county application and fees;
3. The required number of plats containing the minimum information
required by Chapters 16.18 and 16.20 for the appropriate type of
development and approval stage;
§ 16.14.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.14.050
1.01:436
4. Letters, certifications or other appropriate documents as required
by Chapters 16.18 and 16.20;
5. Certification form from the Tax Collector's Office that all taxes,
sanitary sewer user charges or other assessments have been paid
to date of application on the entire tract;
6. Variance applications as required by the Zoning Permit Officer to
permit application for variances from the zoning ordinance;
7. Any applicant electing to submit a separate application requesting
approval of variance under the provisions of 40:55D-70d of the
Municipal Land Use Law and a subsequent application for any
required approval of a subdivision, site plan and/or conditional use
shall submit the following prior to such application being deemed
complete.
a. Application fee,
b. Escrow amount,
c. Wetlands delineation and report. A wetlands delineation and
report shall be performed to identify wetlands as defined by
the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act, P.L. 1987, C. 156, to
identify the wetlands by type (ordinary, intermediate and
exception resource value) and to specify the required
transition area. On-site wetlands and transition areas required
for on-site wetlands shall be delineated. A transition area may
be located and required by the Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act, P.L. 1987, C. 156 on a property even though the
freshwater wetlands adjacent to that transition area is located
on a different property. In such case, the transition area as
required shall be delineated. A report from the person or firm
preparing the wetlands analysis shall be prepared and
submitted identifying the above or stating that no wetlands
and/or transition areas affect the subject site. Alternatively, a
letter of interpretation from the state of New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection determining the
absence or presence of wetlands will be acceptable. If the
letter of interpretation determines the presence of wetlands, a
delineation shall be prepared. In accordance with the
Freshwater Protection Act rules a delineation of a wetlands
boundary for a parcel of less than one acre may be by letter of
interpretation.
d. If the applicant submits a concept plan, sketch plan or similar
schematic layout with such bifurcated application, a traffic
analysis and report shall be submitted consisting of the
following:
i. Estimate of trip generation from the proposed subdivision
or site plan indicating estimated twenty-four-hour trip
§ 16.14.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.14.050
1.01:437
generation, estimated peak hour trip generation from the
development and estimated trip generation during
commuter peak hours of the street system in the area,
ii. Directional assignment of estimated trip generation to the
existing and any proposed street system, as appropriate,
iii. Review of traffic volumes existing on streets in the area.
(Existing acceptable traffic volumes may be utilized. If
such do not exist, traffic volume counts at 15 minute
intervals must be taken),
iv. Review of other development activity in the area and
consideration of trip generation from these other proposed
developments,
v. Project future background traffic volumes on affected
streets for build-out and intermediate development phase,
vi. Review of street, intersections, jug handles, ramps, etc., in
terms of traffic carrying capacity (such may be expressed
as a level of service) as may be affected by the proposed
development activity. No-build, build-out and intermediate
phases should be examined where appropriate,
vii. Identification of streets, intersections, jug handles, ramps,
etc., which anticipated levels of service or other
engineering considerations indicate a need for
improvement. Level of Service D or better is to be
maintained through build-out,
viii. Recommend improvements to mitigate impacts,
ix. Review of proposed on-site street system or on-site
circulation system. Review should include but not be
limited to access, circulation, emergency access, trucking
and parking,
x. Preparation of a report with supporting data signed by the
responsible person.
B. Review. The officials and agencies cited in Section 16.14.040J.1. shall
forward their views and recommendations in writing to the Planning
Board within 30 days from the receipt of the plat. A full report of all
recommendations and discussions shall be forwarded to the Planning
Board within 30 days after receipt of the plat by the agency.
C. Review Time Periods — Decisions. Upon submission to the
Administrative Officer of a complete application which involves 10
acres or less and 10 dwelling units or less in the case of a site plan, and
10 or fewer lots in the case of a subdivision, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by the
§ 16.14.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.14.050
1.01:438
applicant; except that if the application also involves an application for
a variance pursuant to Section 16.04.030, the Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 95 days of the submission of a complete
application to the Administrative Officer or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant.
Upon the submission of a complete application which involves more
than 10 acres or more than 10 dwelling units, or for a conditional use
approval in the case of a site plan, and more than 10 lots in the case
of a subdivision, the Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval and/or conditional use approval 95 days of the date of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
The required time in which the Planning Board must act on an
application shall run from the date the application was submitted as
complete, no matter what date the Administrative Officer reviews the
application and finds it complete.
If the Planning Board requires any substantial amendment in the layout
of improvements proposed by the developer that have been the subject
of a hearing, an amended application for development shall be
submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application
for development.
D. Time Limitation. The Planning Board shall act within 45 days of
submission of a completed application for final approval at a regular
meeting or within such further time as may be mutually agreed upon,
except that in the case of a simultaneous submission of a preliminary
and final site plan, the time limit for preliminary review shall govern. If
the Planning Board approves the final plan, a notation to that effect
shall be made on each plat and signed by the Chairman and Secretary
of the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the
aforementioned time period shall be deemed to be favorable approval
and the Administrative Officer shall issue a certificate to that effect.
E. Filing. A final subdivision plat approval shall be filed by the subdivider
with the County Recording Officer within 95 days from the date of such
approval. If any final plat is not filed within that period, the approval
shall expire. For good cause, the Planning Board may extend the time
for the filing of the plat for an additional period not to exceed 95 days.
No plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Clerk unless it has
been duly approved by the Township Planning Board and signed by its
Chairman and Secretary, and approved by the County Planning Board
and signed by an authorized official.
F. Effect of Final Approval.
1. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer
pursuant to Section 16.14.040(F) is amendatory, whether
§ 16.14.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.14.050
1.01:439
conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of
two years after the date of final approval; provided that in the
case of major subdivision the rights conferred by this chapter
shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the time
period provided in Subsection E of this section. If the developer
has followed the standards prescribed for final approval, and, in
the case of a subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as required
in Subsection E of this section, the Planning Board may extend
such period of protection for extensions of one year but not to
exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this chapter, the granting of final approval terminates the time
period of preliminary approval pursuant to Section 16.14.040(F) for
the section granted final approval.
2. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development
of 50 acres or more, conventional subdivision or site plan for 150
acres or more, or site plan for development of a nonresidential floor
area 200,000 square feet or more the Planning Board may grant
the rights referred to in Subsection (F)(1) of this section for such
period of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable taking into consideration: (1) the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval; (2) economic conditions; and (3) the
comprehensiveness of the development. The developer may apply
for thereafter, and the Planning Board may thereafter grant, an
extension of final approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable taking
into consideration: (1) the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval; (2) the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining
to be developed; (3) economic conditions; and (4) the
comprehensiveness of the development.
G. Conditions of Final Approval. The Planning Board may, as a condition of
final approval:
1. Grant final approval only for designated geographic sections of
development;
2. Grant final approval for certain work but require resubmission for
final approval for designated elements such as, but not limited to,
landscaping, signs, street furniture, etc., and require approval of
these elements as a prerequisite for a certificate of occupancy;
3. Condition the granting of a certificate of occupancy (temporary or
permanent) or zoning permit subject to the applicant or developer
or subsequent heirs or assignees meeting certain requirements
within a designated period of time, not to exceed one year, from the
date of issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy or
zoning permit. This may include, but is not limited to, the
§ 16.14.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.14.050
1.01:440
installation of landscaping, erection of signs, installation of
improvements, re-evaluation of circulation pattern, etc.
H. Time Limits for Applications Involving "d" (40:55-70d) Variances Before
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
1. If a variance is granted under the provisions of 40:55D-70d of the
Municipal Land Use Law ("d" variance), and the application is
bifurcated under provisions of 40:55D-76b. of the Municipal Land
Use Law, subdivision or site plan approval shall be secured within
12 months of the date of approval of the "d" bifurcated variance.
Should the applicant fail to obtain subdivision or site plan approval
within the twelve-month period, it shall be conclusively presumed
that the applicant has waived, withdrawn and abandoned his or her
application and all approvals, permissions, permits and variances
granted to the applicant shall lapse and be void. For good cause
the Board of Adjustment may, upon written application in advance
of the expiration and stating the reasons therefore, extend such
twelve-month time limit.
2. Any preliminary subdivision or preliminary site plan approval
granted by the Board of Adjustment shall be valid for a period of
not more than three years unless extended under the provisions of
40:55D-49 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
Should the applicant fail to obtain final subdivision or final site
plan approval within such three-year period or extension thereto
granted by the Board of Adjustment, it shall be conclusively
presumed that the applicant has waived, withdrawn and
abandoned his or her application and all approvals, permission,
permits and variances granted to the applicant shall lapse and be
void.
3. Any final site plan that has been approved by the Board of
Adjustment shall be valid for not more than two years unless
extended under the provision of 40:55D-52 of the Municipal Land
Use Law. During such two-year period or extension thereof as may
be granted by the Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall have
obtained a construction permit and shall have commenced work on
the project and shall complete such project within one year from
the date of securing such construction permit. For good cause, the
Board of Adjustment may, upon written application in advance of
the expiration and stating the reasons therefore, extend the time
period for obtaining a construction permit, commencing work on
the project and completing work on the project.
If during such two-year period from the date of approval or any
extension thereof which may be granted by the Board of
Adjustment a construction permit has not bee secured and/or work
on the project has not commenced and/or the project has not been
completed within 12 months of such extended period granted by
§ 16.14.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.14.050
1.01:441
Chapter 16.16
GUARANTEES AND IMPROVEMENTS
§ 16.16.010. Performance Guarantees. [Prior code § 15-6.1;
amended by Ord. 87-7; Ord. 88-21; Ord. 92-6]
the Board of Adjustment it shall be conclusively presumed that
the applicant has waived, withdrawn and abandoned his or her
application and all approvals, permission, permits and variances
granted to the applicant shall lapse and be void.
I. Conditional Approval Time Limits.
1. When any application for development before the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment is approved subject to specified conditions
intended to be fulfilled before the approval becomes effective, said
conditional approval shall lapse and become null and void unless all
specified conditions are fulfilled within 190 days of the date such
conditional approval is granted.
The fulfillment of all such conditions intended to be fulfilled before
the approval becomes effective shall be reported to the Municipal
Agency, which may cause such reports to be verified in an
appropriate manner. Only upon fulfillment of all conditions shall
any subdivision map or site plan be signed or any required building
permit, occupancy permit or zoning permit be issued or any on-site
construction commence.
2. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the
Municipal Agency from specifying a longer period of time within
which any specific condition must be fulfilled, or from granting,
upon written application in advance of the expiration stating the
reasons therefore, an extension of time for good cause shown.
3. For purposes of calculating the time period within which conditions
must be fulfilled such time period shall commence from the date of
the original action taken by the Board, and not the date of the
memorialization thereof.
A. Requirements for Subdivision Approval — Determination of
Performance Guarantee. No final plat shall be approved by the Board
until the completion of all such required improvements have been
certified in writing to the Board by the Township Engineer, unless the
subdivider shall have filed with the Township a performance guarantee
sufficient in amount to cover all the costs of such improvements or
incomplete portions thereof as estimated by the Township Engineer and
assuring the installation of such incomplete improvements on or before
an agreed date in accordance with the time set forth in Subsection D of
this section. An additional amount of 20% of the estimate of the
Engineer shall be included in the total amount of the performance
§ 16.14.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.16.010
1.01:442
guarantee to cover legal, engineering and other costs in the event
that the subdivider or developer shall fail to complete the required
improvements and the Township is required to install the
improvements.
B. Requirements for Site Plan Approval. As a condition of final site plan
approval, the Planning Board may require guarantees in accordance
with the standards adopted in this chapter for the purpose of assuring
the installation and maintenance of on-tract improvements and
landscaping.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until a performance
guarantee has been filed with the Township in an amount sufficient to
cover all the costs of such improvements or incomplete portions thereof
as estimated by the Township Engineer and assuring the installation
of such incomplete improvements on or before an agreed date in
accordance with the time set forth in Subsection D of this section.
An additional amount of 20% of the estimate of the Engineer shall be
included in the total amount of the performance guarantee to cover
legal, engineering and other costs in the event that the developer
shall fail to complete the required improvements and the Township
is required to install the improvements. In the event that other
governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will own the
utilities to be installed or the improvement are covered by a
performance or maintenance guarantee to another governmental
agency, no performance guarantee shall be required by the Township
for such utilities or improvements.
C. Type of Guarantee. A minimum of 10% of the performance guarantee
shall be in the form of cash or a certified or cashier's check to be
deposited with the Township. The remaining portion of the performance
guarantee shall be:
1. Cash, or certified or cashier's check; or
2. A surety bond issued by a bonding company authorized to do
business in the state of New Jersey and in the form as approved by
the Township Attorney; or
3. A letter of credit which is issued by a New Jersey bank whose
financial condition and size, in relation to the letter of credit,
satisfies the municipal auditor; and which is irrevocable,
unconditional, subject to all requirements of the Raritan Township
development ordinance, and in a form acceptable and approved by
the Township Attorney.
D. Time of Guarantee. Performance guarantees shall run for a term not to
exceed 24 months. Performance guarantees, with the consent of the
principal and surety, if there be a surety, may be extended by the
Township Committee by resolution for an additional period not to
exceed 18 months. As a condition or as part of any such extension, the
amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as
§ 16.16.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.16.010
1.01:443
the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
the installation as determined as of the time of the passage of the
resolution.
E. Acceptance of Performance Guarantee. The Planning Board shall
recommend to the Township Committee acceptance of the performance
guarantee only after the following requirements are completed:
1. Letter from Township Engineer. Letter from the Township Engineer
containing a list of all items to be guaranteed and costs thereof, and
stating that all plans and specifications meet applicable Township
ordinances.
2. Letter from Township Attorney Recommending Approval of Forms
and Amount of Guarantee. After approval and acceptance of the
performance guarantee by the Committee, a letter stating that fact
shall be sent to the Planning Board before the final plats are signed
and filed with the county.
F. Township Completion of Improvements. If the required improvements
have not been installed in accordance with the required standards and
specifications of the Township within the time limit or extension thereof
as described in Subsection D of this section and the requirements of the
performance guarantees, the obligor and surety shall be liable thereon
to the Township for all reasonable cost of the improvements not
installed, and upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the Township shall
install such improvements and/or the Township may use such portions
of the performance guarantees as have been deposited in cash with the
Clerk to assure the completion of the improvements in accordance with
the terms of this Title and any applicable agreement.
G. Items and Procedures Required Before Releasing the Performance
Guarantee.
1. When all the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall notify the Governing Body in writing by certified mail,
addressed in care of the Township Clerk, of the completion of the
improvements, and shall also notify the owners of the real property
as shown on the current tax duplicates which was the subject of the
application for development and located in the Site and within 200
feet in all directions of the real property which was the subject of
the application for development. Notice of the completion of the
improvements shall be given by (1) serving a copy thereof on the
property owner as shown on the said current tax duplication, or his
agent in charge of the property, or (2) mailing a copy thereof by
certified mail to the property owner at his address as shown on the
said current tax duplicate. Obligor shall also send a copy of the
notice of completion to the Township Engineer in accordance with
Subsection H of this section. Thereupon, the Township Engineer
shall inspect all of the improvements and file a detailed list and
report, in writing, with the Governing Body in accordance with the
§ 16.16.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.16.010
1.01:444
provisions of Subsection H of this section. [Amended by Ord.
04-42]
2. An affidavit from the developer that there are no liens or other legal
encumbrances on any of the improvements or utilities proposed to
be deeded to the Township or other governmental agency or
authority to the Township.
3. Receipt of a written statement from the Raritan Township
Municipal Utilities Authority shall be submitted to the Township
Committee and Administrative Officer confirming that all public
sewerage facilities have been installed with the approved plans and
any amendments thereto, and in accordance with applicable
Township ordinances and specifications.
4. The developer's or applicant's engineer shall certify that all
improvements have been constructed and installed, and are
operating in accordance with the approved final site plan and any
approved amendments thereto.
5. Estimate by the Township of the maintenance guarantee to be
furnished before release of all or portions of the performance
guarantee pursuant to Section 16.16.020.
6. Recommendation from the Planning Board that all or portions of
the performance guarantee be released as requested by the
obligor.
H. Procedures for reduction of performance guarantee. Upon substantial
completion of all required street improvements (except for the top
course) and appurtenant utility improvements, and the connection of
same to the public system, the obligor may request of the Governing
Body in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the Municipal
Clerk, that the Township Engineer prepare, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law (40:55D-1 et seq.), a list of all uncompleted or
unsatisfactorily completed improvements. If such a request is made, the
obligor shall send a copy of the request to the Township Engineer. The
request shall indicate which improvements have been completed and
which improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment of the
obligor. Thereupon the Township Engineer shall inspect all
improvements covered by the obligor's request and shall file a detailed
list and report, in writing, with the Governing Body, and shall
simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor not later than 45 days
after receipt of the obligor's request.
The list prepared by the Township Engineer shall state, in detail, with
respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each
incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy for,
§ 16.16.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.16.010
1.01:445
§ 16.16.020. Maintenance Guarantees. [Prior code § 15-6.2;
amended by Ord. 87-7; Ord. 88-21]
All improvements required by the Planning Board shall be covered by a
maintenance guarantee running in favor of the Township in the amount
of 15% of the estimated cost of the improvements as estimated by the
Township Engineer. The maintenance guarantee shall run for a period of
two years and provide for the proper repair and/or replacement of any such
improvements during such period. The two year period shall be from the
date of the release of the performance guarantee on the improvement, and
no performance guarantee shall be released by the Township until such time
as the maintenance guarantee herein required has been posted with the
Township.
The maintenance guarantee shall be in the form of:
the unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement determined to
be unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the Township Engineer shall
identify each improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be
made in the performance guarantee relating to the completed and
satisfactory improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee.
The Governing Body, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Township Engineer, or reject any or all of these improvements upon the
establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection and shall approve
and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance
guarantee relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with
the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee. This resolution shall be
adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the list and report
prepared by the Township Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution
by the Governing Body, the obligor shall be released from all liability
pursuant to its performance guarantee, with respect to those approved
improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure
completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved;
provided that 30% of the amount of the performance guarantee posted
may be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of all
improvements.
I. If any portion of the required improvement is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete or correct such
improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure
of notification, as set forth in this chapter shall be followed.
J. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
Governing Body or the Township Engineer.
§ 16.16.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.16.020
1.01:446
§ 16.16.030. Acceptance of Subdivision Improvements Into the
Township System. [Prior code § 15-6.3; amended by Ord. 88-21]
The Township Committee shall accept subdivision improvements such as
streets, roads, trails, public easements, drainage and conservation
easements, utility easements, etc., and other lands dedicated to public use,
into Township ownership only after the following requirements have been
met:
A. A surety bond issued by a bonding company authorized to do business
in the state of New Jersey and in the form as approved by the Township
Attorney; or
B. A letter of credit which is issued by a New Jersey bank whose financial
condition and size, in relation to the letter of credit, satisfies the
Municipal Auditor; and which is irrevocable, unconditional, subject to
all the requirements of the Raritan Township development ordinance,
and in a form acceptable and approved by the Township Attorney.
A. Receipt by the Township Committee of a written certification from the
Township Engineer that all improvements to be accepted into Township
ownership have been properly maintained through the maintenance
guarantee period, and are functioning properly in accordance with the
approved plans, specifications and any amendments thereto;
B. An affidavit of title from the developer that there are no liens or other
legal encumbrances on any of the improvements or utilities proposed to
be deeded to the Township or other governmental agency or authority
of the Township;
C. Receipt of a written statement from the Raritan Township Municipal
Utilities Authority to the Township Committee and Administrative
Officer confirming that any public sewage facilities which have been
installed on the tract or within the improvement, have been installed in
accordance with the approved plans and any amendments thereto, and
in accordance with applicable Township ordinances and specifications;
D. The developer and the developer's engineer shall certify in writing that
all improvements have been constructed, installed and maintained and
are operation in accordance with the approved plans and any
amendments thereto;
E. Deeds, free and clear of all encumbrances, for all streets, roads, trails,
public easements, drainage and conservation easements, utility
easements, and other lands dedicated to public use and any
improvements to be dedicated or deeded to the Township or other
public agency, shall be forwarded to the Municipal Clerk, and approved
as to form and content by the Township Attorney and Engineer.
Upon satisfactory compliance as aforesaid, the maintenance guarantee
posted by the developer may be released by resolution of the Township
Committee. The Township Committee need not accept any roads or
§ 16.16.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.16.030
1.01:447
§ 16.16.040. Widening of Existing Streets. [Prior code § 15-6.4]
Developments that include or front on existing streets which do not conform
to pavement and/or right-of-way widths as shown on the master plan or
official map shall dedicate and improve to Township specifications the
additional width from the center line of the road abutting the property
being subdivided. If the subdivision adjoins one side of an existing road
which does not meet standard, one-half of the required extra width shall be
dedicated and improved to Township specifications.
When in the interests of traffic safety, health, convenience and good
planning, a postponement of the installation or construction of a widened
roadway is desirable, the Planning Board may authorize such
postponement, provided that the developer shall deposit with the Township
the cost of the improvement in lieu of actually constructing or installing
same in the same manner as required in this chapter.
§ 16.16.050. Maintenance of Improvements. [Prior code § 15-6.5;
amended by Ord. 88-21; Ord. 96-35]
other improvements if the roads or other improvements will be used by
the developer to complete other portions of the tract or development.
F. Submission of as-built plans (including the complete drainage system)
geo-referenced to the New Jersey State Plan Coordinate System NAD
83 on CD or other acceptable electronic format. [Amended by Ord.
06-11 § F]
A. Maintenance of On-Tract Improvements — Developer/Landowner
Responsibility. During the course of development of a tract and
construction of improvements, the developer/landowner shall be
responsible to insure the safety and proper, on-going maintenance of
the facilities and improvements on the tract. The performance
guarantee as required by these development regulations and N.J.S.
40:55D-53 are posted to insure the proper installation and maintenance
during the performance period, of all improvements installed by the
developer/landowner in accordance with the approved plans,
specifications and any amendments thereto required for approval of the
development by the Planning Board/Board of Adjustment.
All on-tract improvements shall be maintained by the developer/
landowner as a condition of continued development, use and occupancy
of the property. On-tract drainage facilities, including detention and/
or retention basins, shall be maintained by the developer/landowner
unless accepted by the municipality at the satisfactory termination
of the performance period. All drainage ways or drainage structures
shall be contained within the drainage easement to permit access
by municipal maintenance personnel for inspections of the facilities
and for emergency repair of such drainage facilities. Said easements
or emergency repair shall not be deemed or in any way construed
§ 16.16.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.16.050
1.01:448
that the municipality is accepting a dedication or responsible for the
maintenance of the drainage facilities.
B. Snow Removal — Salting/Sanding. Until such time as the privately
owned, on-tract improvements installed by the developer have been
accepted into Township ownership as set forth in these development
regulations or deeded and turned over to a private homeowners'
association, the developer/landowner shall be responsible for the
removal of snow and sanding and/or salting of streets, roadways and
other areas or rights-of-way for passage. The developer/landowner shall
also be responsible for sweeping the streets, roadways, and rights of
way as soon as feasibly possible after the application of salt and/or sand
to remove any excess from the road surface. [Amended by Ord.
06-11]
C. Performance Guarantee Period. During the time period when the
developer/landowner is constructing improvements (performance
guarantee period), the developer/landowner shall remove all snow, and
salt and/or sand the roadway, street and right-of-way areas within the
tract to insure safe passage by all persons and vehicles. Failure to fulfill
such responsibility shall be deemed a breach and default of the
performance guarantee. If the Township, in the sole discretion of its
agents and employees, determine that the health, safety or welfare of
persons or property may be affected by the breach of responsibility and
performance by the developer/landowner, the Township in such
emergency situation shall be authorized to plow and remove snow and
sand and/or salt the road, street or right-of-way areas within the
development.
All costs incurred in the emergency action undertaken by the Township
shall be charged against and deducted from the performance guarantee
posted by the developer/landowner as a default of their responsibility
and obligations to perform under the guarantee. Any such emergency
action by the Township shall not be construed as undertaking of any
of the developer/landowner's continued obligations or responsibilities;
and shall further not be deemed or construed as an acceptance of
any proposed dedication of the improvement. The developer/landowner
shall indemnify and hold the Township harmless for any damages or
injuries to persons or property of the developer, the Township, or others
resulting from such emergency action, and such damages shall likewise
be charged against and deducted from the performance guarantee.
D. Billing. The Township Public Works Department shall keep detailed
records of the time, materials, equipment and men utilized for such
services within the developer/landowner's tract and same shall be
submitted to the Chief Financial Officer for billing the cost of such
snowplowing, sanding or salting at the current rate established by
resolution for such services by the Township Public Works Department
and on file in the Municipal Clerk's Office. The Township Chief Financial
Officer shall forward the bill for services to the developer/landowner
indicating the deduction to be made from the performance guarantee.
§ 16.16.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.16.050
1.01:449
§ 16.16.060. Off-Tract Improvements Required. [Prior code
§ 15-6.6]
Every developer, as a condition of approval, shall be required to pay his or
her pro rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and necessary street
improvements and water, sewerage and drainage facilities, and easements
therefor, located outside the tract limits of the development but
necessitated or required by construction or improvements within such
development. The off-tract improvements for which the developer must
contribute shall be based on the circulation plan and the utility service
plan elements of the master plan. If no other property would obtain a
significant benefit from such improvements, the developer shall pay the
entire cost thereof. If other property within a related and common area
would obtain a benefit from such improvements, then the Planning Board
shall determine the proportionate cost of each element of the improvements
which shall be born by each developer or owner within such area. Where
a developer pays the amount determined as his or her pro rata share
under protest, he or she shall institute legal action within one year of such
E. Indemnification. The developer's agreement executed between the
Township and any developer shall provide that the developer:
1. Authorizes deductions from the escrow account for services under
this chapter; and
2. Acknowledges that arterial or through roads of the Township
receive top priority in snow plowing over secondary or
development roads and that the Township shall not be held liable
by the developer/landowner for any delays in plowing; and
3. Agrees to hold harmless and indemnify the Township and its
employees from any liability or damage to persons or property
resulting during the course of the Township fulfilling the
developer's responsibility in removing snow and sanding or salting
of the streets and roadways within the development or delays in
providing these services; and
4. Acknowledges that the providing of snow plowing, sanding or
salting services is not an acceptance and shall not be construed as
an acceptance of a dedication of any improvements from the
developer/landowner, nor shall such services be deemed as the
Township exercising any dominion or control of or over the
developer/landowner's property, but rather such services are being
provided on an interim basis to protect and insure the public
health, safety and welfare of persons due to the stage of
development of the tract.
F. The street clearing activity by the Township under this chapter shall not
apply to streets which are to remain in private ownership in planned
residential developments (P.R.D.'s) since their homeowners' association
must undertake the road maintenance responsibility.
§ 16.16.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.16.060
1.01:450
payment in order to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to the
fairness and reasonableness of such amount. Any site plan requiring offtract
improvements shall comply with the provisions and design standards
of this Title and the subdivision chapter as appropriate. Performance and
maintenance guarantees shall be provided in accordance with Sections
16.16.010 and 16.16.020 as appropriate. Extensions of existing roads,
waterlines and sanitary and storm sewers required as a condition of final
approval to service the development shall not be considered an off-tract
improvement.
§ 16.16.070. Transportation Improvement District One (TID-1).
[Prior code § 15-6.6a; amended by Ord. 90-5]
A. Circulation Improvement. Street widening, alignment, corrections,
channelization of intersections, construction of barriers, new or
improved traffic signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility
improvements not covered elsewhere, the construction of new streets
and other similar street or traffic improvements. The owner or
developer's proportionate cost shall be in the ratio of the estimated
peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed development. The ratio
thus calculated shall be increased by 10% for contingencies.
B. Water Distribution Facilities. As required by franchised water supplier.
C. Stormwater and Drainage Improvements. Stormwater and drainage
improvements, including the installation, relocation or replacement of
storm sewers, culverts, bridges, catch basins, detention and retention
ponds, and the installation, relocation or replacement of other
appurtenances associated therewith. The owner's or subdivider's
proportionate cost shall be in the ratio of the estimated peak surface
runoff as proposed to be delivered into the existing system measured in
cubic feet per second to the sum of the deficient existing peak flow in
cubic feet per second for the existing system and the estimated peak
flow as proposed to be delivered. For the purposes of calculations, the
standards set forth in Section 16.84.040B, the stormwater control and
floodplain subchapter of this ordinance shall be used. The ratio thus
calculated shall be increased by 10% for contingencies.
D. Sanitary Sewer Facilities. As required by the Raritan Township
Municipal Utilities Authority.
E. Escrow Account. Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be
undertaken at some future date, the moneys required for the
improvement shall be deposited to the credit of the Township in an
interest-bearing account until such time as the improvement is
constructed. If the off-tract improvement is not begun within 10 years of
deposit, all moneys and interest shall be returned to the applicant.
A. Purpose. The Township Committee finds that:
§ 16.16.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.16.070
1.01:451
1. The Township is responsible for and committed to the provision of
an adequate system of transportation within the Township.
2. New residential and nonresidential development is aggregated in
certain development areas. Such development causes and imposes
demands on the Township transportation system.
3. Planning projection indicate that such development will continue
and will place ever increasing demands on the Township's
transportation system.
4. To the extent that such development in aggregated areas place
demands on the existing transportation system, these demands
which will necessitate significant improvements should be shifted
in a fair and reasonable manner from the public at large to the
developments actually creating the demands.
5. The Township Committee after careful consideration finds and
declares that it is necessary to establish a Transportation
Improvement District (TID-1) and that the TID-1 contribution
imposed upon residential and nonresidential development in order
to finance transportation improvements within the TID-1 area, the
demand for which is created by both the residential and
nonresidential development, is in the best interest of the general
welfare of the Township and its residents and is equitable.
B. Intent. This section is intended to impose a TID-1 contribution at the
time of certificate of occupancy issuance, (and as a condition precedent
to such issuance) in an amount based upon variables to reflect expected
trip generation from non — residential development, and number of
units of residential development, and to finance transportation
improvements, the demand for which is generated by new
developments within the TID-1 area. The Township is responsible for
meeting its fair share of such improvements reflecting existing
development and traffic volumes. After studies by the Township's
Traffic Consultant (Travers Associates, Inc. and Rocciola Engineering))
published in a report entitled Raritan Transportation Improvement
District No. 1, dated June, 1990 (hereinafter referred to as The Travers
Study - June, 1990) which was subsequently amended by Rocciola
Engineering and summarized in a memorandum report dated June 25,
2001, the Township's share has been established as 78% of the amount
specified in Subsection E of this section. Only needs created by new
development will be met by such TID-1 contribution. The TID-1
contribution shall be spent on transportation improvements that
substantially benefit those developments within the TID-1 area.
[Amended by Ord. 01-25]
C. Applicability. This section shall be uniformly applicable to development
that occurs within the designated TID-1 area.
§ 16.16.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.16.070
1.01:452
D. Establishment of TID-1. Pursuant to N.J.S. 40:55D-39 there is
established a Transportation Improvement District (TID-1) which shall
include the area bounded by:
Voorhees Corner Road (C.R. 650) on the north;
Old York Road between Voorhees Corner Road and Clover Hill
Road on the east;
Clover Hill Road between Old York Road and Amwell Road on
the east;
Amwell Road and Old York Road to Route 202/31 on the south;
Route 202/31 and Route 202 between Old York Road and
Voorhees Corner Road on the west.
The establishment of such TID-1 is in accordance with the
recommendations of the master plan of the Township of Raritan.
E. Improvements Costs. Based upon a traffic engineering review of the
TID-1 area as described, $9,519,000 of street and traffic control
improvements are deemed necessary within this area in current 2001
dollars. The Travers Associates Study - June, 1990 was amended by
Rocciola Engineering and summarized in a memorandum report dated
June 25, 2001; both documents are on file in the planning and zoning
office of the Township of Raritan. In 2001 dollars, after accounting for
TID-1 funds currently collected as of June 15th, 2001, the total
remaining cost is $8,792,761.45. That sum is broken down to
$6,858,353.93 as the Township responsibility and $1,934,407.52 as the
allocation that shall be borne on a pro rata basis as set forth in
Subsection F of this section. [Amended by Ord. 01-25]
F. Calculation of Contribution. Based upon counts of existing traffic
volumes and projected trip generation of uses within the TID-1, the
following is deemed the pro rata amount of the cost of such
improvements that shall be borne by each developer or owner with
respect to development applications within the TID-1 district.
[Amended by Ord. 01-25]
TID Fee Schedule
Land Use Unit Cost
Residential Home $1,076.00
Retail S.F. GLA $3.98 ($1.00 highway)
Office S.F. GLA $1.57 ($0.39 highway)
Medical office S.F. $3.86 ($0.96 highway)
Building materials S.F. $2.20 ($0.55 highway)
Quality restaurant Seat $110.61 ($27.69 highway)
High-turnover
restaurant
Seat $291.43 ($72.80 highway)
§ 16.16.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.16.070
1.01:453
TID Fee Schedule
Land Use Unit Cost
Fast-food restaurant
w/drive-thru
S.F. $17.66 ($4.12 highway)
For uses not listed above the fee is calculated as follows:
TID FEE = $1055.13 x T x P x H
Where:
$1055.13= Cost per Trip
T = Peak Trip Hours
P = Percent of Primary Trips
H = 0.25 Highway Access Factor, where applicable
Combination of uses as part of a development shall be divided into
component parts based upon the appropriate formula above.
The methodology to determine the appropriate cost trip generation
shall be as established by the Travers Study - June, 1990 and as
amended by the Rocciola Engineering Memorandum dated June 25,
2001.
Where the property which is the subject of a development application
falls within TID-1, the pro rata amount of the cost of off-tract street
and traffic control improvements shall be borne by each developer or
owner with respect to such development application within the TID-1.
The TID-1 contribution shall be determined by the formula specified in
the TID fee schedule.
Any calculation based upon square footage of floor area shall be
deemed to be gross square footage which shall for the purpose of this
section extend to the exterior perimeter of such building or structure.
Any change of use necessitating a development application shall be
subject to a TID-1 contribution based upon the difference between the
existing trip generation and the anticipated trip generation based upon
the formula set forth herein when the anticipated trip generation is
greater than the existing trip generation. [Amended by Ord. 01-25]
G. Findings and Approvals. The Municipal Agency, in deliberation with
respect to any application for preliminary approval with regard to
property located within TID-1, shall consider, and make appropriate
findings, in concept form, as to amounts to be covered in a developer's
TID-1 contribution agreement.
A condition to any final approval shall be that the applicant enter
into an agreement with the Township of Raritan (developers TID-1
contribution agreement) based upon the findings of facts and
conditions of such approval, that will provide for the following:
§ 16.16.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.16.070
1.01:454
1. Payment of a TID-1 contribution fee representing the applicant's
fair share of street and traffic control improvements in accordance
with the standards set forth in this section including provision for
adjustment of such fee due to inflation.
Such fee shall be adjusted annually in January by applying the
construction cost index as published by McGraw-Hill Publishers
in the "Engineering News Record," or if such periodical is no
longer published, as published in another publication of similar
reputation and reliability. If, as of any relevant date, the Index is no
longer published or issued, the Federal Highway Administration's
bid price index or such other index as accurately reflects the effects
of general economic conditions and influences upon the cost of
constructing road improvements in New Jersey shall be used and
employed in the place and stead thereof;
2. A description of improvements to be made by or at the expense of
the developer, in lieu of a fee contribution or some combination
thereof, if any, and the timing or sequencing of such installation.
Such improvements shall only be permitted by the Municipal
Agency in lieu of TID-1 contribution if the Board finds, after
consultation with the Township Engineer, that such improvements
are a part of the TID-1 improvements set forth by the Township
Engineer in the Cost Estimate Breakdown dated April 20, 1989 as
amended by the Revised Table 4 (TID Improvement Cost Estimate)
prepared by the Township Engineer and dated December 12, 2000
and that such improvements are such that traffic operating
characteristics will be safe and adequate following completion of
such improvement.
3. Such other matters as may be recommended by the Municipal
agency. [Amended by Ord. 01-25]
H. Use of Funds Collected. Any funds collected by way of TID-1
contribution shall be maintained in a separate escrow account credited
to the Township. Such funds shall be used only for improvements
referred to in The Travers Study - June, 1990 as amended by the
Rocciola Engineering Memorandum dated June 25, 2001 and
specifically the Cost Estimate Breakdown dated April 20, 1989 as
amended by the Revised Table 4 (TID Improvement Cost Estimate)
prepared by the Township Engineer and dated December 12, 2000. The
Township shall publish a yearly notice in the official newspaper of the
Township indicating where TID-1 funds have been spent. [Amended by
Ord. 01-25]
I. Effect of Transportation District on Development Applications with
Prior Approvals. An applicant who has obtained preliminary or final
approval prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
section with respect to a development application located within the
TID-1 area, provided such approvals are valid, and provided such
applicant has not agreed via a Planning Board resolution and/or written
§ 16.16.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.16.070
1.01:455
Chapter 16.18
LAND SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
§ 16.18.010. Minimum Requirements. [Prior code § 15-7.1]
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Township.
§ 16.18.020. Exceptions. [Prior code § 15-7.2]
The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for minor or preliminary
subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from
the requirements for subdivision approval as may be reasonable and within
the general purpose and intent of this Title if the literal enforcement of one
communication to TID contribution shall not be subject to the
provisions of this section.
All applicants whose preliminary or final approval resolution
incorporates a TID contribution or who have provided written
communication agreeing to a TID contribution, or who shall hereafter
make an application for approval of a development application shall be
subject to the provisions of this section.
J. Low and Moderate Income Housing. Development applications
containing proposals for low and moderate income housing, as defined
by ordinance, shall be subject to this section except that any
computations with respect to the number of units shall exclude units
which are approved as low and moderate income units.
K. Exemption for Public Buildings. Development applications made by a
public agency for the construction of a public building such as federal,
state, county, municipal, school, emergency service facility or building
shall be exempt from this section provided that the Township
Committee finds that the proposed building will serve a public purpose
and promote the public health, safety and welfare.
L. Payment — In Lieu Agreement. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for a development in the designated TID-1 area as herein defined
unless the TID-1 contribution as imposed by this section and calculated
as per this section has been paid to the Township, and unless the
Municipal Agency and the Township have specifically made an
arrangement with the developer through a developer's TID-1
contribution agreement that such TID-1 contribution may take the form
of physical improvements.
M. Contingencies. The pro rata amounts within Subsection F of this section
shall not be subject to be increased by 10% for contingencies as set
forth in this section.
§ 16.16.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.020
1.01:456
or more provisions of this Title is impracticable or will exact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
§ 16.18.030. Checklist Waivers. [Prior code § 15-7.3]
If it can be demonstrated that because of peculiar conditions relating to
the property or proposed construction, any of the required plat details are
not necessary to properly evaluate the plan, the Planning Board may waive
specific requirements. A written request and explanation for the waiver
request must accompany the application submission.
§ 16.18.040. Certificate of Approval. [Prior code § 15-7.4]
Certificate of approval shall be issued by the Administrative Officer in
accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
§ 16.18.050. Required Subdivision Application Fees. [Prior code
§ 15-7.5; amended by Ord. 86-4; Ord. 90-20; Ord. 06-14]
The following nonrefundable fees shall be submitted with applications for
the following types of subdivision applications:
A. Boundary adjustment (subdivision/merger) not creating any new lots,
$100. When any new lots are created, the fee shall be $100, plus the
applicable fees for the new lot.
B. Minor subdivision plat creating one or more new lots, $500, plus $100
for each new lot.
C. Sketch plat for a major subdivision, $500, plus $20 per lot for
succeeding lots.
D. Preliminary plat for a major subdivision, $2,000 plus $200 per lot for
succeeding lots involving attached housing units.
E. Final plat for a major subdivision, $1,000, plus $50 per lot for
succeeding lots.
F. Conditional use in conjunction with a subdivision application, $100,
plus subdivision and site plan approval application fees.
G. Zoning variance in conjunction with a subdivision application, variance
application fee as set forth in Section 16.78.050 of the zoning
ordinance, plus the applicable minor subdivision or preliminary
subdivision application fee.
H. Filing of easement, $25 per easement document (sight, right-of-way,
conservation, drainage, etc.). Said fees for easements shall be paid
prior to the signing of deeds and/or plats for a development application.
I. Where a fee is not stated, it shall be the cumulative fees of each request
made to the applicable Board or Boards.
§ 16.18.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.060
1.01:457
§ 16.18.060. Construction Permits and Certificates of Occupancy.
[Prior code § 15-7.6]
A. Construction Permits Before Final Approval. No construction permit
shall be issued by the Construction Official for any dwellings, buildings
or structures within a subdivision until final approval is granted in the
case of major subdivision or approval is granted in the case of minor
subdivision.
B. Construction Permits Before Installation of Improvements. No
construction permit shall be issued by the Construction Official for any
dwellings, buildings or structures within a subdivision until all
improvements have been installed as shown on the minor subdivision
plat or preliminary subdivision plat, except that the Planning Board may
waive this requirement partially or totally and provide for the posting of
a performance guarantee for all uncompleted improvements as set
forth in Section 16.16.010.
C. Construction Permits Before Payment of All Fees. No construction
permits shall be issued until all applicable fees have been paid to the
agencies of the county and Township, including all hookup fees to the
Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
D. Certificate of Occupancy. No certificate of occupancy for any dwelling,
building or structure shall be granted until all required improvements
have been installed or completed and certified by the Township
Engineer except as herein noted. A certificate of occupancy may be
issued by the Construction Official if all improvements have been
installed or completed, except the finish course of the road, and the
Township Engineer warranties that the Township's interest is best
served by delaying completion of the road until after all structures and
dwellings are completed. The maintenance guarantee required by
Section 16.16.020 shall not begin until the finish course has been
installed.
The Planning Board may authorize the issuance of a temporary
certificate of occupancy due to conditions, such as weather, which
are beyond the control of the developer if landscaping, permanent
sidewalks and other minor improvements specified by the Board have
been guaranteed but not yet installed. Prior to the issuance of more
than 50% of the temporary certificates of occupancy for a subdivision,
all improvements except the finish course of the road, if postponed by
the Township Engineer, shall have been constructed or installed.
If cases of planned residential developments or other large
subdivisions, the Planning Board may by resolution develop
requirements for the issuance of permanent and temporary certificates
of occupancy other than those stated heretofore if such flexibility
promotes a more reasonable and logical development scheme and
serves the best interest of the Township.
§ 16.18.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.070
1.01:458
§ 16.18.070. Exhibits Required for Subdivision Applications.
[Amended by Ord. 03-7]
All applications shall include the information as follows, except that the
Planning Board may waive any requirement upon written request, or may
request additional information, where it is clearly appropriate to the
particular application. Failure to comply shall render such application
incomplete.
A. Minor Subdivisions.
1. Two copies of an affidavit of ownership or letter from the owner
authorizing submission of the plat:
2. Twenty-five copies of a Wetlands Analysis and Report in accordance
with Section 16.18.120.
3. When the development is to be located in the sanitary sewer
service area, written communication from the RTMUA that
adequate sewage treatment capacity has been reserved for the
development shall be submitted along with a copy of the
reservation agreement and/or proof of payment of deposit on
connection fee.
4. Two copies of ownership interest of corporation, limited liability
company, or partnership in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law.
5. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Subdivision
application form.
6. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Minor
Subdivision checklist form.
7. Township Application fee.
8. Township Escrow payment.
9. Twenty-five copies of a completed Raritan Township Variance
application form (if variances from Township ordinance are
requested or required).
10. When the development is located in the public water service area,
25 copies of correspondence from the public water company
indicating service can be provided.
11. Certification from Raritan Township Tax Collector that all taxes,
sewer charges, or other assessments on the entire tract have been
paid to date.
12. Copy of Hunterdon County Planning Board application form as
submitted to the Hunterdon County Planning Board.
§ 16.18.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.070
1.01:459
13. Two copies of all existing protective covenants, deed restrictions,
or easements that apply to tract.
14. Completed W-9 form.
15. Twenty-five copies of the Minor Subdivision Plan in accordance
with Section 16.18.090.
16. Two copies of an affidavit stating that any and all lots parts of the
subdivision application have not been part of another minor
subdivision within the past 12 months.
B. Sketch and Exempt Subdivision.
1. Two copies of an affidavit of ownership or letter from the owner
authorizing submission of the plat.
2. Twenty-five copies of a Wetlands analysis and Report in Accordance
with Section 16.18.120.
3. When the development is to be located in the sanitary sewer
service area, written communication from the RTMUA that
adequate sewage treatment capacity has been reserved for the
development shall be submitted along with a copy of the
reservation agreement and/or proof of payment of deposit
connection.
4. Two copies of ownership interest of corporation, limited liability
company, or partnership in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law.
5. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Subdivision
application form.
6. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Sketch/Exempt
Subdivision checklist form.
7. Township Application fee.
8. Township Escrow payment.
9. When the development is located in the public water service area,
25 copies of the correspondence from the public water company
indicating service can be provided.
10. Certification from the Raritan Township Tax Collector that all taxes,
sewer charges, or other assessments on the entire tract have been
paid to date.
11. Two copies of all existing protective covenants, deed restrictions,
or easements that apply to tract.
12. Completed W-9 form.
§ 16.18.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.070
1.01:460
13. Where common open space is to be provided; two copies of a letter
detailing the proposed use and ownership of said open space.
14. Twenty-five copies of the Sketch Subdivision Plan in accordance
with Section 16.18.090.
15. Twenty-five copies of current New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection Letter of Interpretation.
16. Copy of Hunterdon County Planning Board application form as
submitted to the Hunterdon County Planning Board.
C. Preliminary Subdivisions.
1. Two copies of an affidavit of ownership or letter from the owner
authorizing submission of the plat.
2. Two copies of a letter of intent stating the type of structure to be
erected approximate start date of construction, and any phasing
plan for subdivision.
3. Twenty-five copies of a Wetlands Analysis and Report in
Accordance with Section 16.18.120.
4. Twenty-five copies of an Aquifer Test Analysis and Report in
accordance with Section 16.18.140, unless public water is
proposed.
5. Twenty-five copies of a Traffic analysis and report in accordance
with Section 16.18.130.
6. When the development is to be located in the sanitary sewer
service area two copies of written communication with the RTMUA
that indicates that adequate sewage treatment capacity has been
reserved for the development shall be submitted along with a copy
of the reservation agreement and/or proof of payment of deposit on
connection fee.
7. Twenty-five copies of current New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection Letter of Interpretation.
8. Two copies of ownership interest of corporation, limited liability
company, or partnership in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law.
9. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Subdivision
application form.
10. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Preliminary
Subdivision checklist form.
11. Township Application fee.
12. Township Escrow payment.
§ 16.18.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.070
1.01:461
13. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Variance
application form (if variance from Township ordinance are
requested or required.)
14. When the development is located in the public water service area,
25 copies of correspondence from the public water company
indicating service can be provided.
15. Certification from the Raritan Township Tax Collector that all taxes,
sewer charges, or other assessments on the entire tract have been
paid to date.
16. Copy of Hunterdon County Planning Board application form as
submitted to the Hunterdon County Planning Board.
17. Two copies of all existing and proposed protective covenants, deed
restrictions, or easements that apply to the tract.
18. Where common open space is to be provided; two copies of a letter
detailing the proposed use and ownership of said open space.
19. Five hard copies and one .pdf copy of the site development storm
water management plan in accordance with Chapter 16.84.
20. Completed W-9 form.
21. Twenty-five copies of the preliminary plat in accordance with
Section 16.18.090.
22. Twenty-five copies of Natural Resource Inventory in accordance
with Section 16.18.160
23. Pre-application Meeting to be held with Township Engineer and
Township Planner.
24. In addition to paper plans, initial plan sets shall be submitted on CD
(or other acceptable archivable electronic format) in the most
recent version of Auto CAD and in pdf format. Subsequent revisions
shall be submitted paper format and pdf (via e-mail acceptable).
The final approved revision shall be submitted in paper, AutoCAD
and pdf formats on CD (or other acceptable archivable electronic
format). [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
25. Two copies of the Affordable Housing Production Plan in
accordance with Section 16.11.070.A. [Amended by Ord. 06-21]
D. Final Subdivisions.
1. Two copies of an affidavit of ownership or letter from the owner
authorizing submission of the plat.
2. Certification from the Raritan Township Planner that all conditions
of preliminary approval have been met and that the preliminary
§ 16.18.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.070
1.01:462
plats have been stamped and signed by the Raritan Township
Planning Board.
3. Two copies of all approved Federal, State, County permits required
under preliminary approval.
4. Two copies of ownership interest of corporation, limited liability
company, or partnership in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law.
5. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Subdivision
application form.
6. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Final
Subdivision checklist form.
7. Township Application Fee.
8. Township Escrow payment.
9. Certification from Raritan Township Tax Collector that all taxes,
sewer charges, or other assessments on the entire tract have been
paid to date.
10. Copy of Hunterdon County Planning Board application form as
submitted to the Hunterdon County Planning Board.
11. Two copies of all existing and proposed protective covenants, deed
restrictions, or easements that apply to tract.
12. Completed W-9 form.
13. Submission of two copies of any and all existing and/or proposed
homeowners' association documentation, where applicable.
14. A CAD drawing, prepared by a New Jersey Licensed Land Surveyor
on a compact disc in .dxf format. All required information
appearing on the final plat shall appear on separate layers of the
drawing. Text shall appear on separate layers of the drawing. Text
shall also appear on a separate layer of the drawing. The file must
be drawn at its real New Jersey Plan Coordinates NAD83 (or the
most current New Jersey State Plan coordinate system) position
and the view must be un-rotated so that the NJPCS North points
orthographically up (vertical) in the screen. The drawing shall
identify, at a minimum, three monument markers distributed
around the corners of the tract. These monument markers shall be
identified in US Survey feet.
15. Twenty-five copies of the final plat in accordance with Section
16.18.190. (Please not that two mylar copies and 11 paper copies of
the final plat will be required to be submitted to the Planning Board
after filing with the County Clerk).
§ 16.18.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.080
1.01:463
§ 16.18.080. Subdivision and Site Plan Distribution. [Amended by
Ord. 03-7]
The Planning Board or its appointed representative shall schedule the
application for a hearing if it finds it to be complete and shall forward copies
of the plat and exhibits to the following persons or agencies:
§ 16.18.090. Plat Details. [Amended by Ord. 03-7; Ord. 06-11; Ord.
10-20; Ord. 10-27; Ord. 11-3; 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1]
A. Township Engineer;
B. Township Health Officer;
C. Township Construction Official;
D. Hunterdon County Planning Board;
E. Environmental Commission;
F. Tax Assessor;
G. Raritan Township Fire Department;
H. Flemington-Raritan Fire Aid Squad;
I. Raritan Township Local Historians Committee;
J. Raritan Township Police Department;
K. Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority;
L. Any other official or agency which shall be affected by the proposed
subdivision or required to be notified by law.
A. General. All maps, plats and sketch plats required to be submitted by
this title shall conform to one of the following size configurations: 8 1/2
x 13 inches, 15 x 21 inches, or 24 x 36 inches.
B. Minor Subdivision. All plats shall be based on accurate information at a
scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet. The plat shall be
designed in compliance with the provisions of § 16.18.110 and shall
show or be accompanied by the following information and information
listed in § 16.18.070, except that the Planning Board may waive any
requirement or request additional information where it is clearly
appropriate to the particular application. Failure to comply shall render
such application incomplete.
1. Location and Key Map. The entire tract to be subdivided, giving the
accurate location of all existing and proposed property and street
lines, rights-of-way, and including a key map at a scale where one
inch equals not more than 1,000 feet, showing the entire
subdivision and its relation to all features shown on the Official
Map and Master Plan and located within 1/2 mile of the extreme
§ 16.18.080 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.090
1.01:464
limits of the subdivision. The plat shall indicate that all boundary
corners of the proposed lots have been set with iron pins and shall
show their location. This requirement shall also apply to boundary
adjustments.
2. Structures, Wooded Areas and Topography.
a. The location of existing houses, buildings and other structures
within the portion to be subdivided and 200 feet thereof, with
accurate dimensions from all existing and proposed lot lines,
wooded areas and isolated shade trees more than six inches in
diameter, breast high, and two inches in diameter, breast high,
for flowering and small trees, sufficient elevations and
contours at five-foot vertical intervals for slopes averaging 10%
or greater, and at two-foot vertical intervals for land of lesser
slope, to determine the general slope and natural drainage of
the land, and the high and low points for the portion to be
subdivided, and for a distance of 200 feet thereof. All
elevations and contours shall be verified in the field to
accurately represent the grade involved and shall be based
upon U.S.C. and G.S. datum.
b. The location of existing houses, buildings and other structures
within the portion to be subdivided and 200 feet thereof, with
accurate dimensions from all existing and proposed lot lines,
wooded areas and isolated trees in compliance with
§ 16.20.040.D.
3. Owners. The name and address of the owner and/or subdivider, and
the name of all adjoining property owners and those across existing
or proposed streets as disclosed by the most-recent municipal tax
records.
4. Other Information. The Tax Map sheet, date of original preparation
and revisions, block and lot numbers, zone district, old name if
submitted under a different title, North arrow, written and graphic
scales and acreage of the entire tract and those areas to be
subdivided.
5. Streets, Easements, Watercourses and Rights-of-Way. The location
of existing or proposed streets, roads, easements, public rights-ofway,
streams, wetlands, wetland transition areas, state open
waters, bridges, culverts, drainage ditches and natural
watercourses in and within 500 feet of the subdivision.
6. Lots. The original and proposed lot layout, lot dimensions, all
required setback lines, and lot area of each lot in square feet and
acreage. Lots shall be designated by the official lot number
designations from the Township Tax Assessor.
7. Endorsements and Certificates. Plats being submitted for minor
subdivision approval shall be a boundary survey map drawn by a
§ 16.18.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.090
1.01:465
licensed New Jersey land surveyor and so certified on the plat, to
be drawn from an actual boundary survey. The plat shall contain
a four-inch by five-inch blank box outlined, located adjacent to the
title block, which shall be reserved for the Planning Board's review
stamp. The specific purpose and restrictions of any easement or
land reserved or dedicated for any use shall be indicated on the
plat and shall be included in any deeds conveying title to the
properties in question. Minor subdivisions requiring improvements
shall contain the following certification:
"This is to certify that the engineering plans for all improvements
are based upon topographical data that has been verified in the
field by a N.J. licensed land surveyor."
Signature of N.J. Professional Engineer/Land Surveyor
8. Utility Information. Within the public water and sanitary sewer
service areas, the plat shall include the location of existing and
proposed lines and connections.
9. Permeability and Soil Logs. In the event public sewers are not
available and individual septic systems are proposed, the plat shall
show the following information:
a. For each proposed lot, and pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.2, at
least two soil profile pits, or one soil profile pit and a minimum
of three soil borings in lieu of the second soil profile pit,
provided that the soil horizons and substrata observed in the
borings are not significantly different from those observed in
the first profile pit.
b. At least two passing permeability tests and two acceptable soil
logs shall be conducted on each proposed lot. The permeability
tests and soil logs shall be located at least 20 feet from each
other, but not more than 40 feet from each other, and within
the area of the proposed septic field. "Proposed septic field"
means that area so designated by the design engineer and
located at a lower elevation than the proposed structure,
containing the wastewater facilities and proposed well, and
conforming to distances established by state law and
provisions of this Code. It is further intended that all septic
systems shall be gravity systems unless undue hardship shall
prevent same, as determined by the Planning Board.
10. Other Requirements.
a. Minor subdivisions shall show the location and indicate the
results of all passing, unsatisfactory and abandoned
permeability tests and soil logs. The date the permeability tests
and soil logs were taken shall be indicated on the plats as well
as the name of the Township witness.
§ 16.18.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.090
1.01:466
b. Where an existing dwelling is part of the subdivision, the plat
shall indicate the exact location of the existing well and septic
field. No permeability test or soil log shall be required for the
dwelling.
c. No permeability test or soil log shall be located closer than 100
feet to the highest elevation of seasonal surface water.
d. All permeability tests and soil logs shall be performed at the
applicant's expense by a person authorized by state law to
undertake such tests and shall be witnessed by a
representative of the Township Engineer's office, who shall be
notified at least 48 hours prior to the conducting of any tests.
e. A passing permeability test shall be one which meets the
requirement of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.1, and where the water level
does not drop faster than one inch in one minute.
f. Septic fields shall not be located on slopes greater than 15%;
and on slopes 6% to 15%, the fields shall be placed
perpendicular to the slope.
11. Floodplain Delineations. Minor subdivisions shall indicate flood
hazard area delineations for all permanent streams based upon
State Department of Environmental Protection delineations or for
the 100-year flood as directed by the Township Engineer.
12. Steep slope calculations in accordance with § 16.64.130.
13. Plats shall meet the requirements of the Map Filing Law23 if plats
rather than deeds are to be filed with the County Clerk.
14. Tree Canopy, Historic and Specimen Trees.
a. No more than 55% of the existing mature woodland tree
canopy within the property boundaries shall be removed (not
to be interpreted as 55% of the total lot area). The location of
the remaining 45% of the mature woodland tree canopy to be
preserved shall be noted on the landscape plan. Steep slope
limits of disturbance and maximum hard surface requirements
under Table I shall supersede this section when appropriate.
b. No tree that qualifies as a specimen and historic tree shall be
removed unless the applicant replants trees in accordance with
§ 16.20.040.T.
C. Sketch Plats and Exempt Subdivision. All plats shall be based on
accurate information at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100
feet. The plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of
§ 16.18.110 and shall show or be accompanied by the following
information and information listed in § 16.18.070, except that the
23.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 16.18.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.090
1.01:467
Planning Board may waive any requirement or request additional
information where it is clearly appropriate to the particular application.
Failure to comply shall render such application incomplete.
1. Location and Key Map. The entire tract to be subdivided, giving the
accurate location of all existing and proposed property and street
lines, rights-of-way, and including a key map at a scale where one
inch equals not more than 1,000 feet, showing the entire
subdivision and its relation to all features shown on the Official
Map and Master Plan and located within 1/2 mile of the extreme
limits of the subdivision.
2. Structures, Wooded Areas and Topography.
a. The location of existing houses, buildings and other structures
within the portion to be subdivided and 200 feet thereof, with
accurate dimensions from all existing and proposed lot lines,
wooded areas and isolated shade trees more than six inches in
diameter, breast high, and two inches in diameter, breast high,
for flowering and small trees, and topography within the
portion to be subdivided and within 200 feet thereof shown at
two-foot contours.
b. The location of existing houses, buildings and other structures
within the portion to be subdivided and 200 feet thereof, with
accurate dimensions from all existing and proposed lot lines,
wooded areas and isolated trees in compliance with
§ 16.20.040.D.
3. Owners. The name and address of the owner and/or subdivider, and
the name of all adjoining property owners and those across existing
or proposed streets as disclosed by the most-recent municipal tax
records.
4. Other Information. The Tax Map sheet, date of original preparation
and revisions, block and lot numbers, zone district, old name if
submitted under a different title, North arrow, written and graphic
scales and acreage of the entire tract and those areas to be
subdivided.
5. Streets, Easements, Watercourses and Rights-of-Way. The location
of existing or proposed streets, roads, easements, public rights-ofway,
streams, bridges, culverts, drainage ditches and natural
watercourses in and within 500 feet of the subdivision.
6. Lots. The original and proposed lot layout, lot dimensions, all
required setback lines, and lot area of each lot in square feet and
acreage. Lots shall be designated by consecutive numbers for
major subdivisions until given official lot number designations by
the Township Tax Assessor.
§ 16.18.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.090
1.01:468
7. Endorsements and Certificates. Plats being submitted for exempt
subdivisions shall be a boundary survey map drawn by a licensed
New Jersey land surveyor and so certified on the plat, to be drawn
from an actual boundary survey. The plat shall contain a four-inch
by five-inch blank box outlined located adjacent to the title block,
which shall be reserved for the Planning Board's review stamp. The
specific purpose and restrictions of any easement or land reserved
or dedicated for any use shall be indicated in the plat and shall be
included in any deeds conveying title to the properties in question.
8. Utility Information. Where public water or public sewer
connections are proposed, the sketch plat shall include the location
of existing and proposed lines and connections.
9. Permeability and Soil Logs. In the event public sewers are not
available and individual septic systems are proposed, the sketch
plat shall show the following information:
a. For each proposed lot, and pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.2, at
least two soil profile pits, or one soil profile pit and a minimum
of three soil borings in lieu of the second soil profile pit,
provided that the soil horizons and substrata observed in the
borings are not significantly different from those observed in
the first profile pit.
b. Sketch Plat Major Subdivisions. At least one passing
permeability test and two soil logs shall be made for each five
acres to indicate the suitability of the area for individual septic
systems.
10. Other Requirements.
a. Sketch plats shall show the location and indicate the results of
all passing, unsatisfactory and abandoned permeability and
soil log tests. The date the permeability tests and soil logs were
taken shall be indicated on the plats as well as the name of the
Township witness.
b. Where an existing dwelling is part of the subdivision, the
sketch plat shall indicate the exact location of the existing well
and septic field. No permeability test or soil log shall be
required for the dwelling.
c. No permeability test or soil log shall be located closer than 100
feet to the highest elevation of seasonal surface water.
d. All permeability tests and soil logs shall be performed at the
applicant's expense by a person authorized by state law to
undertake such tests and shall be witnessed by a
representative of the Township Engineer's office, who shall be
notified at least 48 hours prior to the conducting of any tests.
§ 16.18.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.090
1.01:469
e. A passing permeability test shall be one which meets the
requirement of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6-1, and where the water level
does not drop faster than one inch in one minute.
f. Septic fields shall not be located on slopes greater than 15%;
and on slopes 6% to 15%, the fields shall be placed
perpendicular to the slope.
11. Floodplain Delineations. Sketch plats for major subdivisions shall
indicate flood hazard area delineations for all permanent streams
based upon the most recent HUD Flood Boundary Maps or Natural
Resource Inventory Flood Plain/Soils Maps for Raritan Township,
whichever places greater restrictions on the use of land. When
more-accurate information is available, it shall be utilized and
indicated on the plat as to boundaries and source.
D. Plat Submitted for Preliminary Approval. The preliminary plat shall be
clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale of not less than one
inch equals 100 feet. Preliminary plats shall be drawn by a licensed
New Jersey professional engineer or land surveyor. Construction sheets
shall be drawn, signed and sealed by a licensed New Jersey professional
engineer. Contour maps and preliminary construction plans, including
road profiles and utility plans, shall be submitted as part of the
preliminary plat. Separate maps may be required by the Board for
topography, utilities and road details. A soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan, a grading plan and landscaping plan shall be included. The
plat shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of § 16.20.040
and shall show or be accompanied by the following information and
information listed in § 16.18.070, except that the Planning Board may
waive any requirement or request additional information where it is
clearly appropriate to the particular application. Failure to comply shall
render such application incomplete. Plans shall show the location of
proposed shade trees, detention basin landscaping and other
landscaping, including preservation of existing vegetation and trees in
compliance with § 16.20.040.D.
1. Location and Key Map. The entire tract to be subdivided giving the
accurate location of all existing and proposed property and street
lines, and including a key map at a scale where one inch equals not
more than 1,000 feet, showing the entire subdivision and its
relation to all feature shown on the Official Map and Master Plan,
and located within 1/2 mile of the extreme limits of the subdivision,
and the zoning classification of the proposed subdivision and of
adjacent land.
2. Lots. Lot layout, lot dimensions, all required setback lines and
dimensions, individual lot areas in square feet, minimum
improvable lot area in square feet, and the acreage and square
footage of right-of-way easements and dedications. Lots shall be
designated by official block and lot numbers as obtained from the
Tax Assessor.
§ 16.18.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.090
1.01:470
3. Other Contents. The tract name, Tax Map sheet and revision date,
block and lot numbers, date of plat preparation and any revisions,
reference meridian, written scale, graphic scale and the following
names and addresses:
a. Record owner or owners of property to be subdivided; if other
than an individual, the corporate officers or partners or other
statutory agent;
b. Subdivider;
c. Person who prepared the map, official seal and license
numbers;
d. Owners of property within 200 feet of entire tract being
subdivided.
4. Acreage. Acreage of entire tract and those portions to be
subdivided to the nearest hundredth of an acre.
5. Elevations and Contours. Sufficient elevations and contours at fivefoot
vertical intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater, and at
two-foot vertical intervals for land of lesser slope, to determine the
general slope and natural drainage of the land, and the high and
low points for a distance of 200 feet around the entire tract
boundary. All elevations shall be verified in the field to accurately
represent the grades involved and shall be based upon U.S.C. and
G.S. datum.
6. Existing and Proposed Locations.
a. Utilities and Roadways. The location and sizes, where
appropriate, of existing and proposed property lines, streets,
buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drain
pipes, sanitary sewers, water mains, gas mains, and power
lines.
b. Natural features such as rock outcroppings, wooded areas,
shade trees over eight inches in diameter at breast height, and
two inches in diameter at breast height for flowering and small
trees, wetlands, wetland transition areas, streams, state open
waters, lakes, ponds, or other significant natural features. This
data may be determined by field and/or photogrammetric
survey. In forest areas of intense growth, where no
construction or clearing is proposed, the vegetative perimeter
need only be indicated. Where more-detailed information is
available and/or is required elsewhere in this title, it shall be
utilized.
7. Streets. Preliminary plans and profiles at a scale of not more than
one inch equals 50 feet horizontally, and one inch equals five feet
vertically, including cross-sections every 50 feet, or as specified by
§ 16.18.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.090
1.01:471
the Township Engineer, of all proposed streets, curbs and gutters
within the subdivision and proposed connection with existing or
future continuing streets. The distance and radii of all curves along
all street lines shall be shown.
8. Gas, Telephone and Electric. Preliminary plans and profiles of
proposed utility layouts shall be supplied to the Township at
appropriate scales approved by the applicable utility for gas,
telephone and electrical service, showing connections to existing or
proposed systems. All utilities shall be located underground.
9. Potable, Sanitary and Stormwater Management Plans.
a. The applicant shall submit potable water, sanitary sewer and
stormwater management plans as part of the exhibits required
for preliminary plat approval. Plans and profiles shall be at a
scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontally and one inch
equals five feet vertically for all proposed and existing sanitary
sewers, storm drains, drainage ditches, and streams within the
subdivision, together with the location, sizes, elevations,
grades and capacities of any existing sanitary sewer, storm
drain, drainage ditch, stream or watercourse to which the
proposed facility shall be connected.
b. The potable water plan shall be designed to provide each lot
within the subdivision with an adequate and continuous supply
of potable water. Where a property is located in the public
water service area, all lots shall be connected thereto. In the
event that the Planning Board determines that such a system is
not reasonably accessible, individual wells shall be installed on
each lot, but the subdivider may be required by the Planning
Board to install within the subdivision a complete water
distribution system, including provisions for connection to
each structure, or provide performance bonds necessary to
cover the future construction of the system. Until such time as
the system is capable of becoming operable, it shall be capped.
c. The sanitary sewage disposal plan shall be designed to convey
sanitary waste from each lot through laterals and interceptors
of sufficient size, material and capacity to collectors and then
to trunk sewers to public treatment facilities. Where a
development is located outside the sanitary sewer service area,
approved individual septic systems shall be installed for each
lot, except as noted below. Where a public sanitary sewage
disposal system is not now reasonably accessible as
determined by the Planning Board as per § 16.18.100.D.3, but
is located within the sanitary sewer service area, the
subdivider shall install within the subdivision a complete sewer
pipe system, including provisions for the connection thereto at
each structure. Until such time as the public sanitary sewage
disposal system is capable of becoming operable, individual
§ 16.18.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.090
1.01:472
septic systems or other appropriate and approved waste
treatment facilities shall be required.
d. The stormwater management plan shall be designed in
accordance with the standards found in Chapter 16.84.
10. Permeability Tests and Soil Logs. No subdivision or part thereof
proposed to be serviced by individual sewage disposal systems
shall be approved where results of the permeability tests do not
meet with the established requirements of this section or other
applicable ordinances or regulations, nor shall any subdivision or
part thereof be considered where other physical characteristics of
the land would cause septic conditions unsanitary to the public or
contrary to the requirements of this title or other applicable
ordinances or regulations. Any remedy proposed to overcome such
situations shall first be approved by the appropriate local and state
health agency. The following requirements shall be met:
a. For each proposed lot, and pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.2, at
least two soil profile pits, or one soil profile pit and a minimum
of three soil borings in lieu of the second soil profile pit,
provided that the soil horizons and substrata observed in the
borings are not significantly different from those observed in
the first profile pit.
b. Two passing permeability tests and two acceptable soil logs
shall be conducted on each proposed lot at the applicant's
expense by a person authorized by state law to conduct such
tests.
c. The permeability tests shall be witnessed by a representative
of the Township Engineer, who shall be notified at least 48
hours prior to the conducting of any tests.
d. The location and results of all passing, unsatisfactory and
abandoned permeability and soil log tests shall be indicated on
the preliminary plat. The date the permeability tests and soil
logs were taken shall be indicated on the plats as well as the
name of the Township witness.
e. A passing test shall be one meeting the standards set forth in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.1, as amended, and one where the water level
does not drop more than one inch in one minute.
f. The permeability tests and soil logs shall be located at least 20
feet from each other but within 40 feet of each other within the
area of the proposed septic field. "Proposed septic field" shall
mean that area so designated by the design engineer and
located at a lower elevation than the proposed structure,
containing the wastewater facilities and proposed well, and
conforming to distances established by N.J.S.A. 2A:1 1-9 et
seq., and provisions of this Code. It is further intended that all
§ 16.18.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.090
1.01:473
septic systems shall be gravity systems unless undue hardship
shall prevent same, as determined by the Planning Board.
g. No permeability test or soil log shall be located closer than 200
feet of the highest elevation of seasonal surface water.
h. Septic fields shall not be placed on slopes greater than 15%;
and on slopes 6% to 15%, the fields shall be placed
perpendicular to the slope.
i. In areas where on-site or on-tract recharge of stormwaters is
proposed, additional permeability tests may be required by the
Township Engineer or Planning Board.
j. In areas of questionable permeability, the Township Health
Officer may establish the conditions under which the
permeability tests may be undertaken, including the month of
the year and location.
k. Where an existing dwelling is part of the proposed subdivision,
the exact location of the well and septic field shall be shown.
No permeability tests or soil logs shall be required for that
dwelling.
l. The applicant and/or subdivider shall conduct all tests in
accordance with Chapter 17 of the General Ordinances of
Raritan Township.
11. Off-Tract Improvements. When the development of the subdivision
or improvements within the subdivision are contingent upon
improvements outside the boundaries of the subdivision,
information shall be supplied by the subdivider prior to Planning
Board consideration for preliminary approval that the
improvements outside the subdivision are installed and shall be
available to the subdivider, or that the provisions of § 16.16.060
have been complied with.
12. Setback Lines. All front, rear and side yard setback lines shall be
shown and dimensioned on all lots.
13. Open Space. Any open spaces proposed to be dedicated for public
use or playgrounds or other public purpose, and the location and
use of all such property, shall be shown on the plat. Any
improvements proposed for the open space shall be shown on the
plat along with the appropriate construction details related to
those improvements.
14. Support Capability. When deemed necessary to determine the
suitability of the soil to support new construction, the Planning
Board shall require test holes or borings to be made by a New
Jersey licensed engineer or an approved testing laboratory at the
§ 16.18.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.090
1.01:474
expense of the subdivider, under the direction of the Township
Engineer.
15. Conservation Plans. Plans showing measures designed to minimize
soil erosion and sedimentation, such as berms, siltation ponds,
sediment traps, detention and retention basins, landscaping,
natural cover, energy dissipaters, and riprap. Plans shall also
include, where applicable:
a. A storm drainage schedule, including a description of all
temporary and permanent structures and other techniques for
the control of stormwater, together with a timetable for the
construction or installation of such structures, or other
techniques.
b. A schedule containing the timing of and description of
temporary and permanent soil stabilization measures,
including tracking, scarification, serration of slopes,
roughening, mulching, hilting, chemical binders and other
suitable methods of soil stabilization.
c. The location and description of water interception and
diversion measures, such as diversion ditches, dikes, barriers,
and disposal structures such as flexible or sectional down
drains, flumes, linear spreaders and the like.
d. Lot grading.
16. Landscaping Plans. Plans showing the location of proposed shade
trees, detention basin landscaping and other landscaping,
including preservation of existing vegetation. The provisions of
§ 16.18.100.D.9 shall be complied with.
17. Easements and Dedications. The specific purpose and restrictions
of any easement or land reserved or dedicated for any use shall be
indicated on the plat, and the proposed use of sites (other than
residential) shall be noted.
18. Certifications. The following certifications shall appear on all
preliminary plats:
"This is to certify that the engineering plans contained herein for
all improvements are based upon topographical data that has
been verified in the field by a N.J. licensed land surveyor."
Signature of N.J. Professional Engineer/Land Surveyor
19. Floodplain Delineations. Preliminary plats for major subdivision
shall indicate flood hazard area delineations for all permanent
streams based upon State Department of Environmental Protection
delineations or for the 100-year flood as directed by the Township
Engineer.
§ 16.18.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.090
1.01:475
20. Fire Protection Systems. Plans shall show the location and
construction details of proposed fire protection system in
accordance with § 16.18.100.D.10.
21. Steep slope calculations in accordance with § 16.64.130.
22. The plat shall contain a four-inch by five-inch blank box outlined,
located adjacent to the title block, which shall be reserved for the
Planning Board review stamp.
23. Sight, conservation and drainage easements shall be shown on the
plat as required elsewhere in this chapter.
24. Recycling Plan. The subdivision plat shall conform with the
requirements of § 8.36.070 for new developments of multifamily
residential units, commercial, institutional, or industrial properties.
25. Tree Canopy, Specimen and Historic Trees.
a. No more than 55% of the existing mature woodland tree
canopy within the property boundaries shall be removed (not
to be interpreted as 55% of the total lot area). The location of
the remaining 45% of the mature woodland tree canopy to be
preserved shall be noted on the landscape plan. Steep slope
limits of disturbance and maximum hard surface requirements
under Table I shall supersede this section when appropriate.
b. No tree that qualifies as a specimen and historic tree shall be
removed unless the applicant replants trees in accordance with
§ 16.20.040.T.
E. Final Plat. The plat shall be drawn in compliance with the provisions of
the State Map Filing Act and shall show or be accompanied by the
following information and information listed in § 16.18.070, except that
the Planning Board may waive any requirement or request additional
information where it is clearly appropriate to the particular application.
Failure to comply shall render such application incomplete.
1. Identification. Date, name and key map of the subdivision, name of
owner, written scale, graphic scale, and reference meridian. The
final plat shall be drawn at a scale of not more than one inch equals
100 feet.
2. Other Contents. Tract boundary lines, rights-of-way, lines of
streets, street names, easements and other rights-of-way, land to be
reserved or dedicated to public use, all lot lines with accurate
dimensions, bearings, distances, arc lengths, central angles,
tangents, and radii of all curves, building setbacks and area of each
lot in square feet.
3. Easement and Dedications. The specific purpose and restrictions of
any easement of land reserved or dedicated for any use shall be
indicated, and the proposed use of sites other than residential shall
§ 16.18.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.090
1.01:476
be noted. Floodplain delineations for the flood hazard area shall be
shown on the plat as indicated on the approved preliminary plat or
as directed by the Township Engineer.
4. Block and Lots. All block, lot and house numbers shall be approved
by the Township Engineer and the Tax Assessor and shall be related
to existing block and lot numbers as shown on the Official Tax Map
of the Township.
5. Monuments. Location and description of all monuments shall be
shown as per the Map Filing Law.
6. Consent of Owner. Certification that the applicant is the agent of
the owner of the land or that the owner has given consent to file the
map.
7. Approval. When approval of a plat is required by an officer or body,
whether municipal, county or state, approval shall be certified on
the plat.
8. Certifications. The following certifications shall appear on the final
plat:
a. "I hereby verify that this map and the survey have been
made under my immediate supervision and comply with the
provisions of the "Map Filing Law." (Include the following,
if applicable).
I do further certify that the monuments as designated and
shown herein have been set."
Licensed Land Surveyor
(Affix Seal)
Date
If monuments are to be set at a later date, the following
endorsement shall be shown on the map:
"I certify that a bond has been given to the Township of
Raritan guaranteeing the future setting of the monuments
shown on this map and so designated."
Township Clerk Date
b. "I hereby certify that all of the requirements of the Raritan
Township health ordinances have been complied with."
Health Officer
c. I have carefully examined this map and find it conforms
with the provisions of the "Map Filing Law" and the
municipal ordinances and requirements applicable thereto.
§ 16.18.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.090
1.01:477
§ 16.18.100. Improvements. [Prior code § 15-7.10; amended by Ord.
98-12; Ord. 02-21]
Municipal Engineer (Affix Seal)
d. This Application No. _____ is approved by the Raritan
Township Planning Board as a major subdivision.
Chairman
Secretary
9. The final plat shall contain a four-inch by five-inch blank box,
outlined, which shall be reserved for the County Planning Board
review stamp.
10. Each final plat submission shall include a map clearly and legibly
drawn at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet, showing proposed
street rights-of-way, tract boundary lines, easements, land to be
reserved or dedicated to public use, and all lot lines for the area
covered by the final plat. Such map, at a scale of one inch equals
400 feet, need not be filed with the Hunterdon County Recording
Officer.
A. General. Prior to the granting of the final approval, the subdivider shall
have installed improvements required by the Planning Board except as
provided in Section 16.16.010. The Planning Board may solicit local,
county, state, federal, public or semi-public agencies and
knowledgeable individuals on what improvements shall be required.
Improvements recommended by other agencies, such as a utilities
authority, county, state or other governmental agencies, may be
required by the Planning Board as a condition of final approval. The
following construction standards and improvements are necessary to
protect the health, safety, welfare and convenience of the residents and
public, as well as needed to meet local, county, regional, state and
national goals and objectives, all of the improvements listed below may
not be appropriate or needed. These items may then be waived in
accordance with Section 16.18.020.
B. Construction Standards.
1. Township Standards. All standards and specifications of the
Township as now or hereafter adopted, and applicable ordinances,
shall govern the design, construction and installation of all
improvements. Failure of the subdivider, developer, his or her
contractor or agent to conform to the specifications shall be just
cause for the suspension of the work being performed. No
subdivider shall have the right to demand or claim damages from
the Township, its officers, agents or servants by reason of the
suspension.
§ 16.18.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.100
1.01:478
2. Other Standards. In the event the Township has not adopted
standards and specifications for a specific type of improvement,
then generally accepted engineering standards as set forth in
engineering and construction manuals as may be approved and
modified by the Township Engineer for a specific situation, shall be
used. Gas, electric, telephone and similar utilities shall be installed
in accordance with applicable company, state and federal
requirements.
3. Grades. All construction stakes and grades shall be set by a
licensed land surveyor in the employ of the subdivision, developer
or contractor. One copy of all cut sheets signed by an L.S. or P.E.
shall be filed with the Township Engineer 48 hours prior to the
commencement of any construction.
4. Township Engineer. Prior to the start of the construction or
installation of such improvements, the subdivider shall advise the
Township Engineer 48 hours prior to the commencement of such
work. No underground installation shall be covered until inspected
and approved by the appropriate official. If, during installation of
any of the required improvements, the subdivider fails to meet
specification requirements, or to correct unacceptable work, the
subdivider shall be notified in writing by certified mail by the
Township Engineer that the subdivider has failed to comply with
specifications or to correct unacceptable work properly, and the
notice shall set forth in detail what has not been properly installed.
Should any underground structure be covered prior to inspection,
it shall be uncovered as directed by the Township Engineer at the
expense of the subdivider for reinspection.
If, within 10 days after mailing of such notice, the subdivider
has failed to perform in accordance with the notice the Township
Engineer shall then cause the notice of failure-to-comply to be
served upon the subdivider, and a copy shall be sent to the
Township Committee and Planning Board. All work shall cease on
the site immediately upon notification.
5. Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority. Prior to the start of
the construction or installation of public sanitary sewerage
improvements, the subdivider shall advise the Raritan Township
Municipal Utilities Authority 48 hours prior to the commencement
of such work. No underground installation shall be covered until
inspected and approved by the appropriate official. If, during
installation of any of the required improvements, the subdivider
fails to meet specification requirements or to correct unacceptable
work, the subdivider shall be notified in writing by certified mail by
the Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority that the
subdivider has failed to comply with the specifications or to correct
unacceptable work properly, and the notice shall set forth in detail
what has not been properly installed. Should any underground
structure be covered prior to inspection, it shall be uncovered as
§ 16.18.100 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.100
1.01:479
directed by the Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority at
the expense of the subdivider for reinspection. If, within 10 days
after mailing of such notice, the subdivider has failed to perform
in accordance with the notice, the Raritan Township Municipal
Utilities Authority shall then cause the notice of failure-to-comply
to be served upon the subdivider, and a copy shall be sent to the
Township Engineer, Township Committee, and Planning Board. All
work shall cease on the site immediately upon notification.
6. Additional Improvements. If, during construction, additional
improvements are needed, or changes required in the location or
construction of previously approved improvements, the Township
Engineer shall have the authority to require the changes. All
changes shall be indicated on the as-built plans.
C. Site Conditions.
1. Maintenance Required. During construction, the site shall be
maintained and left each day in a safe and sanitary manner; and
any condition which could lead to personal injury or property
damage shall be immediately corrected by the subdivider upon an
order by the Township Engineer or Construction Official or other
authorized personnel.
2. Disposal of Dead Trees, Litter and Building Materials. Development
areas shall be cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish, brush, weeds,
dead and dying trees, roots, debris, and excess or scrap building
materials shall be removed or destroyed immediately upon the
request of and to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector prior to
issuing an occupancy permit.
3. Earth Removal and Top Soil. No top soil shall be removed from the
site or used as spoil unless approved as part of the soil erosion and
sediment control plan. At least six inches of top soil shall be
provided within 25 feet of the structure or paved areas, and be
appropriately landscaped. Stabilization shall proceed promptly in
accordance with the specifications and requirements of the
approved soil erosion and sediment control plan.
4. Changes in Elevation. No change or contour shall be made to any
lot of site unless approved as part of a development application. All
development shall respect the natural contours of the site. Changes
may be made to the natural contours of a property only for public
health and safety purposes. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
5. Temporary Improvements. Prior to or during construction, the
Township Engineer may require the installation or construction of
improvements to prevent or correct temporary conditions on the
site which could cause personal injury, damage to property or
constitute a health hazard. These conditions may result from
erosion and landslide, flooding, heavy construction traffic, creation
§ 16.18.100 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.100
1.01:480
of steep grades and pollution. Improvements may include berms,
mulching, sediment traps, detention and retention basins, grading,
plantings, retaining walls, culverts, pipes, guardrails, temporary
roads, and others appropriate to the specific condition. All
temporary improvements shall remain in place and in operation
until otherwise directed by the Township Engineer.
6. Trees. [Amended by Ord. 10-27]
a. Existing trees on any site shall be preserved with tree
protection fencing erected with a minimum height of four feet,
and placed a minimum of 15 feet from the trunk of the tree or
along the drip line, which ever is greater. Snow fencing may be
used. However, chain link fence may be required if warranted
by site conditions and rarity of the plant.
b. Any clearing within the dripline or within 15 feet of a tree,
whichever is greater, shall be done by hand operated
equipment.
c. Where a tree that has been noted for preservation or identified
as a historic or specimen tree is severely damaged and is
unable to survive, tree replacement may occur as required by
the Township. [Amended by Ord. 11-3]
d. The appropriate approving authority may require a qualified
forester to report to the board, at the developer's sole expense,
as to what measures are necessary to preserve existing trees.
D. Improvements.
1. Stormwater. The stormwater disposal system shall include all or
some of the following: curbs, catch basins, culverts, pipes,
stormwater drains, swales, drainage rights-of-way, channel
improvements, rip-rap, retention, and detention basins,
constructed wetlands, vegetated filter strips, rain gardens, bioretention
basins, infiltration basins, manufactured treatment
devices, pervious pavement systems, dry wells, sand filters, wet
ponds or any combination thereof. It may also include any
vegetation and landscaping association with those improvements.
a. In all new residential subdivisions, all storm water detention
and retention facilities, with the exception of individual on-site
underground systems, shall be placed on individual lots which
shall contain no other structures except those accessory to the
storm water facilities. Said lots will not be required to meet the
minimum lot size, lot width, or other associated requirements
of the underlying zoning district.
b. In all new residential subdivisions, all storm water detention
facilities, when located on individual lots, shall be owned and
§ 16.18.100 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.100
1.01:481
maintained by a homeowners' association. [Amended by Ord.
06-11]
2. Individual On-Site Systems. An individual on-site sanitary waste
disposal system shall include all or some of the following: septic
tank, distribution box, drainage tiles, drainage field, ground
mound.
3. Public Systems. Any subdivision located within the sanitary sewer
service area as identified in the most recent Township Master Plan
shall only be connected with and use the facilities of the Raritan
Township Municipal Utilities Authority sanitary sewer system to
the exclusion of any other system or methods for the collection and
disposal of sanitary sewage. If the Planning Board determines that
the existing Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority
sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible either due to
such reasons as the distance required, the level of improvements
required, or lack of available sewer treatment capacity to allow the
economically feasible development of the property, the applicant
shall install within the subdivision a complete sewer pipe system
including all necessary easements and provisions for the
connection thereto at each structure. Until such time as the
connection to the public sanitary sewage disposal system is capable
of becoming operable, individual septic systems or other
appropriate and approved waste water treatment facilities shall be
required. [Amended by Ord. 02-9; Ord. 02-14]
4. Water. A water system shall include all or part of the following:
pipes and necessary appurtenances of sufficient size, material and
capacity, pumps, valves, pumping stations, standpipes and fire
hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be of a design and type approved by
the Township Engineer and be installed in accordance with
Township regulations.
5. Private Utilities. Gas lines, telephone lines, electrical service, cable
television, and similar utilities when installed shall consist of those
elements required by the private utility, federal, state or local law.
6. Vehicular and Pedestrian Improvements. Such improvements shall
include all or part of the following: street paving, curbs, gutters,
concrete sidewalks, bituminous concrete driveway aprons, street
lighting, traffic signs, traffic control devices and guardrails, and
other street improvements.
a. Streets. Streets shall meet the design specifications
established in Section 16.18.110.
b. Street Signs. The design and location of all street signs shall be
approved by the Planning Board. The name of all new streets
shall be approved by the Township Committee or its designee.
§ 16.18.100 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.100
1.01:482
c. Sidewalks. Sidewalks, where required, shall be a minimum of
four feet in width. Sidewalks shall be provided along the
frontage of lots fronting on major arterial, collector, and
marginal access roads, and located within 1.5 miles of a school.
Such sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide and at least
three feet from the curb or edge of pavement within the rightof-
way lines.
d. Traffic Signs and Control Devices. These improvements, such
as "stop," "yield," "one-way," signs, etc., shall be designed and
installed in accordance with applicable federal, state and
county regulations in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices adopted by the U.S. Department of
Transportation. Recommendation as to their installation may
be made by the Police Department or other competent agency.
e. Guide Rails. These shall be designed to deter vehicles from
leaving the road. They shall be installed where danger exists to
the traveling public due to steep topography, narrow roadways,
location of drainage ditches or other similar conditions.
7. Natural Improvements. These improvements shall include all or
some of the following: shade trees, topsoil, earth removal, borrow
and fill, improvements to prevent erosion and landslides, and
improvements to prevent damage to adjacent property and to
protect vistas and existing natural growth.
8. Monuments. Monuments shall be of such size and shape and
properly located as required by the map filing law.
9. (Reserved) [Amended by Ord. 10-27]
10. Fire Protection Systems. While recognizing that it may not be
possible to assure complete fire protection in every given case, in
order to provide the Raritan Township Fire Company with some
minimum fire fighting capability, all major subdivisions shall
provide for a source of water for fire fighting purposes in systems
approved by the Township Fire Marshal and Fire Chief and in
accordance with the following criteria:
a. Where an existing public water supply is available and has
been approved by the Raritan Township Fire Company for
minimum fire fighting purposes, fire hydrants shall be installed
at appropriate locations. In residential developments, a water
supply system and fire hydrants shall be installed in
accordance with the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (Subchapter 5). In other than residential
developments, a water supply system and fire hydrants shall be
installed as recommended by the Township Fire Marshal and
Fire Chief and accepted by the Raritan Township Governing
Body. The public water supply system in nonresidential
§ 16.18.100 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.100
1.01:483
developments shall be capable of supplying the needed fire
flow at all times for a minimum duration of one hour for flows
of 1,500 gpm or less at a minimum of 20 psi residual pressure
or for two hours for flows greater than 1,500 gpm at a
minimum of 20 psi residual pressure. Hydrants shall be spaced
to provide the necessary fire flow as indicated in Attachment
"A" entitled Fire Flow Requirements for the Township of
Raritan, attached to the ordinance codified in this section and
on file for public inspection. The allowance for each fire
hydrant at 20 psi residual pressure used to deliver the fire
flows listed in the above table is as follows:
Allow up to 1,000 gpm for each hydrant within 300 feet of the
building;
Allow up to 670 gpm for each hydrant within 301 to 600 of the
building;
Allow up to 250 gpm for each hydrant within 601 to 1,000 of
the building;
Allow zero gpm for each hydrant greater than 1,000 feet from
the building.
Hydrants shall be installed in accordance with standards set
forth in ANSI/AWWA, Dry Barrel Fire Hydrants, latest edition;
painted as directed by the Township Fire Marshal and Fire
Chief; and tested in accordance with NFPA 291, Recommended
Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants, latest
edition, to ensure compliance with fire flow requirements.
Acceptance test data shall be provided to the Township Fire
Marshal and Fire Chief for review and approval. In areas
where public water supply is available, but such water supply
does not have the capacity to satisfy the foregoing minimum
standards, such public water supply system shall be
supplemented with additional measures to satisfy the minimum
fire protection requirements of the Township. Such additional
measures may involve any one or a combination of the
following: installation of booster pumps with appurtenances,
installation of water storage tanks with appurtenances,
creation of drafting points with appurtenances, or such other
means of increasing fire fighting capability as may be
recommended and approved by the Township Fire Marshal and
Fire Chief.
b. Where public water supply is not available, underground water
storage tanks shall be installed to provide a source of water for
fire fighting. For subdivisions in residential zoning districts,
underground water storage tanks shall be located and installed
so that no dwelling is farther than 1,000 linear feet from any
such tank as measured along the street, either public or
§ 16.18.100 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.100
1.01:484
§ 16.18.110. Design Standards.
private, and the access driveway to the dwelling. In no event
shall the distance between tanks be greater than 2,000 linear
feet. At least one tank shall be installed for each 2,000 linear
feet of street length or fraction thereof. The minimum capacity
of every underground water storage tank within residential
zoning districts shall be 15,000 usable gallons.
The locations of all fire protection systems and appurtenances
shall be approved by the Township Fire Marshal or Fire Chief.
Unless an equivalent alternate fire protection system is
authorized by the Planning Board and the Township Fire
Company, underground water storage tank systems shall be
provided and shall be constructed and installed in accordance
with design standards and specifications on file in the
Township Engineering Department.
In all cases where a fire protection system is required, no
construction permit shall be issued for a dwelling or principal
structure upon any lot within the subdivision until, to the
extent necessary to afford fire protection to such dwelling or
principal structure, such system is installed and its operability
tested and approved by the Township Fire Marshal and Fire
Chief.
11. Street Lighting. Street lights shall be required at every street
intersection and on the end of each cul-de-sac. In addition, street
lights may be required in other locations as determined by the
Planning Board. If the street has a sidewalk along one side, the
street lights will generally be limited to the sidewalk side of the
street.
A. General. The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and
principles of land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or
portion thereof. To assist developers in good design techniques, several
sketches illustrating design standards are attached to and made a part
of this Title by reference. Such sketches shall be on file in the office of
the Planning Board.
1. Development Patterns. The subdivision plat shall conform to design
standards of this ordinance and should reflect the desire for a more
natural layout respecting existing natural features. [Amended by
Ord. 06-11]
2. Reservation of Public Areas. If the master plan or the official map
provides for the reservation of designated streets, public
drainageways, flood control basins, bikeways, walkways or public
areas within the proposed development, before approving a
subdivision, the Planning Board may further require that such
streets, ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in locations and
§ 16.18.100 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.110
1.01:485
sizes suitable to their intended uses. The Planning Board may
reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or
areas shown on the plat for a period of one year after the approval
of the final plat or within such further time as may be agreed to
by the developer. Unless during such period or extension thereof
the Township shall have entered into a contract to purchase or
institute condemnation proceedings according to law for the fee or
a lesser interest in the land comprising such streets, ways, basins
or areas, the developer shall not be bound by such reservations
shown on the plat and may proceed to use such land for private
use in accordance with applicable development regulations. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the streets and roads,
flood control basins or public drainageways necessitated by the
subdivision or land development and required for final approval.
The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation
of use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously
been mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed
to be the fair market value of an option to purchase the land
reserved for the period of reservation; provided that determination
of such fair market value shall include, but not be limited to,
consideration of the real property taxes apportioned to the land
reserved and prorated for the period of reservation. The developer
shall be compensated for the reasonable increased cost of legal,
engineering, or other professional services incurred in connection
with obtaining subdivision approval or site plan approval, as the
case may be, caused by the reservation.
B. Street.
1. General. The arrangement of streets not shown on the master plan
or official map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate
extension of existing streets and, where necessary in order to
promote the orderly flow of traffic, and for the safety, welfare and
convenience of the public, shall be such as to provide for the
appropriate extensions to adjoining properties.
2. Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths. The right-of-way and pavement
widths shall be measured from abutting lot line to abutting lot line
and shall not be less than the following:
a. Arterial and primary roads: right-of-way, as required by the
state or county.
b. Secondary roads: right-of-way, as required by the state or
county.
c. Collector streets: right-of-way, 50 to 60 feet; pavement, 30 to
40 feet.
§ 16.18.110 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.110
1.01:486
d. Non-residential minor and marginal access streets: right of
way 50 feet; pavement width 26 to 30 feet. [Amended by Ord.
06-11]
e. Cul-de-sac Turnarounds. Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a
minimum radius of 25 feet and minimum right of way radius of
30 feet. A landscaped island should be provided where
appropriate. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
f. Internal or Service Roads. The right-of-way and pavement
widths for internal roads in multifamily, commercial and
industrial developments shall be determined by the Planning
Board on an individual basis, and shall in all cases be of
sufficient width and design to safely accommodate the
maximum traffic, parking, loading and access for emergency
equipment, but in no case shall the pavement be less than the
24 feet in width for two-way traffic.
g. Residential access streets shall meet the requirements of the
Residential Site Improvement Standards with the minimum
roadway width being 22 feet. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
C. Widening Existing Streets. Subdivisions that include existing streets
which do not conform to pavement and/or right-of-way widths as shown
on the master plan or official map, shall dedicate and improve to
Township specifications the additional width from the centerline of the
road abutting the property being subdivided. If the subdivision adjoins
one side of an existing road which does not meet standards, only onehalf
of the required extra width shall be dedicated and improved to
Township specifications.
When in the interests of traffic safety, health, convenience and good
planning a postponement of the installation of construction of a
widened roadway is desirable, the Planning Board may authorize such
postponement providing the developer shall deposit with the Township
the cost of the improvement in lieu of actually constructing or installing
same in the same manner as required in Section 16.16.010.
D. Street Design Standards.
1. Grades. Grades of arterial, primary and secondary roads shall be
determined by the state or county. Collector streets shall not
exceed 7%. Grades on other streets shall not exceed 9%. No street
shall have a minimum grade of less than 1%.
The Township Engineer may waive the minimum and maximum
grade requirements under particular circumstances.
2. Intersections. Street intersections shall be laid out as nearly at
right angles as possible and in no case shall be less than 60°. The
block course at intersections shall be rounded at the right-of-way
§ 16.18.110 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.110
1.01:487
line with a twenty-five-foot radius curve and at the curb line with a
curve having a radius of not less than 35 feet.
3. Jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall
be prohibited.
4. Reverse Curves. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be
introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector
streets.
5. Connecting Streets. When connecting street lines deflect from each
other at any one point by more than 10° and not more than 45° they
shall be connected by a curve with a centerline radius of not less
than 300 feet for minor streets and 600 feet for arterial and
collector streets.
6. Grade Changes. All changes in grade shall be connected by sag and
crest vertical curves and vertical curves shall not be less than 100
feet in length unless approved by the Township Engineer.
7. Dead-End Streets/Culs-de-Sac. Dead-end streets shall not be longer
than 1,200 feet unless authorized to be longer by the Planning
Board. They shall have a turnaround installed with a curb radius of
40 feet and shall be tangent wherever possible to the right side of
the street. The dead-end street should extend to the adjoining
property line to permit its extension to serve adjacent properties
with adequate provision made for the future extension of the street
to meet Township standards. Stub streets, those providing
connections to abutting properties shall be improved to the
property line.
8. Names. Streets shall not have a name which will duplicate or so
nearly duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing
streets. The continuation of an existing street shall have the same
name. All street names shall be approved by the Planning Board.
E. Blocks.
1. General. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads
shall be such as to accommodate the size of the lot required in the
area by the zoning ordinance and to provide adequately for sewage
disposal, convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street
traffic.
2. Pedestrian Crosswalks. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, public
rights-of-way through the blocks may be required in locations
deemed necessary by the Planning Board such as schools,
recreation areas and public buildings. Such rights-of-way shall be
at least 10 feet wide and may be improved by paving if so deemed
by the Planning Board. Block sizes for group housing, business or
industrial use shall be sufficient to meet all area and yard
requirements for such use.
§ 16.18.110 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.110
1.01:488
3. Easements. Rights-of-way and easements within blocks in
commercial, business or industrial areas shall be not less than 30
feet in width.
F. Lots.
1. General. Lot dimensions, front, side and rear yards and total area
in square feet shall not be less than the requirements of the zoning
ordinance of the Township.
2. Side Lines. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be a right
angle to streets and radial to curved streets.
3. Frontage. Each lot shall front upon a street and the frontage shall
not be less than required by the zoning ordinance as measured
along the building setback line and street right-of-way line. The
minimum frontage along a cul-de-sac shall be measured at
minimum required building setback line.
4. Setbacks. Where land has been dedicated for a widening of existing
streets, lots shall begin at such new street line as may have been
established, and all setbacks shall be measured from such line.
5. Substandard Suitability. Where there is a question of the suitability
of a lot or lots for their intended use due to factors such as rock
formations, flood conditions, high water table, sewage disposal,
excessive topographic slope or similar circumstances, the Planning
Board may, after adequate investigation, with professional
assistance, if deemed necessary, withhold approval of such lots.
6. Driveways. Driveways shall not be located where visibility is
impaired because of curves or topography. They shall be
constructed in accordance with Chapter 12.20.
7. Lots on Arterial or Collector Streets. Lots fronting on arterial or
collector roads shall, at the discretion of the Planning Board, be
serviced by a marginal access road or reverse frontage, to be
required to provide driveways with turnarounds as indicated in the
design sketches attached to this Title by reference.
G. Public Use, Service Areas, and Utility Placement. [Amended by Ord.
06-11]
1. Utility Easements. As determined by the Planning Board,
easements may be required for utility installation, existing or
future. Such easements shall be at least 20 feet wide and located
after consultation with the utility companies. Where underground
utilities are proposed outside of the right of way, a twenty-foot
underground utility easement shall be provided.
2. Drainage, Conservation and Historic Preservation Easements.
§ 16.18.110 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.110
1.01:489
a. Wetlands and Wetland Buffer/Transition Areas. Where property
to be subdivided contains wetlands and their associated
transition areas as confirmed by the State of New Jersey under
a Letter of Interpretation, said wetlands and transition area
shall be placed into conservation easements. Where a property
has wetlands, but the areas have not been confirmed by the
NJDEP under a Letter of Interpretation, the Wetlands
Transition area shall be 150 feet and shall be placed into a
conservation easement with the restrictions listed hereafter.
b. Watercourses. Where a property contains a watercourse, said
watercourse and a Riparian Buffer as required under Section
16.64.110.A of this chapter shall be placed into Drainage and
Conservation Easements.
c. Other Significant Physical Features. Where a property to be
subdivided contains significant features including but not
limited to wooded areas, steep slopes, aquifer recharge areas,
wildlife habitat, rock out-croppings, vistas, soil conditions, or
other significant horticultural, environmental, or natural
features determined by the Environmental Commission and/or
Planning Board to be desirous to preserve shall be placed in a
drainage and/or conservation easement.
d. Historic Structures. Any subdivision containing a structure
listed on, or determined to be eligible to be listed on the
National Register for Historic Places as listed within the
Township Historical Survey, Hunterdon County Historical
Survey, the New Jersey Register of Historical Places or the
National Register of Historic Places or as may be further
recommended by the Raritan Township Local Historians
Committee, an easement preventing the demolition or
substantial remodeling of the structure shall be given to the
Township.
e. Cemeteries and Burial Places. Any property to be developed
containing an unused or historical cemetery or burial place
shall provide an easement to the Township preventing the
removal or alteration of the cemetery or burial place.
f. Easement Preparation. The Township Attorney shall be
responsible for the preparation of any easements dedicated to
the Township. The applicant will be responsible for providing
the Township with the following:
i. One copy of the approved plan.
ii. Easement descriptions approved by the Township
Engineer.
iii. One copy of the resolution of approval.
§ 16.18.110 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.110
1.01:490
iv. One copy of a deed for the property showing the current
property owner.
H. Bufferyards. [Amended by Ord. 02-54]
1. Where residential lots are proposed adjacent to existing higher
intensity residential uses and/or zones (as defined under Section
16.20.040), non-residential uses or existing non-residential zones,
bufferyards shall be provided between such uses in accordance
with Section 16.20.040 of this chapter.
2. Where provided between such uses, said bufferyards may be placed
on separate lots. Said lot(s) would not be required to meet other lot
requirements found elsewhere in this chapter. Said lot(s) would be
required to be permanently deed restricted from further
development.
3. Any bufferyard shall be permanently covered by an appropriate
easement or similar restriction preventing the removal or
destruction of said bufferyard.
4. If a bufferyard is to be located on an individual and/or separate lot,
the Planning Board shall require the establishment of a
homeowners' association to own and maintain said bufferyard.
I. State Open Waters. No structure shall be built within 50 feet and no
disturbance of soil or vegetation shall occur within 25 feet of the top of
the bank of any State Open Waters (as defined or determined by the N.J.
Department of Environmental Protection). Should the water course
meet the definition of both state open waters and an existing stream
carrying water on an average of six months of a year, and/or shown on a
United States Department of the Interior Geological Survey
quadrangle, then the large of the riparian buffer requirements found
within Section 16.64.110 shall be met. [Amended by Ord. 06-21]
J. Tree Protection. [Amended by Ord. 10-27]
1. To the greatest extent practicable, trees eighteen inch DBH and
larger, tree rows and hedgerows should be preserved. Only those
trees necessary to permit the construction of buildings, structures,
streets, driveways, infrastructure and other authorized
improvements shall be removed. Where clusters of trees exist on
the site or are contiguous with adjacent sites, fragmentation of the
cluster shall be avoided where possible. Existing vegetation shall
be preserved to the greatest extent feasible although invasive
plants may be removed provided they are replaced with native
plants.
2. A report from the Community Forest Committee and the Township's
Landscape Architect shall be requested for recommended areas of
tree preservation.
§ 16.18.110 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.110
1.01:491
§ 16.18.120. Wetlands Delineation. [Prior code § 15-7.12; amended
by Ord. 90-6]
3. The appropriate approving authority shall have the option of
requiring a conservation easement to protect any or all trees or
tree canopy areas to remain on site.
A. A wetlands analysis shall be performed to identify wetlands as defined
by the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act, P.L. 1987, C. 156, to
identify the wetlands by type, (ordinary, intermediate and exception
resource value) and to specify the required transition area. On-site
wetlands and transition areas required for on-site wetlands shall be
delineated. A transition area may be located and required by the
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act, P.L. 1987, c. 156 on a property
even through the freshwater wetlands adjacent to that transition area is
located on a different property. In such case, the transition area as
required shall be delineated on the subdivision plat or site plan. A
report from the person or firm preparing the wetlands analysis shall be
prepared and submitted identifying the above or stating that no
wetlands and/or transition areas affect the subject site. Alternatively, a
letter of interpretation from the state of New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection determining the absence or presence of
wetlands will be acceptable. If the letter of interpretation determines
the presence of wetlands, a delineation shall be prepared. In
accordance with the Freshwater Protection Act rules a delineation of a
wetlands boundary for a parcel of less than one acre may be by letter of
interpretation.
Such wetlands and transition areas shall be identified by metes and
bounds description on a minor subdivision plat, preliminary plat of a
major subdivision, minor site plan and preliminary and final site plan.
When the applicant intends to request a transition area waiver or
intends to utilize a transition area averaging plan, such shall either
be approved and granted by N.J.D.E.P. or the applicant shall show the
required transition area (without transition waiver and/or transition
area averaging) and note on the submission the area of waiver and/or
averaging plan to be requested by N.J.D.E.P.
B. The wetlands area shall be placed within a conservation easement to be
dedicated to the Township or other appropriate governmental agency
and such shall be indicated on a minor subdivision plat, preliminary
subdivision plat, final subdivision plat, minor site plan, preliminary site
plan and final site plan.
C. The responsible person who prepared the wetlands analysis shall
certify that the delineation on a subdivision or site plan is a true and
accurate delineation of the wetlands condition identified by field
investigation.
§ 16.18.110 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.120
1.01:492
§ 16.18.130. Traffic Analysis. [Prior code § 15-7.13; amended by
Ord. 90-6]
A traffic analysis and report shall consist of at least the following:
§ 16.18.140. Aquifer Test and Analysis — For Major Subdivisions.
[Amended by Ord. 05-4]
Applications for major subdivision approval shall follow the well testing
requirements found in Chapter 16.21.
D. If the Environmental Commission notifies the Municipal Agency that it
is not satisfied with the wetlands delineation and/or classification of
wetlands by type, the Municipal Agency may condition any favorable
action on such application on receipt of a letter of interpretation from
N.J.D.E.P. for verification of a wetlands boundary.
A. Estimate of trip generation from the proposed subdivision or site plan
indicating estimated twenty-four-hour trip generation, estimated peak
hour trip generation for development and estimated trip generation
during commuter peak hours;
B. Directional assignment of estimated trip generation to the existing and
any proposed street system, as appropriate;
C. Review of traffic volumes existing on streets in the area. (Existing
acceptable traffic volumes may be utilized. If such do not exist, traffic
volume counts at 15 minute intervals must be taken);
D. Review of other development activity in the area and consideration of
trip generation from these other proposed developments;
E. Project future background traffic volumes on affected streets for buildout
and intermediate development phase;
F. Review of street, intersections, jug handles, ramps, etc., in terms of
traffic carrying capacity (such may be expressed as a level of service) as
may be affected by the proposed development activity. No-build, buildout
and intermediate phases should be examined where appropriate;
G. Identification of streets, intersections, jug handles, ramps, etc., which
anticipated levels of service or other engineering considerations
indicate a need for improvement. Level of Service D or better is to be
maintained through build-out;
H. Recommend improvements to mitigate impacts;
I. Review of proposed on-site street system or on-site circulation system.
Review should include but not be limited to access, circulation,
emergency access, trucking and parking;
J. Preparation of a report with supporting data signed by the responsible
person.
§ 16.18.120 CODE ADOPTION § 16.18.150
1.01:493
§ 16.18.150. Aquifer Test and Analysis — For Nonresidential Use
Site Plans. [Amended by Ord. 05-4]
Applications for minor, preliminary, and preliminary and final site plan
approval shall follow the well testing requirements found in Chapter 16.21
§ 16.18.160. Natural Resource Inventory Report and Map.
[Amended by Ord. 06-11; Ord. 06-21]
Natural Resource Inventory Report and Map(s) showing and describing on
and within 1000 feet of property boundary:
Chapter 16.20
A. Intermittent and perennial streams, lakes, state open waters, and other
water bodies, including their classification and environmental
condition;
B. 100-year and 500-year floodplain;
C. Wetlands and transition areas;
D. Soils with legend showing soil names and characteristics;
E. Aerial extent of forest and tree cover;
F. Location of any contaminated areas;
G. The presence of any historic or cultural resources that are listed on the
Township Historical Survey, Hunterdon County Historical Survey, The
New Jersey Register of Historical Places or the National Register of
Historical Places.
H. The presence of any known cemetery(s) or burial sites;
I. The presence of any known archaeological sites;
J. The location of any known current or historical mining operations;
K. HUC-14 boundaries;
L. C-1 Waterways and Special Water Resource Protections Areas;
M. Wellhead Protection Areas;
N. Groundwater Recharge Areas;
O. Sanitary Sewer Service Area.
P. Public Water Service Area; and
Q. The presence or absence of rare, threatened, or endangered plants or
animals as evidenced on the site or as listed by the Natural Heritage
Program.
§ 16.18.150 RARITAN CODE § 16.18.160
1.01:494
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 16.20.010. Interpretation of Provisions — Waivers. [Prior code
§ 15-8.1; amended in 3-00 supplement]
A. The standards set forth in this chapter shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Township. If, however, the applicant can clearly
demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his or
her land, the literal enforcement of this chapter is impracticable or will
exact undue hardship, the Planning Board may permit such waivers as
may be reasonable and are within the general purpose and intent of the
rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter.
B. Checklist Waivers. If it can be demonstrated that, because of peculiar
conditions relating to the property or proposed construction, any of the
required plat details are not necessary to properly evaluate the plan,
the Planning Board may waive specific requirements. A written request
and explanation for the waiver request must accompany the application
submission.
C. Reservations of Public Areas.
1. If the Master Plan or the official map provides for the reservation of
designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or
public areas within the proposed development, the Planning Board,
before approving a site plan, may further require that such streets,
ways, basins or areas be shown on the plan in locations and sizes
suitable to their intended uses. The Planning Board may reserve
the location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or areas shown
on the plan for a period of one year after the approval of the final
plan or within such further time as may be agreed to by the
developer. Unless during such period or extension thereof the
Township shall have entered into a contract to purchase or institute
condemnation proceedings according to law for the fee or a lesser
interest in the land comprising such streets, ways, basins or areas,
the developer shall not be bound by such reservations shown on the
plan and may proceed to use such land for private use in
accordance with applicable development regulations.
2. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the streets and
roads, flood control basins or public drainageways necessitated by
the land development and required for final approval.
3. The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation
of use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the
fair market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the
period of reservation, provided that determination of such fair
market value shall include, but not be limited to, consideration of
§ 16.18.160 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.010
1.01:495
§ 16.20.020. Site Plan Submission Requirements.
the real property taxes apportioned to the land reserved and
prorated for the period of reservation. The developer shall be
compensated for the reasonable increased cost of legal,
engineering or other professional services incurred in connection
with obtaining site plan approval caused by the reservation. The
procedure for the payment of all compensation payable under this
chapter shall be provided for in other ordinances.
A. General. All maps and plans required to be submitted by this Title shall
conform to one of the following size configurations: 8 1/2 by 13 inches,
15 by 21 inches, or 24 by 36 inches. All applications shall include the
information as follows, except that the Planning Board may waive any
requirement or request additional information where it is clearly
appropriate to the particular application. Failure to comply shall render
such application incomplete.
B. Minor Site Plans. A minor site plan application shall include the
following information:
1. Two copies of an affidavit of ownership or letter from the owner
authorizing submission of the plat.
2. Twenty-five copies of a Wetlands Analysis and Report in
Accordance with Section 16.18.120.
3. When the development is to be located in the sanitary sewer
service area, written communication from the RTMUA that
adequate sewage treatment capacity has been reserved for the
development shall be submitted along with a copy of the
reservation agreement and/or proof of payment of deposit on
connection fee.
4. Two copies of ownership interest of corporation, limited liability
company, or partnership in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law.
5. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Site Plan
application form.
6. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Minor Site Plan
checklist form.
7. Township Application fee.
8. Township Escrow payment.
9. Twenty-five copies of a completed Raritan Township Variance
application form (if variances from Township ordinance are
requested or required).
§ 16.20.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.020
1.01:496
10. When the development is to be located in the public water service
area, 25 copies of correspondence from the public water company
indicating service can be provided.
11. Certification from Raritan Township Tax Collector that all taxes,
sewer charges, or other assessments on the entire tract have been
paid to date.
12. Copy of Hunterdon County Planning Board application form as
submitted to the Hunterdon County Planning Board.
13. Two copies of all existing protective covenants, deed restrictions,
or easements that apply to tract.
14. Completed W-9 form.
15. Aquifer test and analysis when the development on the site is to be
served by an onsite well or wells. Such aquifer test analysis and
report shall be submitted in accordance with Section 16.18.150 of
this Title.
16. Twenty-five copies of the Minor Site Plan Plat including the
following details and information:
a. Name of development;
b. Name and mailing address of owner and applicant;
c. Name of person preparing plat;
d. Location and Key Map. The entire tract to be developed, giving
the accurate location of all existing and proposed property and
street lines, rights-of-way, and including a key map at a scale
where one inch equals not more than 1,000 feet showing the
entire site and its relation to all features shown on the official
map and master plan and located within one-half mile of the
extreme limits of the site;
e. Date prepared and all revision dates;
f. North arrow;
g. Zoning district and that of adjoining properties;
h. Written and Graphic Scale used. Scale shall be no greater than
one inch equals 100 feet;
i. Tax Map Sheet, Block and lot numbers of the tract in
consideration;
j. Acreage of tracts proposed for development;
k. Location of existing and proposed structures on tract;
§ 16.20.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.020
1.01:497
l. Streets, Easements, Watercourses and Rights-of-Way. The
location of existing or proposed streets, roads, easements,
public rights-of-way, streams, wetlands, wetland transition
areas, state open waters, bridges, culverts, drainage ditches
and natural water-courses on the tract;
m. Existing and proposed drives and parking areas with sufficient
dimensions to show widths of pavement and parking area
dimensions;
n. Existing streets, rights-of-way and easements;
o. Name of owner, description of use, and estimated impervious
surface (except residential properties) of surrounding
properties;
p. Location of any existing and proposed utilities;
q. Location of any existing and proposed septic systems and
wells.
r. Floodplain Delineations. Minor site plans shall indicate flood
hazard area delineations for all permanent streams based upon
State Department of Environmental Protection delineations or
for the 100-year flood as directed by the Township Engineer.
s. Tree Preservation.
i. No more than 55% of the existing mature woodland tree
canopy within the property boundaries shall be removed.
(Not to be interpreted as 55% of the total lot area). The
location of the remaining 45% of the mature woodland tree
canopy to be preserved shall be noted on the landscape
plan. Steep slope limits of disturbance and maximum hard
surface requirements under Table I shall supersede this
section when appropriate. [Amended by Ord. 10-27;
Ord. 11-3]
ii. No tree that qualifies as a specimen and historic tree shall
be removed unless the applicant replants trees in
accordance with Section 16.20.040.T. [Amended by Ord.
10-27]
C. Information Required for Sketch Site Plans. A formal sketch site plan
application shall contain the following information:
1. Two copies of an affidavit of ownership or letter from the owner
authorizing submission of the plat.
2. Twenty-five copies of a Wetlands Analysis and Report in
Accordance with Section 16.18.120.
§ 16.20.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.020
1.01:498
3. When development is to be located in the sanitary sewer service
area, written communication from the RTMUA that adequate
sewage treatment capacity has been reserved for the development
shall be submitted along with a copy of the reservation agreement
and/or proof of payment of deposit on connection fee.
4. Two copies of ownership interest of corporation, limited liability
company, or partnership in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law.
5. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Site Plan
application form.
6. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Sketch Site Plan
checklist form.
7. Township Application fee.
8. Township Escrow payment.
9. When development is to be located in the public water service area,
25 copies of correspondence from the public water company
indicating service can be provided.
10. Certification from Raritan Township Tax Collector that all taxes,
sewer charges, or other assessments on the entire tract have been
paid to date.
11. Copy of Hunterdon County Planning Board application form as
submitted to the Hunterdon County Planning Board.
12. Two copies of all existing protective covenants, deed restrictions,
or easements that apply to tract.
13. Completed W-9 form.
14. Twenty-five copies of the Sketch Site Plan Plat including the
following details and information:
a. Name of development;
b. Name and mailing address of owner and applicant;
c. Name of person preparing plat;
d. Location and Key Map. The entire tract to be developed, giving
the accurate location of all existing and proposed property and
street lines, rights-of-way, and including a key map at a scale
where one inch equals not more than 1,000 feet showing the
entire site and its relation to all features shown on the official
map and master plan and located within one-half mile of the
extreme limits of the site;
e. Date prepared and all revision dates;
§ 16.20.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.020
1.01:499
f. North arrow;
g. Written and Graphic Scale used. Scale shall be no greater than
one inch equals 100 feet;
h. Tax Map Sheet, Block and lot numbers of the tract in
consideration;
i. Acreage of tracts proposed for development;
j. Zoning district and that of adjoining properties;
k. Location of existing structures on and within 200 feet of the
tract;
l. Streets, Easements, Watercourses and Rights-of-Way. The
location of existing or proposed streets, roads, easements,
public rights-of way, streams, wetlands, wetland transition
areas, state open waters, bridges, culverts, drainage ditches
and natural water-courses on and within 200 feet of the tract;
m. Existing and proposed drives and parking areas with sufficient
dimensions to show widths of pavement and parking area
dimensions;
n. Name of owner, description of use, and estimated impervious
surface (except residential properties) of surrounding
properties;
o. Location of any existing and proposed utilities;
p. Location of any existing and proposed septic systems and
wells.
q. Floodplain Delineations. Sketch site plans shall indicate flood
hazard area delineations for all permanent streams based upon
State Department of Environmental Protection delineations or
for the 100-year flood as directed by the Township Engineer.
r. Existing topography as taken from United States and Geodetic
Survey maps at twenty foot intervals and within 200 feet of
tract boundaries. The topography should be supplemented by
field observation to generally locate drainage divides, ditches,
swales and major topographic features which may not be
indicated on the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
sheets;
s. General location and indication of vegetation types of turf,
brush, shrubs, hedgerows, wooded areas and isolated shade
trees more than six inches in diameter breast high, and two
inches in diameter breast high for flowering and small trees
(less than eighteen inch in diameter breast high). [Amended
by Ord. 10-27]
§ 16.20.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.020
1.01:500
t. Proposed structures;
u. Soils pursuant to the Hunterdon County Soil Survey;
15. Additional Information Required for Office and Industrial Parks and
Shopping Centers:
a. A site analysis which shall indicate existing site features,
including:
i. Soils per the Hunterdon County soil survey, published by
the Soil Conservation Service, with descriptions and
suitability for development,
ii. Existing vegetation including fields, wetlands, isolated
tree areas, wooded areas and general description of
vegetation species,
iii. Geology including the location and description of aquifer
recharge areas and rock outcroppings,
iv. Slopes at intervals of 0% to 5%, over 5% to 10%, over 10%
to 20%; topography at two-foot contour intervals from field
survey and utilizing United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey datum,
v. Location of all streams, swales (wet and dry weather),
ponds, wetlands and areas of poor drainage,
vi. Direction of summer and winter winds,
vii. Areas of cold air drainage and channelized wind,
viii. Views to be preserved or screened,
ix. Location of nearest sanitary sewer and storm sewer, water
and electric service,
x. Location, width and condition of pavement of roads
adjoining project,
xi. Location of all structures within 200 feet of tract
boundaries;
b. A traffic study indicating:
i. Existing traffic flow and volume on surrounding
intersections,
ii. Capacity of existing roads and intersections,
iii. Proposed traffic flow and volume on surrounding roads
and intersections,
iv. Analysis of internal project traffic flow and volume,
§ 16.20.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.020
1.01:501
v. Recommendations for upgrading surrounding roads and
intersections to meet increased traffic from the project;
c. A community facilities impact study including the impact on
police, fire and emergency agencies, including equipment and
manpower.
16. Additional Information Required for PRDs and Senior Citizen
Developments:
a. All information required for office and industrial parks and
shopping centers;
b. Expanded community facilities impact study including impact
on school facilities in terms of additional children in
elementary, middle, junior high school, resulting from the
project. The analysis shall be coordinated with the proposed
phasing plan for the project, if any;
c. A population analysis, which shall include the total number of
residents of the project and general age breakdown. The
analysis should be coordinated with the proposed phasing plan
for the project;
d. Tentative subdivision and site plan arrangements including:
i. Lot arrangement,
ii. Vehicular circulation system including right-of-way and
pavement widths,
iii. Bicycle and pedestrian circulation system including
sidewalks, trails, paths and crosswalks and their general
widths,
iv. Recreation areas showing proposed active and passive
recreation facilities,
v. Open space plan, including total acreage by phase,
vi. General stormwater and soil erosion and sediment control
plan,
vii. Parking, including number of parking spaces and the
dwelling units and facilities to be served by each area,
viii. Building locations in multifamily, recreation and
commercial areas,
ix. Large-scale conceptual landscaping plan,
x. Architectural theme of buildings,
xi. Signing plan for vehicular control,
§ 16.20.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.020
1.01:502
xii. Phasing plan and unit mix per phase,
xiii. Schedule indicating total acreage; acreage of dwelling unit
types, commercial area, open space, roads, active
recreation areas. The schedule should show conformance
with zoning ordinance requirements when appropriate.
D. Preliminary Site Plans and Combined Preliminary and Final Site Plan
applications. The preliminary site plan application and/or a combined
preliminary and final site plan application shall include the following
minimum information:
1. Two copies of an affidavit of ownership or letter from the owner
authorizing submission of the plat.
2. Two copies of a letter of intent stating the type of structure to be
erected and its use, the approximate start date of construction, and
any proposed phasing plan for site plan.
3. Twenty-five copies of a Wetlands Analysis and Report in
Accordance with Section 16.18.120.
4. Twenty-five Copies of an Aquifer Test and Analysis and Report in
accordance with Section 16.18.150, when the application is
proposed to be serviced by on-site wells.
5. Twenty-five copies of a Traffic analysis and report in accordance
with Section 16.18.130.
6. When the development is to be located in the sanitary sewer
service area two copies of written communication from the RTMUA
that indicates that adequate sewage treatment capacity has been
reserved for the development shall be submitted along with a copy
of the reservation agreement and/or proof of payment of deposit on
connection fee.
7. Two copies of ownership interest of corporation, limited liability
company, or partnership in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law.
8. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Site Plan
application form.
9. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Preliminary/
Final Site Plan checklist form.
10. Township application fee.
11. Township escrow payment.
12. Twenty-five copies of a completed Raritan Township variance
application form (if variances from Township ordinance are
requested or required).
§ 16.20.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.020
1.01:503
13. When development is to be located in the public water service area,
two copies of correspondence from the public water company
indicating service can be provided.
14. Certification from Raritan Township Tax Collector that all taxes,
sewer charges, or other assessments on the entire tract have been
paid to date.
15. Copy of Hunterdon County Planning Board application form as
submitted to the Hunterdon County Planning Board.
16. Two copies of all existing protective covenants, deed restrictions,
or easements that apply to tract.
17. Where common open space is to be provided; two copies of a letter
detailing the proposed use and ownership of said open space.
18. Five hard copies and one pdf copy of the site development storm
water management plan in accordance with Chapter 16.84.
[Amended by Ord. 06-21]
19. Completed W-9 form.
20. Twenty-five copies of the site plan plat in accordance with the
following:
a. Name of development;
b. Name and mailing address of the applicant and the owner;
c. Name, mailing address, seal, signature and professional
designation of the person preparing the plat;
d. Name of owners and block and lot numbers of all contiguous
land and of property directly across the streets and railroads as
shown by the most recent tax records of all municipalities in
which such properties lie or to which they are adjacent;
e. Location map showing the entire tract and the relationship to
all features within one-half mile of the extreme limits of the
tract as shown on the adopted master plan or official map of
the Township and Hunterdon County. Scale of the map shall be
shown;
f. Date prepared and all revision dates;
g. North arrow;
h. Written and graphic scale;
i. Plat scale shall not be smaller than one inch equals 60 feet.
Where it is physically impossible to show the entire tract on
one sheet of maximum size of 24 by 36 inches, a separate sheet
§ 16.20.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.020
1.01:504
of a smaller scale may be utilized to show the entire tract to
supplement the more detailed sheets at the larger scale;
j. Lot dimensions and bearings based on the boundary survey;
k. Tax map sheet, block and lot numbers;
l. Zoning district and zoning of surrounding properties;
m. Area of tracts proposed for development in square feet and
acres;
n. Location of all waterways, ditches, swales, wetlands, wetland
transition areas, state open waters, and water bodies;
o. Floodplains for all permanent streams and intermittent
streams with flood potential as delineated for the floodway and
flood hazard area by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or, in the absence of such
information, for the 100-year flood pursuant to a method
approved by the Township Engineer;
p. Location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings,
structures, Street pavement, walks, rights-of-way, easements,
drives, parking areas, loading areas, paved areas, fire lanes,
utility poles, etc;
q. Building setbacks as required by the zoning ordinance,
dimensioned distances from all existing and proposed
buildings to the nearest property line, existing and proposed
building entrances, corner grade elevations, existing and
proposed square footage of building;
r. Floor area ratio, if applicable, pursuant to Schedule I located in
the Appendix to this Title;
s. Area of hard surfaces including gravel areas;
t. Floor plans and elevations of each new or altered building
facade. Height of proposed structures;
u. Location of drives and streets within 200 feet of the tract;
v. All existing physical features on the site and within 200 feet of
the site boundaries including streams, watercourse, wetlands,
wetland transition areas, state open waters, water bodies,
existing woodlands, and shrub areas, existing isolated trees
eight inches in diameter at breast height, and ornamentals two
inches in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet above existing grade,
and significant soil and hydrological conditions, such as
swamps, rocks and water flows;
w. Topography showing existing and proposed contours at five
foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater, and at two
§ 16.20.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.020
1.01:505
foot intervals for land of lesser slope to determine the general
slope and natural drainage of the land and the high and low
points for the tract being developed and for a distance of 200
feet. Topography shall be supplemented with sufficient grades
along curbs, road center lines, buildings, property corners,
tops of stream banks, and at other pertinent locations to
clearly delineate the proposed grading. All elevations and
contours shall be instrument verified and shall be based on
United States Coast and Geodetic Survey data;
x. Steep slope calculations in accordance with Section 16.64.130.
y. Soil types and boundaries pursuant to the Hunterdon County
soil survey including an analysis for development capability.
Information concerning fill material shall be supplied for any
filled soil areas;
z. Parking, loading and unloading areas shall be indicated with
dimensions, traffic patterns, access aisles and curb radii;
aa. A schedule shall be shown indicating the proposed number of
motor vehicle and bicycle parking spaces and the number
required by the zoning ordinance or requirements of this Title;
bb. A chart indicating the square footage of new or altered space
and the square footage of new or altered parking areas and
other hard or pervious surface area;
cc. Improvements such as roads, curbs, pavement, retaining walls,
fences and walls shall be indicated with cross sections,
construction details and dimensions;
dd. Improvements such as fences, dumpster enclosures, wheel
stops, benches, play equipment, lighting, trash receptacles,
etc., shall be indicated with the construction details and
dimensions as appropriate;
ee. Location and design of existing and proposed stormwater
management systems including drainage area map and
calculations of runoff and detention; septic systems; sanitary
sewer lines; hydrants; wells; public water supply lines; utilities
above and below grade; and methods of solid waste storage
and disposal;
ff. Items or features which are to remain or be removed both
above and below grade;
gg. The results and location of all abandoned, failed and passing
percolation tests; the location and results of all soil logs; the
date percolation tests and soil logs; were witnessed; and the
name of the Township witness;
§ 16.20.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.020
1.01:506
hh. The specific purpose of any easement or land reserved or to be
dedicated for any use;
ii. Detailed landscaping and buffering plan indicating what will
remain and what will be planted, including botanical and
common name, size, quantity, time of planting, planting and
staking/guying details, maintenance plans, mulched areas
specifying type, thickness and edge of mulched areas, and
whether plants are container, balled and burlapped (B and B)
or bare root. A schedule containing the following information
shall be included on the landscaping sheets; botanical and
common names, quantities, size, type of transplants (container,
B and B, bare root), and whether staked and guyed, and
landscaping calculations as per Section 16.20.04.D;
jj. Soil erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with the
soil erosion and sediment control ordinance of Raritan
Township;
kk. Lighting details as per Section 16.20.040.G;
ll. Detailed sign plan pursuant to Chapter 16.72, including
location, dimensions, area, style, lettering style, color,
construction, materials, etc., of all signs where ground, roof,
wall or of other sign type;
mm.Barrier-free construction details and facility locations;
nn. Staging and construction access plan for large projects;
oo. The following legends and certifications shall be included on
the preliminary plat and appropriately completed and/or
signed prior to submission:
i. Preliminary site plan of
Block _____ Lot _____ Zone _____ Date _____
Applicant __________
Mailing Address __________
Owner __________
Mailing Address __________
ii. I consent to the filing of this site plan with the (Planning
Board) (Zoning Board of Adjustment) of Raritan Township.
Owner __________ Date __________
(The map preparer shall insert the name of the _____
board reviewing the site plan)
iii. I hereby certify that I have prepared this site plan and that
all dimensions and information are correct, and plans for
§ 16.20.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.020
1.01:507
all improvements are based upon topographical data that
has been instrument verified in the field.
Name __________
Title and License No. __________
iv. Four-by-five inch blank box for Township review stamp on
right side of plat;
v. Four-by-five inch blank box for County Planning Board
review stamp adjacent to Township review stamp box;
pp. Location and capacity of all petroleum, fuel or other storage
tanks both above and below grade. Indicate type of substance
stored in the tanks.
qq. Applicants for PRDs, senior citizen housing, shopping centers,
office and industrial parks which did not make a sketch plat
application submission, shall submit all preliminary and sketch
plat information when applying for preliminary approval;
rr. Fire Protection Systems. Plans shall show the location of
proposed fire systems and appropriate construction details in
accordance with Section 16.20.030.P;
ss. Current use and estimated impervious surface of all developed
adjacent properties.
tt. The site plan shall be based on a boundary survey not older
than five years.
uu. The size of the plat shall conform to the Map Filing Law.
vv. Tree Preservation.
i. No more than 55% of the existing mature woodland tree
canopy within the property boundaries shall be removed.
(Not to be interpreted as 55% of the total lot area). The
location of the remaining 45% of the mature woodland tree
canopy to be preserved shall be noted on the landscape
plan. Steep slope limits of disturbance and maximum hard
surface requirements under Table I shall supersede this
section when appropriate. [Amended by Ord. 10-27;
Ord. 11-3]
ii. No tree that qualifies as a specimen and historic tree shall
be removed unless the applicant replants trees in
accordance with Section 16.20.040.T. [Amended by Ord.
10-27]
21. Two copies of the Affordable Housing Production Plan in
accordance with Section 16.11.070.A. [Amended by Ord. 06-5]
§ 16.20.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.020
1.01:508
22. Twenty-five copies of a Natural Resource Inventory in accordance
with Section 16.18.160;
23. Pre-application meeting to be held with Township Engineer and
Township Planner;
24. In addition to paper plans, initial plan sets shall be submitted on CD
(or other acceptable archivable electronic format) in the most
recent version of AutoCAD and in pdf format. Subsequent revisions
shall be submitted in paper format and pdf (via e-mail acceptable).
The final approved revision shall be submitted in paper, AutoCAD
and pdf formats on CD (or other acceptable electronic format).
[Amended by Ord. 06-21]
25. Recycling Plan. The subdivision plat shall conform with the
requirements of Section 8.36.070 for new developments of multifamily
residential units, commercial, institutional, or industrial
properties. [Amended by Ord. 10-20]
E. Information Required for Final Site Plan.
1. Two copies of an affidavit of ownership or letter from the owner
authorizing submission of the plat.
2. Certification from Raritan Township Planner that all conditions of
preliminary approval have been met and that the preliminary site
plan have been stamped and signed by the Raritan Township
Planning Board.
3. Two copies of all approved Federal, State, County permits required
under preliminary approval.
4. Two copies of ownership interest of corporation, limited liability
company, or partnership in accordance with the Municipal Land
Use Law.
5. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Site Plan
application.
6. Twenty-five copies of completed Raritan Township Final Site Plan
checklist form.
7. Township application fee.
8. Township escrow payment.
9. Certification from Raritan Township Tax Collector that all taxes,
sewer charges, or other assessments on the entire tract have been
paid to date.
10. Copy of Hunterdon County Planning Board application form as
submitted to the Hunterdon County Planning Board.
§ 16.20.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.020
1.01:509
§ 16.20.030. Site Plan Performance Standards. [Prior code § 15-8.4;
amended by Ord. 98-1]
11. Two copies of all existing protective covenants, deed restrictions,
or easements that apply to tract.
12. Completed W-9 form.
13. Submission of two copies of any and all homeowners association
documentation, where applicable.
14. When the development is to be located in the sanitary sewer
service area two copies of written communication from the RTMUA
that indicates that adequate sewage treatment capacity has been
reserved for the development shall be submitted along with a copy
of the reservation agreement and/or proof of payment of deposit on
connection fee.
15. When the development is to be located in the public water service
area, two copies of correspondence from the public water company
indicating service can be provided.
16. Twenty-five copies of detailed, colored elevations, including the
height of the buildings, and floor plans of each building facade for
new or altered existing buildings;
17. Twenty-five copies of the final site plan plat in accordance with
Section 16.20.020.C. subparagraph 25, with the exception that the
plans shall be entitled final site plan. [Prior code § 15-8.2;
amended by Ord. 03-7]
A. Planning Board Review. In reviewing any site plan and prior to
preliminary approval thereof, the Planning Board shall find that the
below listed performance standards have been met.
B. Site Design. The design and arrangement of buildings and parking
areas should provide an aesthetically pleasing design and efficient
arrangement. Particular attention shall be given to safety and fire
protection, and the visual and functional impact on surrounding
development and contiguous and adjacent buildings and lands.
Compatibility of architectural design with the historic design features
of adjacent buildings and areas shall be considered.
C. Circulation and Parking.
1. Consideration shall be given to pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular
traffic movement within and adjacent to the site with particular
emphasis on the provision and layout of parking areas, off-street
loading and unloading, movement of people, bicycles, goods and
vehicles from access roads, within the site, between buildings, and
between buildings and vehicles. The Planning Board shall
determine which roads shall be public and which shall remain
§ 16.20.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.030
1.01:510
private in multifamily, townhouse and industrial park
developments.
2. The Planning Board shall ensure that all parking areas are
appropriately landscaped and spaces are easily usable and are
safely and conveniently arranged.
3. Access to the site from adjacent roads shall be designed so as to
interfere as little as possible with traffic flow on these roads and to
permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and egress on the site.
Major access improvements in critical environmental areas are to
be discouraged. The location and provisions of bikeways, sidewalks
and other pedestrian linkages shall be encouraged.
D. Landscaping.
1. Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site plan
design and integrated into building arrangements, topography,
parking and buffering requirements. Landscaping should include
trees, bushes, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, plants,
sculpture, art and the use of building and paving materials in an
imaginative manner.
2. The existing sense and appearance of the semirural, natural scenic
qualities of the Township should be encouraged in site
development. Such techniques as clustering, ample setbacks from
main roads, retention of existing vegetation and narrow minor
widths are encouraged as appropriate.
3. Landscaping should favor native species appropriate to the site.
[Amended by Ord. 06-11]
E. Buffers and Fences.
F. Open Space.
1. Open space shall be provided as part of any planned development.
The open space should be classified as developed (recreational,
passive or active) or undeveloped (natural) space. Open space can
serve as a buffer or help integrate buildings and uses. A recreation
facility or park can be used to integrate a project with the
surrounding neighborhood.
2. Developed open space used for active recreational use should not
be less than 2,000 square feet in area and should be located in
close proximity to the dwelling units it is intended to serve.
Developed open space generally should not be isolated in one
corner of a project, and all developed open space should be linked
to all other open spaces by pathway systems.
3. Undeveloped open space should have as a prime objective the
preservation of a site's natural amenities. Ponds, rock
§ 16.20.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.030
1.01:511
outcroppings, wooded areas, vistas, steep slopes, ravines and
stream beds are appropriate for undeveloped open space.
G. Lighting. Lighting of a type and style to ensure safe movement of
persons and vehicles and for security purposes shall be provided.
Lighting fixtures should be coordinated with the architectural theme of
the site. Lighting shall be placed so as to minimize glare and reflection
onto adjacent properties, streets and drives. For additional
requirements see Section 16.20.040.G. [Amended by Ord. 02-21]
H. Signs. Signs shall be designed to be harmonious with other signs and
architectural features on the site, and located and sized so as to achieve
their purpose without hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.
1. Design Theme. There should be a consistent sign design theme
throughout a particular project. The design theme would include
style of lettering, construction, material, type of pole or standard
(wood or metal, for example), size and lighting. Color of letters and
background is also important and should be carefully considered in
relation to the color of the material of buildings or where the signs
are proposed to be located.
2. Location. For safety, signs should be located so as not to create a
hazard, particularly at driveway and street intersections. The
location of signs should be selected in terms of visibility. Signs
designed to be seen from vehicles should be perpendicular to the
line of travel, while signs designed to be read on foot can be
perpendicular or parallel with walks.
I. Utilities. Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal, water supply and
other required utilities shall be reviewed and considered. Particular
emphasis shall be given to the protection of delineated floodplains,
reservations of stream corridors, establishment of drainage rights-ofway,
the adequacy of existing systems and the need for improvements,
both on-site and off-site, to control the rate, volume and velocity of
storm drainage, to provide for treatment of effluent and to maintain an
adequate supply of potable water at sufficient pressure.
J. Solid Waste Facilities. Garbage disposal provisions shall be reviewed
for adequacy of storage facilities, vermin and rodent control, location,
screening, serviceability, maintenance and related aesthetic
considerations.
K. Environmental Considerations. Environmental elements relating to
prevention of soil erosion, protection of significant vistas or views,
preservation of trees, protection of watercourses and resource, noise,
topography, soil and animal life shall be reviewed, and the design of the
plan shall minimize any adverse impact on these elements. Natural
resource inventory data and environmental impact information shall be
used in reviewing the design character of development in areas having
serious environmental constraints.
§ 16.20.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.030
1.01:512
§ 16.20.040. Design Standards.24 [Prior code § 15.8; amended by
Ord. 91-22; Ord. 98-1]
L. Street Furniture. The site plan shall provide for those elements of street
furniture made of the same or similar materials to ensure design
continuity and be appropriate to the particular use. These may include
phone booths, benches, bike racks, trash receptacles, bus shelters,
kiosks, planters and site directories.
M. Energy Conservation. The site plan should be designed to take
advantage of features of the site which will reduce energy usage in the
structures placed on the site, as well as utilizing features to ameliorate
undesirable microclimates on the site itself. Features of interest include
slope, exposure, wind, humidity, glare, canopy cover and the placement
of objects and plantings to take advantage of or ameliorate site
conditions.
N. Engineering Design Considerations. The site plan shall be designed in
accordance with accepted engineering design practice to produce a
safe, efficient and easy to maintain system of roads, utilities and
drainage, which function appropriately during and after construction.
O. Other Considerations. All site plan designs shall include provisions for
barrier-free design, maintenance of proposed improvements and
construction access.
P. Fire Protection Systems. The site plan shall provide for a source of
water for fire fighting purposes in systems approved by the Township
Fire Company in accordance with criteria set forth in Section
16.20.040.
A. Purpose of Design Standards.
1. The purpose of the design standards set forth in this Title are to
implement the performance standards established in Section
16.20.030. The performance standards provide a general frame of
reference for the applicant in preparing his or her site plan and also
provide guidance for the Township in reviewing the proposed
development. The Planning Board must find that these standards
have been met before an application is approved. These design
standards are intended to implement the performance standards.
The applicant may propose and utilize an alternative design
standard if it can be demonstrated to the Planning Board that it will
satisfactorily implement the applicable performance standard.
2. The Municipal Planner and Township Engineer will be available by
appointment to discuss the design standards contained herein with
respect to any site plan application. In addition, they are available
to meet for presubmission conference with all applicants.
24.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ordinance No. 2017-14 any component of the residential potion
permitted within the PCOS District shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
§ 16.20.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:513
Presubmission conferences are encouraged for all applicants at
sketch, preliminary and final stages of approval.
B. Site Design. In reviewing site plans for a multifamily residential
development, the following design and building layout principles should
be followed, except where zoning requirements provide for greater
distances or stricter standards.
1. Minimum spacing between buildings:
a. Between similar structures: in development groups (more than
one building or structures on tract), the following distances
should be maintained between similar use structures:
i. End wall (no openings) to end wall: 1/2 height of highest
wall; 15 feet minimum.
ii. Any building face to street curb: height of building face for
first 30 feet; 1 1/2 times building height for over 30 feet;
25 feet minimum.
iii. Any building face to parking; 1/2 height of highest building
face; 15 feet minimum.
iv. End wall to window wall; 1 1/2 height to highest wall; 30
feet minimum.
v. Window wall to window wall; two times height of highest
wall; 40 feet minimum.
b. Between buildings of different types:
i. Where buildings of different types will be developed as a
single development group, such as single-family and
townhouses, an appropriate buffer shall be used. This may
include fencing, facing similar uses toward each other,
natural areas, parks or recreation facilities or uses
providing gradual density changes between the two
dissimilar uses.
ii. Actual building spacing between the two types of uses
should be equal to the height of the lower density use
times the difference in the net density of the two uses.
Where a development abuts existing single-family
detached housing, the requirements for buffers as set
forth in the zoning ordinance shall be applied.
2. Townhouses:
a. Maximum of eight units in a single row: minimum width of unit:
18 feet; offset of a minimum of four feet between every two
units.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:514
b. Townhouses should be grouped in clusters with a maximum of
30 per cluster. Private parking should be located near the
entrances and outdoor living areas or patios adjoining open
space or paths leading to open space. Units should not front on
a through street excluding minor horseshoe-shaped streets.
c. Maximum density of townhouses should be as required by the
zoning ordinance. Each unit should have two means of ingress
and/or egress. End units should have at least a ten-foot side
yard. Units should be at least 50 feet from all tract boundary
lines unless abutting the same or higher density area, then 35
feet is permitted exclusive of required buffers.
d. Townhouses in each cluster should be consistent in terms of
architectural style and major design elements such as
materials, windows, roof lines, roof design, etc. Design
approval shall rest with the Planning Board.
3. Garden apartments:
a. Maximum of 16 units in any structure; and maximum length of
structures: 160 feet. Maximum density shall be as permitted in
the zoning ordinance.
b. Garden apartment structures should be grouped in clusters
with architectural design consistence in each cluster. Each unit
should have two means of access, one directly from the unit to
the outside and the other as approved by the Planning Board. A
minimum of four-foot building offset should be provided at
least every 40 feet.
c. Recreation facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts and
other game courts, are encouraged and shall be carefully
located to avoid problems of noise, lights and similar nuisance
elements affecting residential units. They shall be located not
less than 50 feet from any boundary, exclusive of buffers.
C. Circulation and Parking.
1. Off-Street Parking. In all zones, in connection with every industrial,
business, institutional, recreational, residential or any other use,
there shall be provided, at the time any building, structure or use is
erected or is enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking
for automotive and other vehicles in accordance with the
requirements set forth herein. Such facilities shall be completed
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The applicant
shall also meet the requirements of P.L. 1975, 221, requiring
parking spaces for the handicapped.
2. Design Standards for Off-Street Parking Areas.
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:515
a. Number of Parking Spaces Required: The number of off-street
parking spaces required and the size of parking stalls shall be
as set forth in the zoning ordinance. All reversed parking
spaces shall be indicated to evaluate the need for additional
parking spaces.
b. Parking areas should be curbed with granite or belgian block
or concrete curbing. Pressure-treated timber curbing may be
utilized where appropriate in small parking lots as approved by
the Township Engineer except on lots with access to or fronting
on a state highway.
c. Curbs may be used as wheel stops, provided that a three feet
overhang is provided. The length dimensions of parking spaces
may be adjusted by two feet when overhangs are utilized. Hard
surfaces should be utilized in overhang situations.
d. Hairpin or double parking space markings should be used to
delineate spaces. Lines should be four inches wide.
e. Parking areas should be properly lighted, paved and drained.
f. If a one-way traffic system is utilized, it should flow in a
counterclockwise direction. Angle parking should be used to
direct cars in the property direction. Provisions shall be made
for vehicles to circulate through a filled lot without having to
enter again from the street.
g. All parking spaces shall have clear sight distance for backing
out of the space.
h. Large parking areas should have raised sidewalks or planting
beds between bays at appropriate intervals. The walks or bed
should allow for car overhang and shall be a minimum of 10
feet in width.
i. Parking lots and access drives are to be set back at least 25
feet from residential zones, at least 20 feet from street right-ofway
lines, and at least 15 feet from all other property lines to
provide for adequate room for earth berms and screening and
buffering of the parking lot. The provisions of Section
16.70.020E.3. shall be observed.
j. When guardrails are required, they shall be constructed of
wood rails supported by wooden or Corten steel posts, as
approved by the Township Engineer, utilizing the detail
approved for use on the Garden State Parkway.
k. Off-Street Parking Requirements for a Combination of Uses.
The parking requirement for each use shall be computed
separately and then added together to compute the total
number of required parking areas. In all questionable or
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:516
doubtful cases, or for uses not enumerated, the Planning Board
shall determine the required number of spaces, utilizing as a
standard the requirements for the uses which are specifically
enumerated.
3. Parking Area Design Standards.
a. Access. There shall be adequate provisions for ingress and
egress to all parking spaces. The width of access drives or
driveways shall be determined as part of site plan review
depending on use, topography and similar consideration and as
determined by Chapter 16.70.
b. Size of Aisles. The width of all aisles providing direct access to
individual parking stalls shall be in accordance with the
requirements set forth below. Only one-way traffic shall be
permitted in aisles serving single-row parking spaces placed at
an angle other than 90°.
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
0° (parallel parking) 12
30° 14
45° 14
60° 18
90° (perpendicular
parking)
25
c. General Location. No off-street loading area shall be located in
a minimum required front yard. All parking shall be located in
bays generally perpendicular to driveways or roads. Paving
should not abut a building unless necessary for loading or for
pedestrian circulation.
d. Location in Different Zones. No access drive, driveway or other
means of ingress and egress shall be located in any residential
zone to provide access to uses other than those permitted to
such residential zone.
e. Sidewalk and Curbing. Sidewalks between parking areas and
principal structures, along aisles and driveways, at the head of
parking stalls and wherever pedestrian traffic shall occur, shall
be provided with a minimum width of four feet of clear
passable area and shall be raised six inches or more above the
parking area, except when crossing streets or driveways for
barrier-free access. Guardrails and wheel stops permanently
anchored to the ground shall be provided in appropriate
locations. Parked vehicles shall not overhang or extend over
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:517
sidewalk areas, unless an additional sidewalk width of three
feet is provided to accommodate such overhang.
f. Traffic and Pedestrian Island. Heavily utilized parking lots shall
have dividing islands as required by the Planning Board
between bays at appropriate intervals to provide pedestrian
safety and to confine vehicles to marked travel aisles within the
parking lot. Islands shall be at least 10 wide and shall be
landscaped with shade and ornamental trees or pedestrian
walks as required.
g. Landscaping and Drainage.
i. Parking areas shall be suitably landscaped to minimize
noise, glare and other nuisance characteristics as well as
to enhance the environment and ecology of the
surrounding area. Large parking lots shall be broken down
into separate lots of not more than 300 cars and separated
from other sections by landscaping, and similar elements.
Said parking areas shall have suitable drainage facilities
as required by the Township Engineer and shall conform to
the requirements of Subsection C.3.e. and C.3.f.
ii. Off-tract drainage facilities and structures requiring
enlargement, modification or reconstruction resulting in
part from, or totally as the result of, the proposed
development shall be subject to off-tract improvement
requirements and standards as established by the
Township.
h. Lighting. Lighting standards for parking areas shall follow the
requirements of Section 16.20.040.G. [Amended by Ord.
02-21]
i. Markings and Access. Parking stalls, driveways and aisles shall
be clearly marked and delineated. The Planning Board may
require that certain areas be maintained for fire fighting or
other emergency purposes, and these areas shall be
appropriately designated.
4. Circulation Systems for High-Density Residential Developments.
High-density residential developments should be serviced by a
complete loop street system of at least 30 feet in width affording at
least two means of ingress/egress to the site. Crossovers between
the legs of the loop should be provided. When a complete loop
system is not practical, a thirty-four to forty-foot wide street with a
divided roadway as the entrance should be provided or some other
means of ensuring access for emergency vehicles.
5. General Circulation and Parking Design Principles.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:518
a. Parking space allocations should be oriented to specified
buildings.
b. Parking areas would be designed to focus on major walkways.
c. Where pedestrians must cross service roads or access roads to
reach parking areas, crosswalks should be clearly designated
by pavement markings or signs, or by placing of different
pavement materials. Crosswalk surfaces should be raised
slightly to indicate them to drivers, unless drainage problems
would result. A one-way car movement (to the left or
counterclockwise) should be encouraged. A major loop should
be developed around the parking areas and parking bays
should run perpendicular off the road.
d. Driveways should approach from the right to permit
passengers to alight to or from the sidewalk.
e. Whenever possible, one-way traffic should be established at
building entrances.
f. Where buses are a factor, bus shelters and bus indentation
slots off the roadway should be provided.
g. Roads and driveways from main roads should be located at
grade and not below the crest of vertical curves.
h. Parking spaces should be kept at least 50 feet from the
intersection of the ingress access with the street.
i. An indented area for last car maneuvering shall be provided.
j. Ingress and egress for the site should be minimized and
provided with acceleration/deceleration lanes with large curb
radii to permit ease of access to the parking lot or main road
without backing up traffic.
k. Design of islands should consider snow removal operations and
not create an undue hindrance for this operation.
l. All sidewalk intersections should be flared beginning 24 inches
before the intersection on all legs of the intersection.
6. Off-Street Loading Requirements.
a. In any zone, in connection with every building or buildings,
group or part thereof, hereafter erected which is to be
occupied by industrial, office, laboratory, commercial or
distribution uses, there shall be provided and maintained, on
the same lot with such building, off-street loading berths in
accordance with the requirements set forth below.
b. Each loading space shall be no less than 12 feet in width, 50
feet in length and 14 feet in height, and may not occupy any
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:519
part of any required front, side or rear yard; provided,
however, that on lots on which the rear or side yard abuts a
railroad, such loading space may occupy the rear or side yard.
Uses
Floor Area
(square feet) Load Berths
Schools 15,000 or more 1
Hospitals and
nursing homes (in
addition to space
for ambulances)
From 10,000 to
30,000
For each additional
30,000 or fraction
thereof
1
1 additional
Undertakers and
funeral parlors
5,000
For each additional
5,000 or fraction
thereof
1
1 additional
Hotels and offices From 10,000 or more 1
Retail,
commercial,
planned
commercial and
industrial groups
wholesaling,
manufacturing and
industrial uses
From 5,000 or 15,000
Over 15,000 and up to
30,000
Over 30,000 and up to
50,000
Over 50,000 and up to
75,000
For each additional
100,000 or fractional
thereof
1
1
2
3
4
1 additional
7. Joint Facilities for Off-Street Parking or Loading. Off-street parking
and loading facilities for separate uses may be provided jointly if
the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum of
the separate requirements for each use; provided, however, that if
the time of use of such spaces by a participating use does not
overlap with the time of use by any other participating use, the
number of spaces may be reduced to the number required for the
most intensive use or uses.
8. Maintenance of Off-Street Parking and Loading Area. Every parcel
of land hereafter used as a public or private off-street parking or
loading area shall be maintained in good condition, free of hazards
and deterioration. All pavement areas, sidewalks, curbs, drainage
facilities, lighting, bumpers, guardrails, markings, signs,
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:520
landscaping and other improvements shall be maintained in
workable, safe and good condition.
9. Waiver of Parking and Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Requirements. If any applicant can clearly demonstrate to the
Planning Board that, because of the nature of his or her operation
or use, the parking and/or loading and unloading requirements of
this section are unnecessary or excessive, the Planning Board shall
have the power to approve a site plan showing less paved parking
or unloading area than is required by this chapter; provided,
however, that a landscaped area of sufficient size to meet the
deficiency shall be set aside and reserved for the purpose of
meeting future off-street parking or unloading requirements in the
event that a change of use of the premises shall make such
additional off-street facilities necessary.
10. Location of Driveways.
a. All entrance and exit driveways shall be located to afford
maximum safety to traffic, to provide for safe and convenient
ingress and egress to and from the site, and to minimize
conflict with the flow of traffic.
b. Any exit driveway or driveway lane shall be so designed in
profile and grading, and located to provide the following
minimum sight distance measured in each direction. The
measurements shall be from the driver's seat of a vehicle
standing on that portion of the exit driveway with the front of
the vehicle a minimum of 10 feet behind the curbline or edge of
the shoulder with the height of the eye 3.75 feet to the top of
an object 4.5 feet above the pavement.
Allowable Speed of
Road Required Sight Distance in Feet
(mph) Left Turn Right Turn
25 250 200
30 350 260
35 450 350
40 530 440
45 630 550
50 740 700
c. Where a site occupies a corner of two intersecting roads, no
driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50 feet of the
point of tangency of the existing or proposed curb radius of
that site or from the right-of-way line of the intersecting street,
whichever is greater.
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:521
d. No part of any driveway shall be located within a minimum of
15 feet of a side property line. However, the Planning Board
may permit a driveway serving two or more adjacent sites to be
located on or within 10 feet of a side property line between the
adjacent site.
e. No entrance or exit driveway shall be located on a rotary ramp
of an interchange or within 100 feet of the beginning of any
ramp or other portion of an interchange or jughandle.
f. Where two or more two-way driveways connect a single site to
any one road, a minimum clear distance of 100 feet measured
along the right-of-way line shall separate the closest edges of
any two such driveways. If one driveway is two-way and one is
one-way driveway, the minimum distance shall be 70 feet.
g. Driveways for uses on adjacent lots shall be no closer than 40
feet at the closest edges of the driveway as measured at the
right-of-way line.
11. Driveway Angle.
a. Two-Way Operation. Driveways used for two-way operation
shall intersect the road at an angle to as near 90° as site
conditions will permit and in no case will be less than 60°.
b. One-Way Operation. Driveways used by vehicles in one
direction of travel (right-turn only) shall not form an angle
smaller than 45° with a road, unless acceleration and
deceleration lanes are provided.
12. Driveway Dimensions. The dimensions of driveways shall be
designed to accommodate adequately the volume and character of
vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto the land
development for which a site plan is prepared. The required
maximum and minimum dimension for driveways are indicated
below. Driveways serving large volumes of daily traffic or traffic of
over 15% truck traffic shall be required to utilize high to maximum
dimensions.
One-Way Operation
Driveways* Width
(feet)
Two-Way Operation
Driveways* Width
(feet)
3 to 10 family
residence
10-15 18-26
10 family or over 15-25 24-30
Commercial and
industrial
15-30 25-40
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:522
* NOTE: All driveways shall be six feet wider at the curb line,
and this additional width shall be maintained for a distance
of 20 feet into the site. Driveway curb radii shall be designed
to permit vehicles using the site to turn into or out without
encroaching on an adjacent land of either the driveway or
the intersecting road. Channelization islands should be greater
than 50 square feet in area and curbed. Smaller islands should
be painted.
13. Driveway Surfacing. The surface of any driveway shall be
constructed with a permanent pavement of a type specified and
approved by the Township Engineer and shall normally be four
inches bituminous stabilized base topped with two inches FABC
surface. Such pavement shall extend to the paved portion of the
road and shall extend throughout the area defined by the required
driveway dimensions specified above.
14. Driveway Profile. Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be flat
enough to prevent the dragging of any vehicle undercarriage.
Should the sidewalk be so close to the curb at a depressed curb
driveway as to cause the ramp to be too steep and be likely to cause
undercarriage drag, the sidewalk shall be appropriately lowered to
provide a suitable ramp gradient.
15. Driveway Grades. Driveways shall not have a grade in excess of
10% over the entire length. The first 25 feet of driveway should
grade toward the intersecting road and not exceed 6% unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Board. Driveways shall not be
located where visibility is limited because of curves or topography.
The maximum difference between grades should not exceed 8%.
16. Acceleration Lanes. Where a driveway serves right-turning traffic
from a parking area providing 200 or more parking spaces and the
road has peak hour traffic volume exceeding 750 vehicles per hour,
an acceleration lane shall be provided which is at least 250 feet
long and at least 10 feet wide measured form the road curb line. A
minimum thirty-five-foot curb return radius shall be used from the
driveway to the acceleration lane.
17. Deceleration Lanes.
a. Where a driveway serves an entrance to land development
providing 100 or more parking spaces, a deceleration lane
shall be provided for traffic turning right into the driveway
from the road. The deceleration lane shall be at least 200 feet
long and at least 10 feet wide measured from the road curb
line. A minimum thirty-five-foot curb return radius shall be
used from the deceleration lane into the driveway.
b. In instances where there is insufficient frontage to
accommodate the required length of acceleration or
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:523
deceleration lane, a separate right turn ramp 18 feet in width
having a turning radius of 75 feet is to be provided. If an island
is provided, the throat width is to be 23 feet onto or out of the
site.
18. Reverse-Frontage Roads. Reverse-frontage or parallel access roads
shall be required by the Planning Board upon analysis and
recommendation of the Township Engineer where the volume of
traffic or configuration of the road and adjoining intersections
requires same for safety and to keep traffic easily flowing.
D. Landscaping.
1. A detailed landscaping plan shall be submitted with each final site
plan application. The plan shall identify existing and proposed
trees, shrubs, bushes, plant material and ground cover, and natural
features such as boulders and rock outcroppings/. It should show
where they are or will be located, and the planting details and
specifications.
2. Landscaping shall be specific as to the location, size, spacing,
quantity and species (botanical and common name) of all plants, as
well as the location, perimeter outline, type and thickness of all
mulches. Size, quantity, species and other pertinent information
shall also be listed in the form of a schedule on the landscaping
plan. Where turf is anticipated, topsoiling, seeding or sodding,
fertilizing, liming and water specifications shall be provided.
Planting details (staking, fertilizing, watering, soil mixture, etc.)
specific to soil conditions and the exposure of the site shall also be
provided.
3. The landscaping plan shall include the following information
regarding existing trees and vegetation: [Amended by Ord.
10-27]
a. The location of the tree canopy within the property boundaries.
Identify any areas of clear cutting which have occurred on the
property within the last five years. [Amended by Ord. 11-3]
b. Trees that qualify as specimen and historic trees.
c. Clear labeling of individual trees to be preserved within the
area of development/limit of disturbance with their drip lines
noted.
d. Clear labeling of the trees intended for removal and the
location of replacement trees in compliance with Section
16.20.040.S.
e. The location of existing and proposed buildings/structures,
driveways and parking areas.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:524
f. The plan shall provide a schedule of the size and species of
individual trees with a DBH of 10 inches or greater excluding
those within steep slopes (over 25%), wetlands, floodplains,
and riparian or associated buffers.
g. Proposed methods to protect the existing trees and growth
during and after construction in compliance with Section
16.20.040.N.2.
4. The following principles should be followed:
a. Locate landscaping to provide for climate control. For example,
shade trees on the south to shield the hot summer sun, and
evergreens on the north and northwest for windbreaks;
b. Use landscaping to accept and complement buildings. For
example, groupings of tall trees to break up long, low buildings
and lower plantings for taller buildings;
c. Landscaping should be provided in public areas, recreation
sites and adjacent to buildings;
d. Vines and climbing plants should be considered for large
expanses of walls for reducing heat build-up and aesthetics;
e. Consider massing trees as critical points rather than in a
straight line at predetermined intervals along streets. Vary
types by neighborhood. At least two types of trees should be
used for environmental diversity;
f. Groundcover may be used extensively to reduce erosion and is
encouraged on slopes;
g. Provide for a variety and mixture of landscaping. The variety
should consider susceptibility to disease, colors, season,
texture, shapes, blossoms and foliage;
h. Local soil conditions and water availability should be
considered in the choice of landscaping;
i. Consider the impact of any proposed landscaping plan at
various time intervals. Shrubs may grow and eventually block
sight distances. Foundation plants may block outbuildings;
j. It is preferable to have fewer large specimens than more
smaller ones;
k. Deciduous trees should be at least 1 3/4 inch to two inch
caliper at planting, and evergreens should be at least four feet
tall. Shrubs should be at least 18 to 24 inches tall at planting.
All plantings should be balled and burlapped unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Board;
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:525
l. Street trees should be selected to fit the space provided, wide
spreading trees planted where there is room, and small or
narrow trees in restricted areas;
m. Entrance to sites deserve special landscaping treatment;
n. Existing large trees should be saved by not varying the grade
around the trees by more than six inches to 12 inches, by
construction of tree wells and walls, and by erecting protective
fences during construction activities. Maximum effort should
be made to save groups of trees rather than individual ones;
o. Off-street parking lots designed to accommodate more than 25
vehicles shall be landscaped so that landscaping equal to at
least 15% of the parking area is provided in the manner
specified below.
The parking area is that area devoted to parking spaces, aisles
and space back up area and shall generally consist of such
areas within curbing but excluding building, access aisles
leading from a street to the parking area, pedestrian walkways
and landscaped areas.
In calculating the landscaped area, the following may be
included:
i. Landscaping within the parking area consisting of
landscaped islands between rows of parking spaces and
islands at the end of parking rows,
ii. Landscaped areas which may extend into the parking area
from the perimeter of the paved area even though such
may be outside of the parking lot curbed area; and
landscaped areas where parking lot curbed areas as
extended would intersect. Examples of such are attached.
Proposed use of landscaped areas other than those
illustrated may also be used as part of the required
landscaping if approved by the Planning Board.
In determining whether to include such other areas as
part of the required parking lot landscaping, the Planning
Board shall find that such area is so located and
landscaped as to contribute to the objective that parking
areas be landscaped,
iii. Up to, but not to exceed, one-third of the required 15% of
landscaping in the parking area may be included in a
landscaped area along a street right of way line located
between the street right of way and parking spaces when
such parking spaces are proposed in the front and/or side
yard abutting a street are located between a building and
street right of way. Such area may include any such
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:526
bufferyard required between the street right of way and
parking spaces when such parking spaces are proposed in
the front and/or side yard abutting a street and located
between a building and street right of way (see Section
16.20.040.E). In no case shall landscaping along the
building face and/or foundation be included as part of
the required landscaping within a parking area. Building
facade or building foundation landscaping between a
building and a sidewalk generally paralleling such
building, or if no sidewalk generally parallels such
building, shall be landscaping between 15 feet of the
building facade and/or foundation. [Amended by Ord.
02-36]
iv. To be included as part of the required parking lot
landscaping such areas shall include trees and/or shrubs
as well as appropriate surface treatment,
v. At least one landscaping island containing a canopy tree
shall be planted every eight spaces within the parking lot.
Should the Board determine that the use precludes the
planting on trees within the parking area then the
developer shall be required to provide twice the number of
trees that would have been required in the parking area
elsewhere on site if possible, or off site in a separate
location to be approved by the Board if sufficient area on
site is not available. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
p. It is the intent to have parking lots canopied with trees to
reduce stormwater runoff. Light standards should also be
located in these islands or walkways;
q. Parking lot landscaping should be designed and located to
withstand the effects of snowplowing;
r. All landscaping in parking areas should be carefully located so
as not to obstruct vision. A variety of different types of trees
should be grouped to break up the mass of cars;
s. Plantings should be chosen to match the particular
microclimate and space restrictions to which they will be
exposed. For example, drought-tolerant plants should be
located where a plant will be surrounded by pavement, and
maples and other trees would not be located where their roots
can raise sidewalks;
t. Select trees that can withstand an urban environment in
parking lot locations;
u. All parking areas shall be screened from the street and
adjoining or adjacent properties. Screening shall include
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:527
planting, dropped or depressed parking lots, earth berms,
masonry walls or fences, or a combination of these elements;
v. Landscaping designed as buffers or screening on combination
with other screening devices should be a minimum of three
feet high at the time of planting and should consist of a
majority of evergreen plant materials. Screening shall be
carefully placed so as not to impair visibility or vehicles
entering or exiting parking areas;
w. Shade trees shall be located along all streets and drives but
outside all public road rights-of-way where possible. Applicants
should follow the shade tree planting plan requirements as
outlined in Section 16.20.040.D.4.
x. The provisions of Section 16.20.040.E. Buffers, Fences and
Bufferyards and of Chapter 16.74 the performance standards
of the zoning ordinance shall be observed. [Amended by Ord.
02-36]
y. Where existing trees are to be preserved, the grade of the land
located within the dripline shall not be raised or lowered by
more than six inches unless compensated by construction of
tree wells or retaining walls; and in no event shall tree wells or
retaining walls be less than six feet from the trunk of a tree.
[Amended by Ord. 10-27]
E. Buffers, Fences and Bufferyards.
1. Any new non-residential use or high intensity residential use (see
footnotes of Tables I and II of this section), or change in a nonresidential
use to a more intensive class of use, or expansion of an
existing non-residential or high intensity residential use by at least
25% of the floor area and/or impervious surface associated with the
use that is proposed, on a lot adjoining a lot containing a less
intensive class of existing use or a vacant lot zoned for less
intensive uses shall provide a transitional bufferyard and screening
meeting the requirements of this section. In the case of an
expansion of an existing use, where the degree of expansion does
not exceed 50%, such expansion need only provide a transitional
bufferyard and screening that meets the requirements of this
section to a degree proportional to the degree of expansion. For
example, a 30% expansion of an existing use shall provide a
transitional bufferyard meeting 30% of required bufferyard depth
and plant density requirements. These transitional bufferyard
regulations apply whether or not the adjoining lot is in the same
zoning district. [Amended by Ord. 02-36]
2. Location of Transitional Bufferyard and Screens. Transitional
bufferyards and screens shall be located:
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:528
a. Along the perimeter of a lot or parcel, but not within any
portion of an existing or proposed road right of a way; or
b. In instances where the area represented by a site plan is
significantly less than the total area of the lot(s) of record, the
Board may permit the screening required between the
proposed use and the adjacent lot(s) to be located in a
transitional bufferyard surrounding the smaller area provided
that;
i. The depth of the transitional bufferyard and type of
screening provided for the smaller area is equal to or
greater than required by Table I and II of this section; and
ii. The transitional bufferyards required in Table I of this
section are also provided around the perimeter of the
lots(s) of record; and
iii. The total area of the lot(s) of record, less the smaller area
represented by the subject site plan, could meet the
minimum requirements within the applicable zoning
district, if considered as if they were independent lot(s) of
record. [Amended by Ord. 02-36]
3. Depth of Transitional Bufferyards.
a. Required Bufferyard Depth. Transitional bufferyard depth
requirements are set forth in Table I of this section. To
determine the required bufferyard depth, first identify the
class of the proposed new, changed, or expanded use. Then
identify the class of each adjoining existing use and the zoning
of each adjoining vacant lot. Then use the matrix in Table I to
identify the required bufferyard depth (shown at the
intersection of the row associated with the proposed use and
the column associated with the adjoining use or vacant lot
zoning).
b. Overlap with Other Yards. In the event that a transitional
bufferyard depth requirement conflicts with yard requirements
within an applicable zoning district, the more stringent shall
apply. [Amended by Ord. 02-36]
4. Screening Required within Transitional Bufferyards.
a. Required Screening. Minimum screening requirements are set
forth in Table II of this section. To determine the required
screening type, first identify the class of the proposed new,
changed, or expanded use. Then identify the class of each
adjoining existing use and the zoning of each adjoining vacant
lot. Then use the matrix in Table II to identify the required
screening type (shown at the intersection of the row associated
with the proposed use and the column associated with the
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:529
adjoining use or vacant lot zoning). Required screening may be
composed of existing vegetation, planted vegetation, a fence, a
wall, a landscaped earthen berm, or any combination of these
screening measures. Examples and plantings guidelines are on
file with the Planning Board in the Planning and Zoning Office
and are referenced as "Bufferyard Planting Guidelines".
b. Types of Screens.
i. Type A Opaque Screen: A screen that is opaque year-round
from the ground to a height of at least 10 feet, with
intermittent visual obstructions from the opaque portion to
a height of at least 20 feet. The opaque screen is intended
to exclude all visual contact between uses and to create a
strong impression of spatial separation. A Type A screen
may be composed of fencing, walls, berms, landscaping or
any combination thereof as may be appropriate to the
specific site and use in question.
ii. Type B Broken Screen: The broken screen is intended to
create the impression of spatial separation between uses
without necessarily eliminating visual contact between the
spaces.
A screen composed of either:
One canopy tree per 30 lineal feet of bufferyard;
One under-story tree per 20 lineal feet of bufferyard;
One shrub per five lineal feet of bufferyard;
Any combination of the above; or
Any other screening that meets or exceeds the degree of
screening achieved by the above.
5. Alternative Transitional Bufferyards and Screening. Recognizing
that a transitional bufferyard is defined by both its depth and the
density of screening within it, the Board may allow a transitional
bufferyard's depth to be reduced by up to 50% from that specified
in Table I if the density of screening within the bufferyard is
increased to an equivalent degree - provided the bufferyard
remains deep enough to accommodate the healthy growth and
protection of the proposed screen plantings. Similarly, the Board
may also allow a transitional bufferyard's screening density to be
reduced by up to 50% from that specified in Table II if the
bufferyards depth is increased to an equivalent degree.
6. Additional Transitional Bufferyards and Screening Required.
a. In addition to any screening requirements found elsewhere in
this Title, any outside storage of junk, refuse, salvage, or
discarded materials shall be screened from adjacent rights-ofway
by means of Type A screening.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:530
b. Whenever a use is proposed along a collector street, county or
state road, a 10 feet deep transitional bufferyard and Type B
screening shall be required adjacent to the right of way.
[Amended by Ord. 02-54]
c. Whenever a non-residential use is proposed next to a
residential use and is separated from the residential use by a
public road, a 10 feet deep transitional bufferyard and Type B
screening shall be provided adjacent to the public right of way.
7. Uses and Structures Permitted within the Transitional Bufferyards.
a. A transitional bufferyard may contain utility lines, driveways,
or pedestrian or bicycle paths, provided that:
i. The proposed locations of such uses are necessary for
their proper functioning, and such uses cross the
bufferyard where feasible, rather than lie along the length
of the bufferyard; and
ii. The total width of the bufferyard is maintained; and
iii. No screen required by this ordinance is reduced or
eliminated.
b. Signs shall be permitted within transitional bufferyards
provided that:
i. They are completely screened from view from any point on
adjacent residential properties; and
ii. Placement of such signs shall not violate other provisions
of this Code.
c. Transitional bufferyards shall not be used for parking, loading,
storage, or any activity that is either part of or accessory to the
proposed use.
d. A transitional bufferyard may contain all or part of a storm
water management system provided that:
i. Said system meets requirements found in Section
16.20.040 of this chapter;
ii. No screen required by this section is reduced or
eliminated;
iii. Any detention basin shall be sufficiently landscaped and
graded so as to be aesthetically pleasing;
iv. The geometric or other man-made appearance of such
facilities shall be discouraged.
8. Requirements for Plants Used for Screening.
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:531
a. Use of Existing Vegetation Encouraged. Existing vegetation
that meets or exceeds applicable screening requirements may
be used to satisfy the requirements of this section, provided
the transitional bufferyard contains sufficient area surrounding
the vegetation to ensure its protection from encroachments
that may threaten its continued healthy growth.
b. Location and Spacing. Plants shall be staggered or clustered as
necessary to maximize screening objectives and to meet the
needs of the particular species of plants for root space, water,
light and circulation.
c. Minimum Height at Planting. Plantings shall follow minimum
planting guidelines as found in referenced document entitled
"Bufferyard Planting Guidelines" on file with the Planning
Board and available for review at the Planning and Zoning
office.
d. Minimum Height at Maturity.
i. Canopy trees, understory trees, and hedge plants shall be
of a variety that has a minimum mature height which will
meet the minimum screening requirements for which they
were chosen.
ii. Shrubs shall be of a variety that has an average mature
height of at least three feet.
9. Requirements for Fences, Walls and Berms Used for Screening.
a. Fences and Walls. Fences and walls shall be screened over at
least 50% of their exterior face area by plantings which provide
year-round screening to obstruct the view of the fence or wall
from adjacent properties. This may be achieved with a tight
evergreen hedge that is 1/2 the height of the fence or wall; or
by using plants other than the evergreen hedge meeting the
above requirement, provided that figures on the average
mature height and spread of each species to be planted are
submitted with the site plan for approval by the Board.
b. Berms. Berms shall be planted with trees, shrubs, vines,
grasses, or other groundcover. Part of a berm may be devoted
to a non-living screen such as a fence or wall.
10. Maintenance of Screenings. All screening shall be maintained to
continue its effectiveness. All plantings shall be guaranteed for a
period of two years after installation.
11. Clear View of Intersections. Transitional bufferyards and screens
shall not impede sight lines at driveways or intersections.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:532
12. Conflict with Other Regulations. In the event that a regulation of
this section conflicts with one found elsewhere in this Title 16 the
more stringent regulation shall apply.
13. Reduction of Screening Requirement. When a condition such as
unusual topography, elevation in relation to adjacent properties,
size or shape of the parcel involved, or any other condition exists
which would make strict adherence to this Section 16.20.040.E
impractical or impossible, the Board may reduce the transitional
bufferyard and screening requirements.
14. Fencing as an Accessory Use. Fencing shall be considered as an
accessory use to a principal permitted use and are permitted in all
zones as set forth in Section 16.64.120.
15. Waivers and Exceptions. The Board may grant a waiver for a
reduction in any bufferyard standard as may be reasonable and
within the intent of the general purposes and provisions of this
section and if the literal enforcement of this section is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land involved, as determined by the
Board.
Table I
Residential Non-residential
Required Depths
of Transitional
Bufferyards in
Feet (6)
Lower
Intensity (1)
Higher
Intensity
(2)
Lower
Intensity (3)
Medium
Intensity
(4)
High
Intensity
(5)
Class of Adjacent
Existing Use
Lower Intensity
Residential (1)
n/a 25 50 75 100
Higher Intensity
Residential (2)
25 n/a 50 75 100
Low Intensity Nonresidential
(3)
50 50 n/a 50 50
Medium Intensity
Non-residential (4)
75 75 n/a n/a 25
High Intensity Nonresidential
(5)
100 100 n/a n/a n/a
Zoning of
Adjacent Lot
R-1A, R-1A, R-2, R-3,
R-4
n/a 25 50 50 100
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:533
Table I
Residential Non-residential
Required Depths
of Transitional
Bufferyards in
Feet (6)
Lower
Intensity (1)
Higher
Intensity
(2)
Lower
Intensity (3)
Medium
Intensity
(4)
High
Intensity
(5)
R-5, R-6, R-6LM,
R-7, R-8, R-9
25 n/a 50 50 100
B-1, B-5, P, H 50 50 n/a n/a 50
B-2, B-3, B-4- O-1 75 75 n/a n/a 25
O-2, I-1, I-2 100 100 n/a n/a n/a
Notes:
n/a - No bufferyard required.
(1) A lower intensity residential use is a residential use with a
density of less than 4 dwelling units per acre.
(2) A higher intensity residential use is a residential use with a
density of more than 4 dwelling units per acre.
(3) A low intensity non-residential use is a non-residential use
with a floor area ratio no greater than 15% and an impervious
surface coverage no greater than 30%. This category shall
include public schools regardless of their FAR or impervious
surface coverage.
(4) A medium intensity non-residential use is a non-residential use
with a floor area ratio greater than 15% but not greater than
30%, or an impervious surface overage greater than 30% but
no greater than 60%.
(5) A high intensity non-residential use is a non-residential use
with a floor area ratio greater than 30% or an impervious
surface coverage greater than 60%.
(6) The depth of a transitional bufferyard may be reduced by up
to 50% at the discretion of the Board if the planting density is
increased to the same degree. Please see Subsection E.5. for
additional information.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:534
Table II
Class of Proposed Use
Residential Non-residential
Types of screening
Required Within
Transitional
Residential
Bufferyards
Lower
Intensity (1)
Higher
Intensity
(2)
Lower
Intensity (3)
Medium
Intensity
(4)
High
Intensity
(5)
Class of Adjacent
Existing Use
Lower Intensity
Residential (1)
n/a B A A A
Higher Intensity
Residential (2)
B n/a A A A
Low Intensity Nonresidential
(3)
A A n/a B B
Medium Intensity
Non-residential (4)
A A n/a n/a B
High Intensity Nonresidential
(5)
A A n/a n/a n/a
Zoning of
Adjacent Lot
R-1A, R-1A, R-2, R-3,
R-4
n/a B A A A
R-5, R-6, R-6LM,
R-7, R-8, R-9
B A A A A
B-1, B-5, P, H A A n/a B B
B-2, B-3, B-4-, O-1 A A n/a n/a B
O-2, I-1, I-2 A A n/a n/a n/a
Notes:
n/a - No bufferyard required
(1) A lower intensity residential use is a residential use with a
density of less than four dwelling units per acre.
(2) A higher intensity residential use is a residential use with a
density of more than four dwelling units per acre.
(3) A low intensity non-residential use is a non-residential use
with a floor area ratio no greater than 15% and an
impervious surface coverage no greater than 30%. This
category shall include public schools regardless of their FAR
or impervious surface coverage.
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:535
(4) A medium intensity non-residential use with a floor area ratio
greater than 15% but not greater than 30% or an impervious
surface coverage greater than 30% but no greater than 60%.
(5) A high intensity non-residential use is a non-residential use
with a floor area ratio greater than 30% or an impervious
surface coverage greater than 60%. [Amended by Ord.
02-54]
F. Open Space.
1. General Requirements. At least 25% of any tract proposed for
planned development shall be in common open space and
distributed generally as follows:
a. A minimum of 10% of the gross tract area shall be in formal
recreation facilities, such as tennis courts, playgrounds,
swimming pools, ball-fields, and similar facilities.
b. A minimum of 10% of the gross tract area shall be in natural
features, vistas, significant wooded areas, vegetation and in
other usable open space which shall be defined as lands other
than in channels, floodways and on slopes in excess of 25% or
water bodies, whether used for recreation, retention or
detention purposes.
c. Five percent of the gross tract area may include all lands
excluded in Subsection (F)(1)(b) above and water bodies.
2. Recreation Facilities. The following recreational facilities should be
considered as part of any, but not necessarily all, planned
developments:
a. Trails: use to connect open space, between recreational
facilities and between buildings and other uses.
b. Bikeways: minimum width of six feet, optimum of eight feet,
and 10 feet where paths are also used for emergency vehicle
access. Keep grades under 10%, lower if for any length.
Machine-laid asphalt surface of four inch bituminous stabilized
base over an approved subbase are required. All turning radii
should be at least 12 feet with thirty-seven-foot radii required
where bicycle speeds approach 15 miles per hour. Curb cuts
and signing should be provided.
c. Playlots: minimum of 2,000 square feet for toddlers and up to
5,000 square feet for older children. Primarily for use by preschool-
age children. Facilities include swings, slides, play
sculptures and benches for parents. Effective service radius of
one block or one-eighth of a mile. Approximately one playlot for
each 400 persons or 100 children.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:536
d. Playgrounds: designed for a variety of uses, and the equipment
should reflect the patronage. Sandboxes and play sculpture for
young children, basketball courts or backboards for older
youths, paved areas for various activities, and sunny and quiet
areas for the elderly should be provided. The size of the
playgrounds should be based on population as follows:
Population
Size
(acres)
2,000 3.25
3,000 4.0
4,000 5.0
5,000 6.0
e. Tennis: one for each 100 dwelling units. Parking should be
provided on the basis of four per court.
f. Swimming pools: provide three square feet of pool area for
each resident above three years of age. Provide for wading
pools.
3. Other Considerations.
a. Orientation of recreational facilities generally should run in a
northeast-southwest direction.
b. Carefully orient passive recreational facilities. The southerly
exposure is the warmest and captures the short fall, winter and
spring sun. During the summer, it can be uncomfortable, but
this can be relieved by landscaping.
c. Small garden plots are also valid recreational opportunities,
particularly for the elderly. Orient toward the south.
d. Recreational facilities should be operated for the residents of
the development. They should not be commercial enterprises
open to anyone who pays a fee.
G. Lighting.
1. Submission of Plans. Plans and evidence of compliance shall
include the following:
a. Description of outdoor lamp/luminaire combinations including
component specifications such as lamps, reflectors, optics,
angle of cutoff, supports, poles and include manufacturers
catalog cuts.
b. Locations and description of every outdoor light fixture and
hours of operation, their aiming angles and mounting heights.
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:537
c. Computer generated photometric grid showing footcandle
readings every 10 feet and the average footcandles for the site.
d. Foundation details for light poles.
2. The style of the light and light standard shall be consistent with the
architectural style of the principal building and should be
coordinated with the landscaping for the site.
3. Maximum Height of Lights.
a. The light shall be measured from ground level to its highest
point and shall include the base.
b. The maximum height in residential parking lots and in off
street residential situations is 15 feet.
c. The maximum height in non-residential uses is 25 feet, but in
no case shall be higher than the buildings(s).
4. Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected to avoid being
easily damaged by vehicles.
5. Lighting should be located along streets, parking areas, at
intersections and where various types of circulation systems
merge, intersect or split.
6. Lighting of Walkways/Bikeways and Parks. Where special lighting
is to be provided for walkways, bikeways, or parks, the following
requirements shall apply:
a. The walkway, pathway, or ground area shall be illuminated to a
level of no more than 0.5 foot-candles.
b. The vertical illumination levels at a height of five feet above
grade shall be no more than 0.5 foot-candles.
c. Lighting fixtures shall be designed to direct light downward,
and the light sources shall have an initial output of no more
than 1,000 lumens.
7. Stairways and sloping or rising paths, building entrances and exits
require illumination.
8. All non-essential outdoor lighting fixtures, including display
lighting, shall be turned off after close of business, unless needed
for safety or security, in which case the lighting shall be reduced to
a minimum level necessary as determined by the Board (nonessential
may apply to: display, aesthetic, parking and sign
lighting).
9. Light Trespass. The maximum illumination at five feet inside an
adjoining residential parcel or public right-of-way or beyond, from
an artificial light is 0.25 horizontal footcandles and 0.25 vertical
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:538
footcandles. Said illumination likewise measured inside an
adjoining commercial or industrial parcel or on a public roadway,
or beyond, shall not exceed 0.5 horizontal footcandles or 0.5
footcandles. No line of sight to a glaring light source is permitted
from five feet or more inside a residential or public right-of-way
property line by an observer viewing from a position that is level
with or higher than the ground below the fixture. Compliance is
achieved with fixture shielding, directional control designed into
the fixture, fixture location, fixture height, fixture aim, or a
combination of these factors.
10. General Lighting Design. The bulbs in outdoor light fixtures
emitting from 600 to 1200 lumens shall be frosted glass or covered
by frosted glass or other similarly translucent cover. An outdoor
fixture emitting more than 1200 lumens except motion detector
activated lighting, shall be full cutoff and fully shielded to an
observer at the property line. This can be achieved with fixture
location, mounting height, natural or artificial barriers on the
fixture owner's property, fixture shielding, and other fixture design
features.
A spotlight of less than 1800 lumens need not be full cutoff or
covered by a translucent cover if its center beam is aimed at a
point not beyond any property lines and no higher than 45° below
horizontal, and is motion detector activated and cycles off after five
minutes.
Generally, luminaries should not be located closer to the property
line than a distance equal to three times the fixture's mounting
height above grade at the property line.
11. Emergency lighting and traffic control lighting is exempt.
12. The use of search lights, laser lighting, or lights that pulse, flash,
rotate or simulate motion for advertising or promotions is
prohibited.
13. Tower lighting shall not be permitted unless required by the FAA.
Required lighting shall be of the lowest allowed intensity and red
unless specifically forbidden under FAA requirements.
14. With the exception of structures having exceptional symbolic
significance such as churches, public buildings or buildings of
historic significance in the community, exterior buildings and other
vertical structures shall not be illuminated. When buildings and
other structures having symbolic or historic significance are to be
illuminated, the design for the illumination must be approved by
the Planning Board.
15. Buildings and other vertical structures.
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:539
a. The maximum illumination on any vertical surface or angular
roof surface shall not exceed 5.0 foot-candles.
b. Lighting fixtures shall be carefully located, aimed, and shielded
so that light is directed only onto the building surface. Lighting
fixtures shall not be directed toward adjacent streets or roads.
c. Lighting fixtures mounted on the building and designed to
"wash" the building surface with light are preferred.
d. To the extent practicable, lighting fixtures shall be directed
below the horizontal rather than above the horizontal plane.
16. Landscaping. When landscaping is to be illuminated, the Planning
Board shall first approve a landscape lighting plan that presents
the purpose and objective of the lighting, shows the location of all
lighting fixtures and what landscaping each is to illuminate, and
demonstrates that the installation will not generate excessive light
levels, cause glare, or direct light beyond the landscaping into the
night sky.
17. Lighting of Exterior Display/Sales Areas. Lighting levels on exterior
display/sale areas shall be adequate to facilitate the activities
taking place in such locations. Lighting of such areas shall not be
used to attract attention to the business. Signs allowed under local
ordinance are to be used for the purpose. The applicant shall
designate areas to be considered display/sale areas and areas to be
used as parking or passive vehicle storage areas. The designation
must be approved by the Planning Board.
a. Areas designated as parking or passive vehicle storage areas
shall be illuminated in accordance with the requirements for
parking areas suggested elsewhere in this section.
b. Areas designated as exterior display/sales areas shall be
illuminated so that the maximum illumination level is thirtyfive-
foot-candles in feature display areas and twenty-footcandles
in general display areas. In no case shall the
illuminance in any exterior selling areas exceed 10 times that
of the surrounding area.
c. Light fixtures shall be cut-off fixtures, and shall be located,
mounted, aimed, and shielded so that direct light is not cast
onto adjacent streets or properties.
d. Fixtures shall be mounted no more than 20 feet above grade,
and mounting poles shall be located either inside the
illuminated area or no more than 10 feet away from the outside
edge of the illuminated area.
18. Lighting of Outdoor Facilities. Outdoor nighttime facilities
(concerts, athletic contests, etc.) have unique lighting needs.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:540
Illumination levels vary, depending on the nature of the activity.
The regulations in this section are intended to allow adequate
lighting for such events while minimizing sky glow, reducing glare
and unwanted illumination of surrounding streets, properties, and
reducing energy consumption. The design plan shall include a
discussion of the lighting requirements of various areas and how
those requirements will be met.
19. Lighting of Gasoline Station/Convenience Store Aprons and
Canopies. Lighting levels on gasoline station/convenience store
aprons and under canopies shall be adequate to facilitate the
activities taking place in such locations. Lighting of such areas
shall not be used to attract attention to the business. Signs allowed
under local ordinance are to be used for the purpose.
a. Areas on the apron away from the gasoline pump islands used
for parking or vehicle storage shall be illuminated in
accordance with the requirements for parking areas set forth
elsewhere in this section. If no gasoline pumps are provided,
the entire apron shall be treated as a parking area.
b. Areas around the pump islands and under canopies shall be
illuminated so that the minimum horizontal illuminance at
grade level is no more than 5.5 foot-candles. The ration of
average to minimum illuminance shall be no greater than 4:1.
This yields an average illumination level of no more than 22.0
foot-candles.
c. Light fixtures mounted on canopies shall be recessed so that
the lens cover is recessed or flush with the bottom surface of
the canopy and/or shielded by the fixture or the edge of the
canopy so that light is restrained to no more than 85° beyond
the vertical plane.
d. Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of the canopy,
and the sides of the canopy shall not be illuminated.
20. Parking Lot Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall be designed to
provide the minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate vision
and comfort in parking areas, and to not cause glare or direct
illumination onto adjacent properties or streets.
a. All lighting fixtures serving parking lots shall be cut-off
fixtures.
b. Mounting heights of lighting fixtures shall not exceed 25 feet.
c. The minimum illumination level shall be 0.25 foot-candles. The
ratio of the average illumination to the minimum illumination
shall be 4:1. [Amended by Ord. 02-21]
H. Signs.
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:541
1. Signing plan. A signing plan for all signs including traffic control
signs is required as part of all site plan submissions. Section
16.72.050.D spells out Township objectives with respect to signs.
2. Lighting. Internally lit, plastic signs are not recommended. Painted,
externally lit signs are preferred which blend with the rural
character of the municipality.
3. Traffic Signs and Control Devices. Improvements, such as "stop,"
"yield," "one-way," signs, etc., shall be designed and installed in
accordance with applicable federal, state and county regulations in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
adopted by the United States Department of Transportation.
4. Street signs. The design and location of all street signs shall be
approved by the Planning Board. The name of all streets shall be
approved by the Planning Board.
I. Utilities.
1. The design and location of all utilities shall be underground and
shall be based on Township standards and those standards of the
public utility(s) having primary jurisdiction. All plans shall be
approved by the Township Engineer and the appropriate authority.
[Amended by Ord. 02-9]
2. Any development located within the sanitary sewer service area as
identified in the most recent Township Master Plan shall only be
connected with and use the facilities of the Raritan Township
Municipal Utilities Authority sanitary sewer system to the exclusion
of any other system or methods for the collection and disposal of
sanitary sewage. If the Planning Board determines that the existing
Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority sanitary sewer
system is not reasonably accessible either due to such reasons as
the distance required, the level of improvements required, or lack
of available sewer treatment capacity to allow the economically
feasible development of the property, the applicant shall install
within the development a complete sewer pipe system including all
necessary easements and provisions for the connection thereto at
each structure. Until such time as the connection to the public
sanitary sewage disposal system is capable of becoming operable,
individual septic systems or other appropriate and approved waste
water treatment facilities shall be required. [Amended by Ord.
02-9]
J. Solid Waste Facilities.
1. Disposal containers are to be conveniently located to trashproducing
portions of buildings and shall be provided with their
own means of access.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:542
2. Disposal containers are to be screened by solid wood fencing,
berms or dense evergreen plantings. Plantings should be large
enough and of a type to provide immediate screening.
3. Trash containers should be located at the entrances of each
business as appropriate and appropriately spaced in parking areas,
if necessary.
4. No litter is to escape from disposal containers.
5. The provisions of Section 16.74.050.B shall be observed.
K. Environmental Considerations.
1. The site plan shall be designed in accordance with applicable
Township regulations, designed to protect the environment. The
Township has passed a stormwater control and floodplain
ordinance and soil erosion and sediment control ordinance.
Applicants should be prepared to document conformance with the
provisions of these ordinances to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer.
2. It is the responsibility of any person causing any activity on or
across a stream, watercourse or swale, or upon the floodway or
right-of-way thereof, to maintain as nearly as possible in its present
state the stream, watercourse, swale, floodway or right-of-way
during the duration of such activity and to return it to its original or
equal condition after such activity is completed.
3. No person shall block, divert, disturb, impede the flow of, alter or
construct any structure or deposit any material or thing, or commit
any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any communal
stream or watercourse without having obtained prior approval
from the Township of Raritan and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources.
4. Stream setbacks shall be maintained as per Section 16.64.110.
[Amended by Ord. 06-11]
5. No person, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or otherwise
remove topsoil for sale or other use other than on the premises
from which taken, except in connection with the construction or
alteration of a building on such premises, and excavating or
grading incidental thereto or except as hereinafter specified.
6. Site Conditions.
a. During Construction. During construction, the site shall be
maintained and left each day in a safe and sanitary manner,
and any condition which could lead to personal injury or
property damage shall be immediately corrected by the
developer upon an order by the building inspector or other
authorized personnel. The developer shall make provisions for
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:543
disposal of oil and grease from equipment. The site area should
be regularly sprayed eliminate dirt from construction activity.
Dust should be controlled with calcium chloride.
b. Disposal of Dead Trees, Litter and Building Materials.
Developed areas shall be cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish,
brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, roots and debris, and
excess or scrap building materials shall be removed or
destroyed to the satisfaction of the Construction Official, prior
to issuance of an occupancy permit.
c. Changes in Elevation. No change shall be made in the elevation
or contour of any lot or site by the removal of earth to another
lot or site by the removal of earth to another lot or site other
than shown on an approved site plan. Minimal changes in
elevations or contours necessitated by field conditions shall be
shown on the final plat and indicated as a change from the
preliminary, or if final approval has been granted, said changes
shall be shown on the as-built plans.
d. Temporary Improvements. Prior to or during construction, the
Township Engineer may require the installation or
construction of improvements to prevent or correct temporary
conditions on the site which could cause personal injury,
damage or property or constitute a health hazard. These
conditions may result from erosion and landslide, flooding,
heavy construction traffic, creation of steep grades and
pollution. Improvements may include berms, mulching,
sediment traps, detention and retention basins, grading,
plantings, retaining walls, culverts, pipes, guardrails,
temporary roads and others appropriate to the specific
condition. All temporary improvements shall remain in place
and in operation until otherwise directed by the Township
Engineer.
L. Street Furniture.
1. Street furniture is the manmade element of an urban landscape.
These are the functional elements of the environment and include
phone booths, benches, planting boxes, mail and meter boxes,
water towers, lighting standards, directional signs, bollards
(posts), fire hydrants, power lines, fences and walls, water
fountains and pools, drinking fountains, trash receptacles, bike
racks, sculpture, paving and steps, and bus shelters. The street
furniture plan should include location, size, lighting and design
relationship.
2. Certain street furniture is functional in nature and should be
located where the demand is. Bike racks should be located in front
or to the rear of multifamily areas, and with easy access to bike
trails. They also should be placed near service areas, by
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:544
recreational activities and outside all major public and commercial
or office buildings as appropriate.
3. Bus shelters may be required at major intersections. The stops
themselves should be on the far side of the intersection so as not to
block other vehicles or limit passage through the intersection. It is
desirable to provide indentations to accommodate the buses off the
main travel routes. The shelter should be designed to keep rain off
those waiting for the buses and to break the wind. They should not
be entirely enclosed to allow the interiors to be readily observed.
4. Trash receptacles should be located near recreational activities, at
street corners, at entrances and exits to buildings and where
people naturally congregate such as near bus stops and under
street lights. Open-weave receptacles should be avoided because
wind blows small bits of paper and debris from them.
5. Dog waste receptacles shall be located near trails, sidewalks and
other walkways as determined by the Planning Board. [Amended
by Ord. 06-11]
M. Engineering Design Considerations.
1. Pavement in parking areas and driveways in normally four inch
bituminous stabilized base with two inch FABC surface course and
subbase. Applicants are encouraged to use decorative and porous
paved surfaces other than asphalt if they meet with the approval of
the Township Engineer and the Planning Board and are appropriate
to the location and use.
2. Engineering and construction details for all improvements shall be
made part of the site plan submission.
3. Place storm drains on the high side of the roadway to intercept
groundwater before pavement section. Cross-crossing the road to
avoid manholes shall not be permitted.
4. Storm drain outlets are to be 25 feet or more from a stream.
Discharge at five feet per second or less into a riprap channel. The
channel is to meet the main stream at 45° or less.
5. All inlets are to have an eight inch head or two inches greater than
curb face. Castings are to be stream-flow type for efficiency.
6. Minimum lot grades are to be 2%; maximum side slopes of 3:1.
Grading should blend with the surroundings. Abrupt grade changes
should not be apparent.
7. Provide overland relief for stormwater in roads with sump
condition for storms in excess of design frequency.
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:545
8. The first 25 feet of driveways are to drain toward the street. As an
alternate to asphalt pavement, driveway aprons may be
constructed of six-inch thick concrete.
9. Velocities in swales are not to exceed five feet per second, unless
grouted riprap is proposed. Riprap must have a filter blanket for
stability.
10. All vertical curbs are to be a minimum length allowed by the
American Association of State Highway Officials to lessen flat spots
in gutters.
11. Minimum storm drain size shall be fifteen inch R.C.P. (reinforced
concrete pipe). C.M.P. (corrugated metal pipe) shall be fully coated
with paved invert and shall be used outside roadway rights-of-way.
12. All drainage inlets are to have a concrete invert, and all pipes are to
be cut flush with walls. Inlets to be self-scouring under low flow
conditions.
13. All nomenclature should agree with New Jersey Department of
Transportation specification designations.
14. Profile of minor roads should meet gutter elevation of arterial roads
to avoid bumps or thank-you-ma'am at intersection.
15. Underdrains should be expected and noted on plans to be "as
directed by the Township Engineer." This would apply to pavement
as well as on lot drainage.
16. All roads are to be constructed of four inch Type 5, Class A road
stone subbase material, four inches of 1 1/2 inch Quarry Blend as
approved by the Township Engineer.
17. At intersections and points of ingress and egress to sites, the
approach grades should be minimized to under 2% to allow a
relatively level stopping area for 100 feet, plus or minus.
Handicapped ramps shall be installed at intersections.
18. Where road widths exceed 30 feet, an eight inch curb face will be
required. Where roads are 30 feet, in width, a six inch curb face will
be required. On twenty-four-foot or narrower width roads, a six
inch sloping curb will be required six inch vertical height).
19. Right-of-way lines at intersections must have a radius similar to
curb return. Angle points in right-of-way will not be permitted.
20. All intersections are to be provided with sight triangles, and such
areas are to be cleared and graded prior to project completion.
Sight easements in other locations will be required as conditions
warrant. Sight triangles are normally right triangles of 30 by 100
feet.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:546
21. Double inlets are to be provided with a double wall on exterior
walls and castings supported by 6WF20 beam in the center. All
other roadway inlets shall be of double wall construction for
roadway walls.
22. Stakeout of horizontal and vertical curves are to be at twenty-fivefoot
intervals. A minimum of two stakes shall be used for inlet
stakeout.
23. Detention and retention basins shall be of a free-form configuration
with 3:1 slopes maximum. A lot flow channel should be provided
with 2% bottom grading to the channel. Recreational use of such
basins shall be considered. Geometric or other manmade
appearance of such facilities is discouraged. Location of detention
basins should not be adjacent to roadways unless sufficiently
landscaped and graded so as to be aesthetically pleasing.
24. Islands in cul-de-sacs should contain low-maintenance landscaping,
such as shade trees, pines and other tree form evergreens.
25. Minor residential streets shall be limited to a minimum centerline
radius of 100 feet. As designated by the Township Engineer, tight
horizontal curves shall be expanded to 30 feet on twenty-four-foot
wide roads, and to 40 feet on thirty-foot wide roads to
accommodate restricted turning movements, occasional parking
and supportive emergency services. All other roads of collector or
arterial type shall be designated in accordance to American
Association of State Highway Officials standards to accommodate
the design volumes and speeds.
26. In using the rational formula, a "C" value of 0.20 is the minimum to
represent woodland and the maximum for undeveloped land shall
be 0.30.
27. Sidewalks and underground utilities are to be located in the lower
side of the roadway in the area behind the curb.
28. Gas, water, storm and sanitary sewers shall be constructed within
the paved portion of the roadway (curb to curb).
29. Where soil conditions permit, sump-type inlets are required to
recharge the aquifer.
30. Prior to paving of roadways, all curbs, concrete driveway aprons
and grading of slopes in the right-of-way shall be completed.
31. Sidewalks crossing driveways shall be six inches thick and shall not
drop, but shall continue as a straight grade parallel to the
centerline profile. Driveway aprons shall meet the sidewalk edge,
thus providing a positive slope toward the gutter.
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:547
32. Curbing at driveways shall also be 18 inches in overall depth. The
depressed curb will necessitate increasing the depth of the bottom
of the curbing at these locations.
33. In addition to the above requirements, the design of the drainage
system shall follow those standards found in N.J.A.C. 7:8-5 et seq.
and N.J.A.C. 7:8-6 et seq., and in the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The best management practices
selected shall be based upon the specific conditions of the property
in question after consultation with the Township Engineer.
[Amended by Ord. 04-16]
N. Other Considerations.
1. Energy Conservation.
a. Buildings should be located to best take advantage of the site;
winds, sun, cold air drainage, humidity, vegetation, landforms,
etc.
b. Plantings and structures should be located to block
undesirable winds and sun, and increase wind and ventilation
where desirable.
c. Water bodies should be considered for reflecting light and
cooling.
d. Snow drifting should be considered.
e. Applicants should consult a publication entitled Landscape
Planning and Energy Conservation before designing site plans.
2. Tree Protection During Construction. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
a. The tree protection area shall be located at least 15 feet from
the trunk of the tree(s) to be retained. Where there is a group
of trees or woodlands, the tree protection area shall be the
aggregate of the protection areas for the individual trees.
b. Tree protection areas shall be shown on the landscape plan
and the grading plan.
c. Prior to any site work, clearing, tree removal, grading or
construction the tree protection area shall be delineated.
d. Where groups of trees are to be preserve the area shall be
delineated with tree protection fencing as follows:
i. All woodland and forest and forest areas proposed for
preservation must be fenced with blaze orange fencing
with a warning sign placed every 100 linear feet along the
fenced area.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:548
ii. No clearing, grading, or land disturbance may begin until
the tree fencing has been installed and inspected by the
Township Engineer or their designee.
iii. No construction, stockpiling, storage, dumping, or heavy
machinery may take place inside the fenced area.
e. Tree protection fencing erected with a minimum height of four
feet, and placed a minimum of 15 feet from the trunk of the
tree or along the drip line, which ever is greater. Snow fencing
may be used. However, chain link fence may be required if
warranted by site conditions and rarity of the plant.
[Amended by Ord. 10-27]
f. Any tree protection fencing shall be maintained and remain in
place until all construction on site is completed.
g. Trees being removed shall not be felled, pushed or pulled into a
tree protection area or into trees that are to be retained.
h. No vehicles, construction equipment, construction materials,
or waste materials shall be placed within the protection areas.
i. No toxic materials shall be placed within 100 feet of the tree
protection area.
j. When tree stumps are located within 10 feet of the tree
protection area they shall be removed with a stump grinder.
k. Trees shall not be used for roping, cables, signs or fencing.
Nails and spikes shall not be driven into trees.
l. Any clearing within the dripline or within 15 feet of a tree,
whichever is greater, shall be done by hand operated
equipment. [Amended by Ord. 10-27]
m. Where a tree that has been noted for preservation is severely
damaged and is unable to survive, tree replacement shall occur
as provided in compliance with Section 16.20.040.T.
[Amended by Ord. 06-11; 10-27]
3. Performance Standards of the Zoning Ordinance. The provisions of
Chapter 16.74, shall be observed. As a condition of any of approval
and the continuance of any use, occupancy of any structure and
operation of any process or equipment, the applicant shall supply
written evidence, satisfactory to the Planning Board or its
designated representative, that the proposed use, structure,
process or equipment will conform fully with all of the applicable
performance standards.
4. Barrier-Free Design. The provisions of the New Jersey
Administrative Code, Title 17, Chapter 19A, pertaining to barrier-
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:549
free design, shall be observed in the design of all improvements as
appropriate.
5. Maintenance. The provisions of Chapter 16.74 and other
appropriate sections of this Code, and all conditions of site plan
approval, including maintaining all site improvements as approved
or intended, shall be constantly observed as a condition of
continued occupancy of and use of premises or structures.
6. Construction Access. In order to assure public health, welfare and
safety through residential areas and to preserve the structural
integrity of pavements designed for residential loadings, prior to
preliminary approval, the developer shall stipulate means for
construction access to the proposed development for all road and
building materials, equipment, supplies and manpower.
Construction access may be categorized as direct external access
to the site and internal access through the site or adjoining sites.
a. Direct External Construction Access. In most cases, small nonsectionalized
developments will not require a separate
construction access, provided that there is direct construction
access to the site from a state highway. Where construction
access to a site is only available via roads of a lesser category
than a municipal arterial road, or where construction access
must be through earlier improved sections of the same or other
developments, the applicant shall be responsible for off-site
and/or off-tract improvements to said access route in the form
of sidewalks, structural repairs and additional macadam
surface coursing as necessary to permit the access route to
withstand or be repaired from the abnormal loading of the road
or roads, and to assure pedestrian safety along the route. In
lieu of physical improvements to this type of construction
access route, the Planning Board may require, as an alternate,
the posting of a performance bond to cover the cost of damage
to less than arterial construction access routes.
b. Internal Construction Access. Construction access for staged
projects shall, when possible, be via a separate construction
route which avoids improved sections of the development and
adjoining developed properties. The construction access may
take a different route as succeeding sections of the
development are constructed. Such an internal construction
access route shall be maintained by the developer for the
duration of the project to such a standard as to permit access
for materials and equipment and shall normally consist of five
inches of 2 1/2 inch quarry blend topped with two inches of 3/4
inch road stone. All sectioned developments shall have the
sectioning plan designed with construction access as a primary
determinant in the sequence of development of the site.
O. Related Standards.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:550
1. Applicants shall observe all recommendations of the Township
Engineer and standards set forth in Title 12 of this Code in the
design, construction and installation of improvements. Percolation
test requirements shall be governed by Chapter 17.12 of this Code
regarding preliminary plats and the Township Board of Health
requirements set forth in ordinances adopted by that Board.
2. The requirements of the Township zoning ordinance, including all
applicable standards for parking, performance standards, location
of structures, setback, bulk, height and coverage, shall apply to site
plan review.
3. The design criteria established in the land subdivision ordinance
shall apply, where appropriate, to site plans.
4. All applicable requirements and standards of other Township
ordinances shall apply to site plans as appropriate.
5. Applicants are encouraged to obtain copies of the following
publications which contain design standards which will supplement
the design standards contained within this Title:
a. New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Division of
Local Government Services, Site Plan Manual, Department of
Community Affairs, Trenton, 1976;
b. New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Division of
Local Government Services, A Guide for Residential Design
Review, Department of Community Affairs, Trenton, 1976.
6. In the event that the Township has not adopted standards and
specifications for a specific type of improvement, then generally
adopted engineering standards set forth in engineering and
construction manuals as may be approved and modified by the
Township Engineer for a specific situation shall be used. Gas,
electric, telephone and similar utilities shall be installed in
accordance with applicable company, state and federal
requirements.
P. Easements. The following easements, as appropriate, shall be granted
to the Township as a condition of final site plan approval. The Township
Attorney shall be responsible for the preparation of any easements to be
dedicated to the Township. The applicant will be responsible for
providing the Township Attorney with the following: (i) One copy of the
approved subdivision or site plan, (ii) Easement descriptions approved
by the Township Engineer, (iii) One copy of the resolution of approval,
and (iv) One copy of a deed for the property showing the current
property owner.
1. Utility Easements. As determined by the Planning Board,
easements may be required for utility installation, existing or
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:551
future. Such easements shall be at least 20 feet wide and located
after consultation with the utility companies.
2. Drainage and Conservation Easement.
a. Wetlands and Wetland Buffer/Transition areas. Where property
to be developed contains wetlands and their associated
transition areas as confirmed by the State of New Jersey under
a Letter of Interpretation, said wetlands and transition area
shall be placed into conservation easements. Where a property
has wetlands, but the areas have not been confirmed by the
NJDEP under a Letter of Interpretation, the Wetlands
Transition area shall be 150 Feet and shall be placed into a
conservation easement.
b. Watercourses. Where a property contains a watercourse, said
watercourse and any Riparian Buffer as required under
Section 16.64.110.A of this chapter shall be placed into
Drainage and Conservation Easements.
c. Other Significant Physical Features. Where a property to be
developed contains significant features including but not
limited to wooded areas, steep slopes, aquifer recharge areas,
wildlife habitat, rock out-croppings, vistas, soil conditions, or
other significant horticultural, environmental, or natural
features determined by the Environmental Commission and/or
Planning Board to be desirous to preserve shall be placed in a
drainage and/or conservation easements.
3. Historic Structures. Any property to be developed containing a
structure determined to be eligible to be listed on the National
Register for Historic Places as listed within the Township Historical
Survey, Hunterdon County Historical Survey, The New Jersey
Register of Historical Places or the National Register of Historic
Places or as may be further recommended by the Raritan Township
Local Historians Committee, an easement preventing the
demolition or substantial remodeling of the structure shall be given
to the Township.
4. Sight Easement.
a. At street intersections, horizontal and vertical curves, and
where access drives intersect streets, sight easements shall be
required, as appropriate, by the Planning Board. The sight
easement shall be kept clear of vegetation, structures, fences
or topographic features or objects which block vision at a
height of two feet to 10 feet above the elevation of the surface
of the edge of the adjoining road. It is the responsibility of the
property owner to maintain the area within the easement as
stated above.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:552
b. Sight easements shall be generally triangular in shape with the
sides adjoining streets or drives being 100 feet and 30 feet,
respectively, unless road conditions warrant a larger or greater
size, in the manner determined by the Planning Board. When
necessary, the Planning Board may consult with the Municipal
Engineer prior to requiring and/or fixing the area of a sight
easement.
5. Right-of-Way Easement. Developments that front on existing
streets which do not conform to right-of-way widths as set forth in
the master plan or on the official map, shall dedicate along the
frontage of the tract, as appropriate, the additional right-of-way
from the center line necessary to conform to the desired width.
Where a development adjoins along one side of an existing road
which does not meet standards, only one-half of the required extra
right-of-way width shall be dedicated. A minimum of a twenty-fivefoot
right-of-way return shall be provided at all street intersections.
Within the easement, the municipality may authorize or build,
widen, improve and repair the Township road, including such
bridges, culverts, slope and drainage facilities, guardrails,
sidewalks and other protections and such other devices and
facilities as it may see fit; and the Township may also permit the
installation, repair, maintenance and removal of such public utility
wires, pipes and renovating of such entrances as it may see fit and
including the use by the Township of all earth, soil aggregate,
vegetation and trees as may be required for road construction.
6. Cemeteries and Burial Places. Any property to be developed
containing an unused or historical cemetery or burial place shall
provide an easement to the Township preventing the removal or
alteration of the cemetery or burial place.
Q. Fire Protection Systems. While recognizing that it may not be possible
to assure complete fire protection in every given case, in order to
provide the Township Fire Company with some minimum fire fighting
capability, all preliminary and preliminary/final site plans shall provide
for a source of water for fire fighting purposes in systems approved by
the Township Fire Marshal and Fire Chief and in accordance with the
following criteria:
1. Where an existing public water supply is available and has been
approved by the Township Fire Company for minimum fire fighting
purposes, fire hydrants shall be installed at appropriate locations
as recommended by the Township Fire Marshal and Fire Chief.
Hydrants shall be spaced to provide the necessary fire flow as
indicated in Attachment "A" entitled Fire Flow Requirements for
the Township of Raritan attached to the ordinance codified in this
subsection and file for public inspection.
The allowance for each fire hydrant at 20 psi residual pressure
used to deliver the fire flows listed in the above table is as follows:
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:553
Allow up to 1,000 gpm for each hydrant within 300 feet of the
building;
Allow up to 670 gpm for each hydrant within 301 to 600 of the
building;
Allow up to 250 gpm for each hydrant within 601 to 1,000 of the
building;
Allow zero gpm for each hydrant greater than 1,000 feet from the
building.
Hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the standards of
ANSI/AWWA, Dry Barrel Fire Hydrants, latest edition; painted as
directed by the Township Fire Marshal and Fire Chief; and tested in
accordance with NFPA 291, Recommended Practice for Fire Flow
Testing and Marketing of Hydrants, Flow Testing and Marketing
of Hydrants, latest edition, to ensure compliance with fire flow
requirements.
Acceptance test data shall be provided to the Township Fire
Marshal and Fire Chief for review and approval. In areas where
public water supply is available, but such water supply does not
have the capacity to satisfy the foregoing minimum standards, such
public water supply system shall be supplemented with additional
measures to satisfy the minimum fire protection requirements of
the Township. Such additional measures may involve any one or
a combination of the following: installation of booster pumps with
appurtenances, installation of above ground or underground water
storage tanks with appurtenances, creation of drafting points with
appurtenances, or such other means of increasing fire fighting
capability as may be recommended and approved by the Township
Fire Marshal and Fire Chief.
2. Where public water supply is not available, surface, underground
or above groundwater storage facilities shall be installed to provide
a source of water for fire fighting. For site plans, such water
storage facilities shall be located and installed not farther than 500
feet from any principal structure.
Storage capacities for nonresidential developments shall be
approved by the Township Fire Marshal and Fire Chief and shall
be based on the degree of hazard of the proposed structures to be
protected but shall in no event be less than 15,000 usable gallons.
The locations of all fire protection systems and appurtenances shall
be approved by Township Fire Marshal and Fire Chef. Unless an
equivalent alternate fire protection system is authorized by the
Planning Board and the Township Fire Company, water storage
facilities shall be provided and where underground water storage
tanks are proposed shall be constructed and installed in
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:554
accordance with design standards and specifications on file in the
Township Engineering Department.
R. State Open Waters. No structure shall be built within 50 feet and no
disturbance of soil or vegetation shall occur within 25 feet of the top of
the bank of any State Open Waters (as defined or determined by the N.J.
Department of Environmental Protection). Should the watercourse
meet the definition of both state open waters and an existing stream
carrying water on an average of six months of a year, and/or shown on a
United States Department of the Interior Geological Survey
quadrangle, then the larger of the riparian buffer requirements found
within Section 16.64.110 shall be met. [Amended by Ord. 06-21]
S. Tree Removal. [Amended by Ord. 10-27]
1. To the greatest extent practicable, trees eighteen inch DBH and
larger, tree rows and hedgerows should be preserved. Only those
trees necessary to permit the construction of buildings, structures,
streets, driveways, infrastructure and other authorized
improvements shall be removed. Where clusters of trees exist on
the site or are contiguous with adjacent sites, fragmentation of the
cluster shall be avoided where possible. Existing vegetation shall
be preserved to the greatest extent feasible although invasive
plants may be removed provided they are replaced with native
plants.
2. No more than 55% of the existing mature woodland tree canopy
within the property boundaries shall be removed. (Not to be
interpreted as 55% of the total lot area). The location of the
remaining 45% of the mature woodland tree canopy to be
preserved shall be noted on the landscape plan. Steep slope limits
of disturbance and maximum hard surface requirements under
Table I shall supersede this section when appropriate. [Amended
by Ord. 11-3]
3. A report from the Community Forest Committee and the Township's
Landscape Architect shall be requested for recommended areas of
tree preservation.
4. The appropriate reviewing authority shall have the option of
requiring a conservation easement to protect any or all trees or
tree canopy areas to remain on-site.
T. Tree Replacement and Reforestation. In the event that tree
replacement is required, the following criteria shall be met: [Amended
by Ord. 10-27]
1. Replacement tree(s) shall be of nursery grade quality, balled and
burlapped and shall be planted on the site which is subject to the
application.
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:555
2. The type of replacement tree(s) shall be the same as the species
removed from the site or other species native to the area as listed
in below. The planting of all replacement trees shall be done by or
supervised by a person with horticultural training in tree care and
planting methods.
3. Newly planted replacement trees shall be monitored for a period of
one year to ensure the health of the trees. If the replacement trees
die within one year of planting, the developer/applicant shall
replace the dead tree.
4. Where replacement trees are required but not suitable for the
particular site because of site constraints, including but not limited
to slopes, topography, grading, water runoff, wetlands, floodplains,
riparian or associated buffers; stormwater detention or retention
facilities; existing structures, existing easements, or and any other
physical or environmental feature which physically impedes the
option to plant the replacement trees, the Township shall impose a
fee in lieu of planting, or the applicant has the ability to plant the
replacement trees on public lands as designated by the Township's
Master Plan or consistent with the designated projects by the
Township's Community Forestry Management Plan. There are
several sites that fall within the following broad categories:
Municipal property may include property owned or maintained by
the Township, including but not limited to parks, streets, schools,
municipal facilities, and open space and recreation areas. Each of
these sites can benefit from canopy cover and would be consistent
with community character. In addition, replacement and/or
reforestation allows for added opportunities to enhance
stormwater management recharge and infiltration areas.
5. Tree Replacement Schedule. The number of replacement trees
shall be the equivalent of three inches caliper trees or greater
needed to equal the DBH of the removed tree. The collection of fees
shall occur as prescribed in the following table. [Amended by
Ord. 10-27]
Caliper of Existing Tree
Removed Fee in Lieu of Planting
Less than 6 inches $50 per tree
Between 6 & 12 inches $100 per tree
Between 13 & 17 inches $200 per tree
Between 18 & 23 inches $300 per tree
Between 24 & 29 inches $500 per tree
Between 30 & 35 inches $750 per tree
36 inches or greater $1,000 per tree
U. Recommended Native Tree Species. [Amended by Ord. 10-27]
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:556
1. The recommended native tree species list is on file in the Township
Clerk's Office.
V. Solar or Photovoltaic Energy Facility Design Standards. [Amended by
Ord. 12-5]
1. General Requirements. The following general requirements shall
apply to solar or photovoltaic energy facilities as permitted uses.
a. Facilities shall not be counted in the calculation of maximum
impervious cover, unless the area under the system (excluding
the footings) consists of an impervious material, such as
pavement. The design of the systems shall comply with all
Township stormwater, grading, and soil disturbance
regulations and the applicant shall take appropriate measures
to prevent a concentrated flow of runoff.
b. The solar or photovoltaic energy facility be encompassed with
an eight-foot high chain link fence with all fencing and related
fence components being black vinyl coated or black powder
coated.
c. Ground systems greater than 1,000 square feet shall provide
one or more of the following beneath the structures: meadow
grasses or agricultural area for crops or grazing farm animals.
d. Site disturbance including but not limited to, grading, soil
removal, excavation, and soil compaction, including beneath a
ground mounted system, shall be minimized to the extent
practical, and shall be in accordance with the Township's Soil
Compaction Protocol for Solar Energy Generating Facilities, as
follows.
i. Promote Viability of Vegetation. The contractor shall
employ means and methods to maintain and promote the
viability of the existing and proposed vegetation cover.
ii. Heavy Construction Traffic. Heavy construction traffic
shall be limited to main access drives as shown on the
construction and parking plan. Construction traffic within
panel array areas (i.e. at racking locations and between
arrays) shall be limited to low pressure construction
equipment and lightweight vehicles in order to minimize
soil compaction.
iii. Wet Conditions. Construction traffic shall be prohibited
when surface soils are excessively wet. No construction
shall be performed for a period of 24 hours immediately
following a significant rain event (i.e. one inch or greater).
iv. Determination of Compaction. Should there be visual
evidence of compaction by the absence of vegetation,
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:557
wheel rutting, tracking, construction during wet or
saturated conditions, or should the Township Engineer
believe that there has been compaction, a cone
penetrometer which measures soil resistance or other
suitable device, shall be used to compare the compacted
areas with nearby undisturbed areas. If necessary, soil
bulk density shall be measured as an alternative at the
discretion of the Township Engineer.
v. Limited Soil Compaction. For areas where it is determined
that compaction is limited to the topsoil or surface layer,
the surface should be scarified, seed bed prepared and
reseeded following the agronomic standards per the Soil
Conservation District.
vi. Subsoil Compaction. Where compaction extends to depths
greater than six inches, sub-soiling or soil plowing shall be
performed. Sub-soiling or soil plowing shall be performed
with agricultural sub-soilers or rippers with narrow
straight shanks and coulters designed for minimal
disturbance of the surface.
vii. Significant Soil Compaction. In the event of significant
compaction, sub-soiling or soil planting shall be performed
as described above for "Subsoil Compaction" and the
topsoil shall be amended by the addition of one inch to
three inches of an approved compost material. If there are
areas that are inaccessible (i.e. under installed panels) the
compost layer may be used as a seed bed. In areas which
are accessible by equipment, the compost should be
incorporated into the soil as part of the seed bed
preparation standards of the Soil Conservation District.
viii. Site Inspections. Site inspections may be performed
periodically by the Township Engineer and/or Township
Landscape Architect but shall be performed prior to the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, Approval or Use
and, if required by the Township Engineer and/or
Township Landscape Architect, the appropriate soil
compaction measures set forth in the within protocol shall
be performed by the applicant. In no event shall a
Certificate of Occupancy, Approval or Use be issued unless
and until the Township Engineer and Township Landscape
Architect have inspected the property and issued their
written approval of the soil compaction conditions.
e. Mounting of the solar structures shall be accomplished without
the use of footings, concrete, or other impervious surfaces,
except that up to 10% of the total number of foundation posts
may be encased in concrete footings at the discretion of the
Township Engineer, and shall be in accordance with the
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:558
Township's Soil, Water and Post Testing Protocol for Solar
Energy Generating Facilities.
f. To the maximum extent possible, all foundation posts for the
racking system which will support the solar panels shall be
installed through the driven vibrating method of installation
(the hammering method of driving the posts is strictly
prohibited) and/or through helical screw-in posts.
g. All new on-site roadway surfaces (excluding the inverter pads)
site shall be constructed of pervious materials and shall be
designed to minimize the extent of roadways constructed and
associated soil compaction. Wooded areas may not be clear cut
to construct or install the solar or photovoltaic energy facility.
h. All electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and
secured to prevent unauthorized access.
i. There shall be no signs that are visible from any public road
posted on a solar or photovoltaic energy system or any
associated building or structure, except for the manufacturer's
or installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, owner
identification, and as required for fire and emergency
identification.
j. No new lighting other than motion sensor lighting for security
purposes.
k. Emergency response training to the Township Fire
Department, mutual aid fire companies, and other emergency
and rescue personnel must be provided.
l. Video surveillance camera monitoring must be installed, at the
discretion of the Township, so that all solar panels, inverters,
transformers, switching equipment and the connection to the
grid are viewed in real time.
m. No portion the energy facilities or structure shall occupy any
areas of land designated and regulated by New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection as floodplains, flood
hazard areas, wetlands, wetland transition areas or riparian
corridors. An applicability determination from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection shall be provided to
document the presence and/or absence of these regulated
areas.
n. No soil containing prime farmland and farmlands of statewide
significance as identified by the United States Department of
Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service shall be
removed from any site.
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:559
o. Any and all cleaning of the solar panels shall be done with
water only to the maximum extent feasible. In the event a
cleaning solution is necessary, only biodegradable nonenvironmentally
harmful cleaning products may be used.
p. Only dry or vegetable oil transformers shall be used on the
property. And, in the event that vegetable oil transformers are
used, the applicant shall provide containment for each such
transformer even if not required by the Uniform Construction
Code.
q. In addition to those items required for an application to be
deemed complete, a site plan application shall depict the
following:
i. Location of proposed and existing underground or
overhead utility or transmission lines.
ii. Location of any proposed or existing substation, inverter
or transformer.
iii. Description of any necessary upgrades or modifications to
existing substations or the necessity for a new substation.
iv. Description of how the energy generated by the facility
will be connected to the electrical distribution or
transmission system or the electrical system of the
intended energy user.
v. For projects over 2MW, the location and elevations of all
transmission lines, support structures and attachments to
a substation(s).
vi. If there are no fire hydrants on the property, the site plan
must include a 15,000 gallon underground water storage
tank ("UST"). Perimeter and internal emergency access
drives, no less than 20 feet wide, access gates, "Knox"
boxes as found appropriate by the Fire Marshal and Fire
Department.
r. In addition to those items required for an application to be
deemed complete, the application shall include the following:
i. Shading Impact Plan: a study to evaluate conditions of
over shadowing or shading from trees or other obstacles
on the solar array system.
ii. Geotechnical Report: a study to assess the site's soils,
bedrock and geotechnical conditions and what types of
infrastructure/foundation design would be needed to
support the solar panel facility.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:560
iii. An Interconnection Feasibility Study: a plan to determine
the approximate costs and construction time estimates to
connect the subject property to the grid operating electric
transmission system (PJM Interconnection network). The
study must also describe the requirements for
interconnection, and any network or infrastructure
upgrades needed.
iv. Land and Surface Maintenance Plan: a plan showing the
methods to maintain and promote the viability of existing
and proposed vegetation cover, the areas devoted to
construction phasing and heavy construction traffic, a soil
compaction prevention protocol and plan,
v. Visual Impact Analysis and Photo Simulations: depicting
the site's existing conditions; and the proposed application
with and without buffering. The intent of the Visual Impact
Analysis is to show how the proposed landscaping and
buffer achieves maximum screening and buffering at the
time of installation. Height of planting material at
planting, at five years, 10 years and 20 years.
vi. Glint and Glare Analysis: a report to determine if the glint
and glare off the surface of the proposed solar or
photovoltaic energy facility will be visible to offsite
viewers, what the duration and intensity of the glint and
glare would be and what mitigation methods are needed
and/or could be implemented to mitigate the glint and
glare.
vii. Soil, Water and Post Testing Protocol:
(A) Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, the applicant
shall submit manufacturer's specifications and
product literature for the proposed posts to the
Township Engineer and Planner as well as to a New
Jersey licensed professional engineer with a
geotechnical specialty to be selected by the Township.
The Township Engineer, Planner and New Jersey
licensed professional engineer with a geotechnical
specialty shall review and approve the specifications
and product literature as the posts not containing
hazardous substances.
(B) Prior to the installation of the posts, 1% of the posts to
be installed shall be tested against the manufacturer's
specifications and product literature by a certified
materials testing laboratory. The purpose of the tests
is to confirm that the materials in the posts match the
materials listed in the manufacturer's specifications
and product literature, and a written report to that
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:561
effect shall be submitted to the Township Engineer
and Planner directly from the testing firm. The
material content tests shall be performed in
accordance with ASTM standards by the certified
materials testing laboratory. If the test results show
that the posts contain no hazardous substances and
that they are composed of substantially similar
substances to that contained in residential well
casing, then the testing is concluded.
(C) If the test results show that the posts contain no
hazardous substances but that they are not composed
of substances substantially similar as contained in
residential well casings, then the following additional
testing shall occur:
(1) The applicant shall arrange for a New Jersey
licensed professional land surveyor to establish a
GIS grid with soil and water quality testing
locations on the property to the satisfaction of a
New Jersey licensed professional engineer with a
geotechnical specialty to be selected by the
Township. Prior to the installation of the posts, the
applicant shall submit for review and approval by
the Township Engineer and Planner, as well as the
New Jersey licensed professional engineer with a
geotechnical specialty to be selected by the
Township, a sealed survey showing the GIS grid
and testing locations.
(2) Prior to the installation of the posts, soil testing
and water testing shall be performed by a
geotechnical engineer retained by the applicant
to establish a baseline and a written report shall
be submitted to the Township Engineer and
Planner directly from the applicant's geotechnical
engineer and the results shall be reviewed and
approved by the New Jersey licensed professional
engineer with a geotechnical specialty selected by
the Township.
(3) Soil and water testing shall be performed by the
applicant's geotechnical engineer at five-year
intervals, commencing five-years from the date of
the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy,
Approval or Use, at locations identified on the GIS
grid. A written report shall be submitted to the
Township Engineer and Planner directly from the
applicant's geotechnical engineer and the results
shall be reviewed and approved by the New Jersey
licensed professional engineer with a
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.040
1.01:562
geotechnical specialty to be selected by the
Township.
(4) Failure to comply with the Soil, Water and Post
Test Protocol will result in a violation of site plan
approval.
(D) All soil testing and water testing shall comply with the
NJDEP requirements set forth in the "Field Sampling
Manual."
(E) All testing services shall be paid for out of the
applicant's escrow account.
viii. Noise Study: a report describing the noise generated from
the solar or photovoltaic energy facility, and showing
consistency with the Township's performance standards
and NJ DEP Noise Code.
ix. Abandonment and Decommissioning Plan:
(A) A solar or photovoltaic energy facility that is out-ofservice
for a continuous twelve-month period will be
deemed to have been abandoned.
(B) The Township may issue a Notice of Abandonment to
the applicant once the facility is deemed to have been
abandoned. The notice shall be sent return receipt
requested.
(C) The applicant shall have the right to respond to the
Notice of Abandonment within 30 days from Notice
receipt date.
(D) If the applicant provides information that
demonstrates the solar or photovoltaic energy facility
has not been abandoned, the Township shall withdraw
the Notice of Abandonment and notify the applicant
that the Notice has been withdrawn.
(E) If the designated Township Official determines that
the solar or photovoltaic energy facility has been
abandoned, the applicant shall remove the solar or
photovoltaic energy facility and properly dispose of
the components at the applicant's sole expense within
six months (180 days) after the applicant receives the
Notice of Abandonment, or as addressed in the
Decommissioning Plan.
(F) In the event that the applicant fails to remove the
solar or photovoltaic energy facility, the Township and/
or its employees and/or contractors may enter the
property to remove the solar or photovoltaic energy
§ 16.20.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.040
1.01:563
§ 16.20.050. Site Plan Review and Inspection Fee Schedule. [Prior
code § 15-8.5; amended by Ord. 86-9; Ord. 90-20; Ord. 06-14]
facility (but shall not be obligated to remove same)
and, in the event that the Township performs the
removal, all costs and expenses of such removal shall
be reimbursed to the Township by the applicant. In the
event the applicant fails to reimburse the Township,
the Township may place a lien on the property in the
amount of the costs and expenses of said removal and,
in the event that the Township incurs any additional
costs and expenses in enforcing the lien and/or
collecting the money owed, the applicant shall be
obligated to reimburse the Township for the additional
costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney's
fees.
(G) The applicant shall submit for review and approval to
the Township Engineer and Township Attorney a
financial security to be held by the Township to
guaranty the decommissioning plan and the
restoration of the property within 180 days of the
cessation of use of the solar or photovoltaic energy
facility. The Township requires that the developer
have a bond in place for decommissioning the solar or
photovoltaic energy facility and an insurance policy
which covers all other unfunded aspects of the
property. The bond and insurance are to be reviewed
and approved by the Township Engineer and Township
Attorney.
(H) Failure to comply with the Abandonment and
Decommissioning Plan would require Planning Board
approval.
A. Waived site plan approvals: no fee.
B. Minor site plan: $500.
C. Sketch site plan review, general development: $250.
D. Sketch site plan review, residential site plans: $15 per dwelling unit.
E. Sketch site plan review, office and industrial parks, shopping centers,
large-scale commercial, industrial or office developments: $20 per store
or tenant, or $400, whichever is greater.
F. Preliminary site plan review: $1,500 plus $0.10 per square foot of new
or altered GFA; $0.05 for GFA in excess of 100,000 square feet, plus
$0.02 per square foot of new or impervious surface.
G. Final site plan review: $500.
§ 16.20.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.050
1.01:564
§ 16.20.060. Construction Procedures. [Prior code § 15-8.6]
H. Review of ground sign: when not submitted as part of a site plan
application or when submitted after site plan review has been granted,
a fee of $25 shall be charged for the review of ground signs.
I. Conditional uses in conjunction with site plan application: $200 plus
site plan review application fee. [Amended by Ord. 06-14]
J. Filing of easement: $15 per easement document (sight, right-of-way,
conservation, drainage, etc.). The easements shall be filed by the
municipality and the fee shall be paid prior to the signing of deeds and/
or plats for an application.
K. Filing of easement: $25 per easement document (sight, right-of-way,
conservation, drainage, etc.). The easements shall be paid prior to the
signing of deeds and/or plats for a development application.
A. Prior to commencing construction, a preconstruction meeting shall be
held with the Township Engineer's Office and other appropriate officials
to review project details in order to avoid any misunderstandings. At
this meeting, the Township Engineer's Office shall present the
construction estimate of quantities and costs, which shall be the basis
for bonds, sureties and inspection fees in accordance with the Township
ordinances. The construction estimate shall be determined after
submission of an itemized estimate of quantities and materials
submitted by the applicant's engineer. All bonds, sureties, inspection
fees, etc., shall be posted prior to commencing construction.
B. Unless site improvements are in major disagreement with the approved
site plan or a matter of imminent hazard, the project will not be shut
down. Any deviation from the approved development plan without
written approval of the Township Engineer shall be at the owner/
contractor's risk subject to the review of the Planning Board prior to
final approval/acceptance.
C. Field revisions may be permitted with the approval of the Township
Engineer, provided that the developer's engineer shall make such
revisions to the approved site plan as may be required, forwarding
copies of the revisions to the Township Engineer.
D. Major engineering deviations shall be reviewed prior to constructing
after receipt of the revised plans. Work may not proceed until the
Township Engineer's approval has been secured.
E. Any major map or deviation from the approved site plan shall require
Planning Board approval prior to construction of the affected
improvements. Minor items may be approved by the Township Engineer
or Municipal Planner as appropriate prior to construction.
F. Inspectors from the Township Engineer's Office shall be charged with
general road, storm and sanitary sewer construction observation. The
§ 16.20.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.060
1.01:565
inspectors are supervised by professional engineers who bear the
responsibility of the service.
G. Supplemental inspection services shall be made for landscaping,
grading, sidewalks, bikeways, etc.
H. The developer's engineer is to maintain a record of all changes, change
orders, revisions, etc., and to incorporate same in the as-built
construction plans prior to final acceptance or approval of
improvements by the Township. The developer shall present the
Township with a duplicate set of tracings certified to be as-built
conditions.
I. Prior to the start of the construction or installation of such
improvements, the developer shall advise the Township Engineer 48
hours prior to the commencement of such work. No underground
installation shall be covered until inspected and approved by the
appropriate official. If, during installation of any of the required
improvements, the developer fails to meet specification requirements
or to correct unacceptable work the developer shall be notified in
writing by certified mail by the Township Engineer that the developer
has failed to comply with the specifications or to correct unacceptable
work properly, and the notice shall set forth in detail what has not been
properly installed. Should any underground structure be covered prior
to inspection, it shall be uncovered as directed by the Township
Engineer at the expense of the developer for reinspection. If, within 10
days after mailing of such notice, the developer has failed to perform in
accordance with the notice, the Township Engineer shall then cause the
notice of failure to comply to be served upon the developer, and a copy
shall be sent to the Township Committee and Planning Board. All work
shall cease on the site immediately upon notification.
J. It should be noted that work undertaken without inspection shall not be
approved and may require removal and/or reconstruction.
K. All construction stakes and grades shall be set by a licensed land
surveyor in the employ of the developer or contractor. One copy of all
cut sheets signed by an L.S. or P.E. shall be filed with the Township
Engineer 48 hours prior to the commencement of any construction.
L. Prior to the start of the construction or installation of public sanitary
sewerage improvements, the developer shall advise the Raritan
Township Municipal Utilities Authority 48 hours prior to the
commencement of such work. No underground installation shall be
covered until inspected and approved by the appropriate official. If,
during installation of the required improvements, the developer fails to
meet specification requirements or to correct unacceptable work, the
developer shall be notified in writing by certified mail by the Raritan
Township Municipal Utilities Authority that the developer has failed to
comply with the specifications or to correct unacceptable work
properly, and the notice shall set forth in detail what has not been
§ 16.20.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.060
1.01:566
§ 16.20.070. Temporary Certificates of Occupancy. [Prior code
§ 15-8.7]
§ 16.20.080. Certificates of Occupancy. [Prior code § 15-8.8]
A permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Construction
Official only after:
properly installed. Should any underground structure be covered prior
to inspection, it shall be uncovered as directed by the Raritan Township
Municipal Utilities Authority at the expense of the developer for
reinspection. If, within 10 days after mailing of such notice, the
developer has failed to perform in accordance with the notice, the
Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority shall then cause the
notice of failure to comply to be served upon the developer; and a
copy shall be sent to the Township Engineer, Township Committee,
and Planning Board. All work shall cease on the site immediately upon
notification.
A. The Planning Board may, after granting final approval, authorize the
Construction Official to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for
the subject structure and site development based upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer, Construction Official,
Planner and compliance with the Uniform Construction Code.
B. The temporary certificate of occupancy shall be granted for a specified
period of time not exceeding one year if winter weather or other
conditions beyond the control of the applicant prevent compliance with
the conditions of final site plan approval before occupancy is needed.
C. The site and structure shall be completed to a point designated by the
Planning Board to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the
public and the tenants before the temporary certificate of occupancy is
issued.
D. All incomplete site improvements which were required by the final site
plan approval which may not have been previously guaranteed shall
have a performance guarantee posted in accordance with Section
16.16.010.
E. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the
Construction Official until the Land Use Enforcement Officer has issued
a certificate of development compliance setting forth the Planning
Board's conditions associated with the granting of the temporary
certificate of occupancy.
A. All site improvements have been completed in accordance with the
approved final plans and any approved amendments thereto.
B. The applicant's or developer's engineer has certified in writing that all
improvements have been constructed and installed and are operating in
§ 16.20.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.20.080
1.01:567
§ 16.20.090. Site Plan Conformance. [Prior code § 15-8.9]
§ 16.20.100. Enforcement. [Prior code § 15-8.10]
accordance with the approved final plans and any approved
amendments thereto.
C. Written confirmation from the Township Engineer that all
improvements have been constructed and installed and are operating in
accordance with the approved final plans and any approved
amendments thereto.
D. All inspection fees or other outstanding fees have been paid.
E. All conditions required by the Planning Board prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy have been met.
F. The Land Use Enforcement Officer shall issue a certificate development
compliance setting forth that Subsections A through E of this section
have been satisfied.
A. If at any time any person fails to adhere to any of the conditions of site
plan approval subsequent to receiving a certificate of occupancy, this
shall be construed as being in violation of this Title and shall reasonably
be grounds for the revocation of the certificate of occupancy until
compliance is achieved. Revocation shall be by written notice sent by
certified mail by the Land Use Enforcement Officer. However, the Land
Use Enforcement Officer may make the same effective at a future date,
and if prior to said date, such compliance is achieved, the notice may be
withdrawn.
B. The approved site plan shall be binding upon the applicant. Any
changes from the approved final plat shall require resubmission and
reapproval by the Planning Board, except as set forth in Section
16.20.080.
A. The Land Use Enforcement Officer is given the duty, power and
authority to enforce this chapter.
B. Zoning Permit. No building permit shall be issued by the Construction
Official for any development which has been the subject of site plan
review until a zoning permit has been issued by the Zoning Permit
Officer.
C. Certificate of Development Compliance.
1. Purpose. To ensure compliance with the provisions of this Title, no
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any development
requiring site plan review until the proper certificate of
development compliance or certificate of waiver of site plan review
has been issued by the Township Planner.
2. Issuance. It shall be the duty of the Township Planner to issue:
§ 16.20.080 RARITAN CODE § 16.20.100
1.01:568
§ 16.20.110. Wetland Delineation, Traffic Analysis and Aquifer Test
and Analysis. [Prior code § 15-8.11; amended by Ord. 90-6; Ord.
99-6]
For regulations, requirements and procedures regarding wetlands
delineation, analysis, traffic analysis, and aquifer test and analysis for major
subdivisions and nonresidential use site plans, see Sections 16.18.120,
16.18.130, 16.18.140 and 16.18.150, respectively.
Chapter 16.21
WELL TESTING
§ 16.21.010. Administration. [Amended by Ord. 05-4]
a. A certificate of waiver of site plan review when site plan review
has been waived by the Planning Board; or
b. A certificate of development compliance when he or she is
satisfied that the improvements and conditions of occupancy
set forth by the Planning Board as a result of their site plan
review of a development have been satisfied pursuant to the
procedure set forth in Section 16.20.080.
D. Violations. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained; or any building, structure
or land is used in violation of this article; or other regulation made
under authority conferred hereby, the Township Committee, the Land
Use Enforcement Officer or an interested party, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, maintenance or use, to
restrain, correct or abate such violation to prevent the occupancy of the
building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
A. Administration
1. Procedures and Sequence: Submission of copies of the final well
testing report are required to be submitted under Sections
16.18.070 (subdivisions) and 16.20.020 (site plans). Steps in the
preparation of the well testing are as follows:
a. Submit 2 copies of the "Preliminary Hydrogeologic Report/
Aquifer Test Plan" for review by the municipality's appointed
hydrogeologist, along with $750. in escrow funds, a completed
W-9 form, and a completed Aquifer Test Plan Application form.
b. After approval of the test plan, conduct notification of
proximate well/spring owners and prepare their water sources
as observation wells for the aquifer test.
§ 16.20.100 CODE ADOPTION § 16.21.010
1.01:569
§ 16.21.020. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 05-4]
ACT, STATE — Refers to the Private Well Testing Act, P.L. 2001, c. 40;
N.J.S.A. 58:12A-26 et seq., which applies to buyers, sellers and leaser of
certain real property as follows:
APPLICANT — A developer or property owner submitting an application for
development or permit to install or use a well.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance, or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
AQUIFER — A formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that
contains sufficient saturated permeable material to yield economic
quantities of water to wells and springs.
AQUIFER TEST — A three part test conducted to obtain background,
pumping, and recovery data/information from a pumping well and
observation wells in order to determine aquifer hydraulic characteristics
c. Perform three phases of the aquifer test, specifically:
i. Background Monitoring.
ii. Pumping Test.
iii. Recovery Monitoring.
d. Sample representative wells for selected drinking water
qualify parameters.
e. Prepare and submit "Draft Hydrogeologic Report" for review
by the municipality's appointed hydrogeologist.
f. Respond to comments from reviewers and finalize report.
All contracts of sale for any real property in which the potable water
supply is a private well located on the property, or for any other real
property in which the potable water supply is a well that has less than
15 service connections or that does not regularly serve an average
of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of the year, shall
include a provision requiring the testing of that water supply for certain
parameters as set forth in the Act.
A.
The leaser of any real property in which the potable water supply is a
private well for which testing of the water is not required pursuant to
any other State law. The leaser shall test that water supply for certain
parameters as set forth in the Act. Testing of the water is required at
least once every five years. In addition, within 30 days after receipt of
the test results, a written copy of the results must be provided to each
rental unit and each new lessee.
B.
§ 16.21.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.21.020
1.01:570
and assess potential water-level drawdown (well interference) to nearby
wells.
AQUIFER, CONFINED — An aquifer that is overlain by a confining bed.
The confining bed has a significantly lower hydraulic conductivity than the
aquifer. Artesian aquifer is a synonym.
AQUIFER, SEMI-CONFINED — An aquifer overlain by a low-permeability
layer that permits water to slowly migrate through to the aquifer. Also
termed leaky artesian or leaky confined aquifer.
AQUIFER, UNCONFINED — An aquifer in which there are no confining
beds between the zone of saturation and the ground surface. Water-table
aquifer is a synonym.
CERTIFIED LABORATORY — Any laboratory, facility, consulting firm,
government or private agency, business entity or other person that the
NJDEP has authorized pursuant to the Regulations Governing The
Certification of Laboratories and Environmental Measurements, N.J.A.C.
7:18, to perform analysis in accordance with the procedures of a given
analytical method using a particular technique as set forth in a certain
methods reference document, and to report the results from the analysis of
environmental samples in compliance with a NJDEP regulatory program.
CONE OF DEPRESSION — The area around a pumping well in which the
head (water level) in the aquifer has been lowered by pumping action.
CONFINING BED — A body of low hydraulic conductivity material that is
stratigraphically adjacent to one or more aquifers.
CONTAMINANT — Any physical, chemical, biological, or radiological
substance or matter that has an adverse affect on air, water or soil quality.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DRAWDOWN — The lowering of the water table of an unconfined aquifer or
the potentiometric surface of a semi-confined or confined aquifer caused by
pumping of groundwater from a well or wells. Drawdown is determined by
subtracting the depth to water during pumping from the static water level
determined prior to the start of pumping.
DRINKING WATER QUALITY STANDARD — A standard that applies to a
constituent or contaminant that is required to be tested pursuant to the
New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq. including a
maximum contaminant level, recommended limits, or in the case of lead, an
action level.
EXCEEDANCE — The concentration of a constituent or contaminant that is
greater than an MCL, action level, standard or recommended upper limit
for that given constituent or contaminant.
FRACTURE TRACE — The surface representation of a fracture zone as
determined from an analysis of aerial photographs in stereo pair.
§ 16.21.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.21.020
1.01:571
GROUNDWATER — Water in the ground that is in the zone of saturation
from which wells, springs and stream baseflow (dry weather streamflow)
are supplied.
HEAD, STATIC — Static head is the height above a standard datum of the
surface of a column of water that can be supported by the static pressure
at a given point. In a groundwater system, it is composed of elevation head
and pressure head.
HYDRAULIC CONDUCTIVITY — The capacity of a geologic formation to
transmit water. It is expressed as the volume of water at the prevailing
density and viscosity that will move in unit time under a unit hydraulic
gradient through a unit area measured at right angle to the direction of flow.
HYDRAULIC GRADIENT — The change in static head per unit of distance
measured in a given direction.
HYDROGEOLOGY — The study of groundwater with particular emphasis
given to its chemistry, mode of migration, and relation to the geologic
environment.
INFILTRATION — The flow of water downward from the land surface into
and through the upper soil layers.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM — Equipment including but not limited to pumps,
piping, and sprinkler heads used to distribute water to grasses, landscape
materials, crops, and other vegetation.
LOCAL HEALTH AUTHORITY — A county, regional or municipal health
agency that serves as the lead point of contact with the Department on
environmental issues. This agency would ordinarily be the local health
agency certified pursuant to the County Environmental Health Act (CEHA),
N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq. In those counties that do not have a certified
CEHA health agency, the local health authority is the agency that serves
as the lead for administering the Local Information Networks and
Communication System (LINCS) as designated by the Department of Health
and Senior Services.
MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL (MCL) — The maximum permissible
concentration of a constituent in drinking water. Maximum contaminant
levels shall apply to public and non-public water systems, in accordance
with the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq. and
implementing rules at N.J.A.C. 7:10.
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
OBSERVATION WELL — A non-pumping well used to observe the elevation
of the water table or the potentiometric surface. An observation well is
generally constructed similar to a pumping well. Observation wells are also
referred to as monitoring wells. Observation wells are required to measure
water-level drawdown during the aquifer pumping test and also for the
calculation of aquifer hydraulic characteristics. The specific requirements
for observation wells for both residential and commercial developments are
provided in Appendix B - Observation Well Requirements - Well Testing of
this chapter.
§ 16.21.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.21.020
1.01:572
PARAMETER — A general term that includes other terms such as
contaminant, constituent, substance, metal, organic/inorganic chemical,
and characteristics that are used to designate an analyte, group of analytes,
attribute, or physical property.
POINT-OF-ENTRY TREATMENT (POET) DEVICE — A water treatment
device applied to the drinking water entering a house or building for the
purpose of reducing contaminants in the drinking water distributed to the
entire house or building. Examples of POET include devices such as calcite
filters and ion exchange (water softeners).
POROSITY — The voids or openings in rock and soil. Porosity may be
expressed quantitatively as the ratio of the volume of openings in a rock or
soil to the total volume of the rock or soil.
POROSITY, EFFECTIVE — The amount of interconnected pore space
available for fluid transmission.
POROSITY, PRIMARY — The porosity that represents the original pore
openings when a rock or sediment was formed.
POROSITY, SECONDARY — The porosity that has been caused by fractures
or weathering in a rock or sediment after it has been formed.
POTABLE WATER — Any water used, or intended to be used, for drinking
and/or culinary purposes which is free from impurities in amounts sufficient
to cause disease or harmful physiological effects, and complies with the
bacteriological and chemical quality standards of the New Jersey Safe
Drinking Water Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:10.
PRIVATE WELL — A potable water well that serves a dwelling unit and is
located on the same real property as the dwelling unit.
PUMPING TEST — A test made by pumping a well for a period of time
and observing the change in water levels (hydraulic head) in pumping and
observation wells in the aquifer.
PUMPING TEST, CONSTANT RATE — A pumping test during which the
discharge rate from the pumping well is maintained at a constant rate for
the duration of the test.
QUALIFIED HYDROGEOLOGIST — An individual who has received a
minimum of a bachelor's degree in Geology at an accredited institution or
has completed an equivalent of 30 semester hours of geological education
(including at least 2 accredited courses in hydrogeology) while obtaining a
Bachelor's or Master's degree in a related field of engineering or science at
an accredited institution. Such a person must also demonstrate eight years
of professional work experience in the practice of applying geologic and
hydrogeologic principals to interpretation of groundwater conditions and
in the running of aquifer tests and the analysis of aquifer test data. The
individual shall provide a resume or curriculum vitae to document education
and experience requirements.
§ 16.21.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.21.020
1.01:573
RECHARGE AREA — An area in which there are downward components of
head (water levels) in an aquifer. Infiltration moves downward to deeper
parts of an aquifer in a recharge area.
RECOVERY — The rate at which the water level in a well rises after the
pump has been shut off. Recovery is the inverse of drawdown.
SECONDARY PARAMETER — A drinking water contaminant regulated for
aesthetic purposes rather than health affects under the SDWA rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:10. Secondary parameters include pH, iron and manganese.
STATIC WATER LEVEL — The depth to water in a well prior to the
commencement of pumping.
STORAGE COEFFICIENT (STORATIVITY) — The volume of water an aquifer
releases or takes into storage per unit surface area of the aquifer per
unit change in head. It equals the product of specific storage and aquifer
thickness. Also known as storativity.
TRANSMISSIVITY — The rate at which water of a prevailing density and
viscosity is transmitted through a unit width of an aquifer under a unit
hydraulic gradient. Transmissivity equals hydraulic conductivity times
aquifer thickness.
WATER TABLE — The surface in an unconfined aquifer or confining bed at
which the pore water pressure is atmospheric. It is defined by the levels at
which water stands in wells that penetrate the water body just far enough
to hold standing water.
WELL — A hole or excavation larger than four inches in diameter or a hole
or excavation deeper than 10 feet in depth that is drilled, bored, cored,
driven, jetted, dug, or otherwise constructed for the purpose of removal or
emplacement of, or investigation of, or exploration for, fluids, water, oil, gas,
minerals, soil, or rock.
WELL INTERFERENCE — The result of two (2) or more pumping wells,
the drawdown cones of which intercept. At a given location, the total well
interference is the sum of the drawdown due to each individual pumping
well.
WELL PERMIT — Refers to a written approval issued by the NJDEP,
pursuant to Well Construction and Maintenance at N.J.A.C. 7:9D, to a
licensed well driller, which authorizes a licensed well driller of the proper
class to construct a well or wells.
WELL RECORD — The form provided by the NJDEP that depicts the
construction details of a well, which is completed by the well driller
subsequent to well permit issuance and well installation.
§ 16.21.030. Water Quality Evaluation. [Amended by Ord. 05-4]
A. Purpose and Intent. The objective of the water quality evaluation is to
assess if the proposed water supply sources to a development or
commercial establishment meet NJDEP drinking water quality MCLs. In
§ 16.21.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.21.030
1.01:574
§ 16.21.040. Hydrogeologic Report Requirements. [Amended by
Ord. 05-4]
the event that one or more constituents do not meet the applicable
MCLs, standard treatment systems need to be readily available.
B. Groundwater Quality Determination.
1. Groundwater quality will be determined for the pumping well and
on-site observation wells as part of this program. Groundwater
samples from the pumping well, used for the aquifer pumping test,
will be collected during the pumping phase of that test.
2. The water samples from the on-site observation wells can be
collected either three days in advance or three days after the
pumping test has been completed. The samples must be collected
in accordance with the NJDEP Field Procedures Manual. At a
minimum, the samples shall be analyzed by an NJDEP-certified
laboratory for: hardness, gross alpha particle activity, arsenic, iron,
manganese, copper, lead, nitrate, and total and fecal coliform
bacteria. The samples shall also be analyzed for volatile organic
compounds for which the United States Environmental Protection
Agency or NJDEP has determined maximum contaminant levels
using USEPA Method 524.2.
3. During the pumping test, field measurements of pH, conductivity/
total dissolved solids and temperature shall be made with
calibrated instruments.
4. If site conditions or the site history indicate the potential historic
use of materials containing heavy metals, pesticides, herbicides, or
other volatile or semi-volatile organic compounds at or near the
site, these analyses must also be conducted.
5. Based on past historical operations at the site or at nearby
properties, the Board, at its discretion, may require additional
analyses of the groundwater to assess current and potential future
impacts. The results of the water sample analyses will be used to
assess background (pre-development) water quality conditions.
A. A hydrogeologic report must be submitted with each application for
subdivision of two or more lots and all site plans. This report shall
document the design and implementation of the aquifer test and
include the following data, information and analysis:
1. Calculations of aquifer characteristics such as transmissivity and
storage coefficient, calculations of the cone of depression, potential
impacts to adjacent well owners, and an evaluation of the long-term
sustained yield for the wells.
2. All water-level measurements obtained during the three phases of
the aquifer test in electronic format acceptable to the Township.
§ 16.21.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.21.040
1.01:575
§ 16.21.050. Evaluation Results. [Amended by Ord. 05-4]
3. A detailed hydrogeologic description of the aquifers encountered
beneath the site and adjacent properties.
4. A detailed evaluation of the water-supply demand for an average
and peak day. This demand should be supported with information
on anticipated population, expected unit density, size of units, lawn
and garden irrigation needs, pool filling requirements, and other
anticipated water uses.
5. An inventory of all wells within 1,000 feet of the proposed
subdivision/site plan boundaries appended and placed on a base
map of the site area. This inventory must be submitted in electronic
format acceptable to the Township.
6. Figures depicting site geology, topography, surface water bodies,
water-level elevations, groundwater flow, and development plans.
7. All laboratory water-quality sampling data tabulated and
summarized. One copy of the laboratory reports is necessary for
filing with the Township.
8. A detailed evaluation of potential impacts from subsurface sewage
disposal systems on groundwater quality. A site plan depicting
topography, actual and planned well locations, septic leach field
locations, and fracture trace locations at a minimum scale of one
inch equals 200 feet should be included. For any and all locations
where a fracture or set of fractures intersects one or more wells
and/or septic leach fields, a detailed assessment of treatment
technologies should be included. The treatment technologies
should provide adequate assurances that any and all groundwater
pumped from the wells will satisfy Federal and New Jersey
Drinking Water Standards (MCLs) and will not be degraded by the
septic leach field discharges.
9. The hydrogeologic report shall be prepared and signed by a
qualified hydrogeologist using applicable sections of GSR 29 or
successor document as a guide.
10. The hydrogeologic report shall include the name and license
number of the well driller and pump installer. The report shall
include the names of the persons and firm responsible for
collecting the water-level measurements. In addition, the report
shall include copies of the completed NJDEP Well Records.
A. Evaluation.
1. Precipitation. A test conducted during a period in which 0.5 inches
or more of precipitation are recorded at or near the site must be
repeated or technical documentation provided that the
§ 16.21.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.21.050
1.01:576
precipitation event had no impact on water levels 24 hours before,
during, and 24 hours after the test.
2. Background Phase. Antecedent influences must be determined,
and, if necessary, water-level data from the pumping phase and
recovery phase must be corrected. Insufficient data to assess these
influences will require repetition of all three phases of the aquifer
test.
3. Pumping Phase.
a. If the pumping rate does not exceed the average daily demand
by 120% or the peak-day demand cannot be pumped within a
twenty-four-hour period, the aquifer beneath the site may be
deemed insufficient to meet the proposed demands and the
applicant may need to review and adjust the site demand and
development units. Some alternatives include:
i. Repeating the pumping test with two or more pumping
wells to achieve average or twenty-four-hour peak-day
demand for a development. This may be particularly
applicable for large developments in low yielding bedrock
aquifer systems.
ii. Decreasing the number of developed lots.
iii. Re-arranging the lot configuration.
b. If the pumping rate varies by more than 10% of the average
flow rate, the entire test shall be repeated.
c. If the pump shuts down during the pumping phase, the entire
test must be repeated.
d. If water levels in the pumping and/or observation wells exceed
the measurement capacity of the devices used for measuring
changes in water levels and measurements are not recorded
with other devices in accordance with the schedule listed in
Appendix A, the test must be repeated.
e. If the pumping data indicate a change in aquifer transmissivity
as a result of fracture dewatering, all analyses of the potential
radius of influence and impacts to neighbors, streams, and
wetlands must be conducted using the lower value of aquifer
transmissivity. If this lower aquifer transmissivity indicates
that the anticipated demand cannot be supported by the
aquifer beneath the site, the applicant will need to review and
adjust the site demand and development units as outlined in
Subsection A.3.a. above.
4. Recovery Phase. For purposes of evaluating water-level recovery,
the recovery phase duration will be equal to the pumping phase
duration. For example, if the pumping phase is eight hours in
§ 16.21.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.21.050
1.01:577
§ 16.21.060. Aquifer Test Procedures. [Amended by Ord. 05-4]
duration, water levels eight hours after the pump has been turned
off will be compared to the pre-pumping static water level to assess
recovery magnitude and degree of recovery.
a. If water-level recovery is less than 90% of full recovery at the
end of a recovery phase of similar duration as the pumping
phase, the applicant must show through standard/recognized
aquifer test analytical methods and calculations that the well
or wells are capable of full recovery. If full recovery cannot be
shown or groundwater mining/dewatering has occurred, the
applicant will need to review and adjust the site demands and
development units as outlined in Subsection A.3.a.
5. Neighboring Well.
a. If the drawdown is measured or projected to be more than one
foot at any existing adjacent property well or along the
subdivision boundary, the applicant's hydrogeologist must
evaluate long-term potential impacts to adjacent properties
based on the actual operating condition of wells in that zone or
along that portion of the subdivision/site plan boundary.
b. If a drawdown of five feet or more (This may be adjusted by a
Township Hydrogeologist and should take lot sizes into
account) is noted in any existing adjacent property well, or is
projected at any property boundary, then the aquifer will be
deemed to have insufficient transmissivity and capacity to
support the proposed subdivision/site plan. The applicant will
need to review the site demand, development units, and well
locations to ensure that drawdown will not exceed five feet at
any site boundaries.
6. Impacts to streams and wetlands. If drawdown is measured or
projected to induce leakage from streams or wetlands such that
base flow in these streams will be directly reduced or wetlands
partially or entirely dewatered, then the demand and development
units must be reduced to prevent adverse impacts to stream flow
and wetlands.
7. Additional Testing. Any test that must be repeated, restarted, or reconducted
at a reduced demand, must satisfy all the requirements
of this chapter including but not limited to renotification of all
property owners within 500 feet and resubmission of an aquifer
test plan for Board approval prior to implementation of the test.
A. Procedures.
1. The first test phase will involve the collection of background water
levels prior to the start of the test. The second test phase will
involve the pumping of water from the well and the monitoring of
§ 16.21.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.21.060
1.01:578
water-level drawdown in the observation and pumping wells. The
third test phase will involve the measurement of water-level
recovery in the observation and pumping wells after the pump has
been shut down. This third phase of the test must, at a minimum,
be the same length as the pumping phase.
2. The aquifer test (all three phases) shall not be conducted during a
precipitation event or events in which total precipitation equals or
exceeds 0.5 inches. Precipitation must be recorded with a National
Weather Service acceptable rain gauge on site during all phases of
testing and measurements for each day must be included in the
hydrogeologic report. If precipitation occurs during the test, the
applicant shall provide precipitation amounts and sufficient data to
show that the precipitation did not recharge the aquifer during the
test and impair the test results. If precipitation amounts exceeding
0.5-inches are recorded, the test may have to be repeated.
3. The pumping equipment must be installed in the pumping well at
least 24 hours prior to the start of the background phase.
4. Prior to starting the background phase, water levels in the test well
and observation wells must be permitted to stabilize for a minimum
of three days after all drilling activities are completed.
5. During the background phase, water levels should be collected at a
minimum of one measurement per hour for the twenty-four-hour
period prior to the start of the pumping test. It is the applicant's
responsibility to collect sufficient data to determine background
conditions and to ensure that antecedent influences can be fully
characterized. Barometric measurements and additional waterlevel
measurements can be made by the applicant to evaluate the
change in water levels resulting from barometric pressure changes
and/or influences from off-site pumping.
6. On the day of the pumping phase, water levels shall be collected
from the pumping and observation wells to determine static water
level conditions prior to the start of pumping. Water levels in wells
on neighboring properties should be allowed to stabilize to at or
near static prior to the start of pumping. For any observation well
which has been pumped within the 24 hours preceding the test, two
depth-to-water measurements, at least one hour apart, shall be
collected to assess if the well has fully recovered prior to the start
of pumping.
7. When the aquifer test is started, the pumping flow rate shall be
adjusted, within the first several minutes of pumping, to a uniform
(constant) pumping rate as required for a constant-rate test and in
accordance with the approved aquifer test plan. The flow rate shall
not vary by more than 10% throughout the test. If the flow rate
fluctuates more than 10%, the test may be deemed invalid and the
§ 16.21.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.21.060
1.01:579
applicant will be required to repeat the notification and testing
process.
8. Water-level measurements during the pumping phase of the test
shall be collected in accordance with Table A-1. This same schedule
shall be followed for the recovery phase of testing upon shut down
of the pump in the test well.
Table A-1: Minimum Frequency of Water-Level
Measurements in Wells During Pumping and Recovery
Phases of Aquifer Test
Time Since
Pumping Began
or Stopped Test Well Observation Well
0 to 5 Minutes 0.5 Minutes 0.5 Minutes
5 to 10 Minutes 1 Minute 1 Minute
10 to 30 Minutes 2 Minutes 2 Minutes
30 to 60 Minutes 5 Minutes 5 Minutes
60 to 120 Minutes 10 Minutes 10 Minutes
2 to 24 Hours 30 Minutes 30 Minutes
9. Aquifer Pumping Test Rate and Duration. The rate and duration of
the aquifer test will depend upon the size of the proposed
development and expected average and peak daily demands for
water.
a. The average daily and average yearly water demand for human
consumption within the subdivision or site plan must be
determined according to the guidelines in N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.6.
Demand calculations must include irrigation systems, if
proposed, and water usage for filling of swimming pools and all
other demands. The peak-day demand is twice the average
daily demand. For non-residential developments, peak-day
demand must include seasonal factors.
b. The pumping phase must simulate peak-day demand and
therefore, the pumping phase duration is not to extend more
than 24 hours. The minimum pumping rate is calculated by
dividing the peak-day demand by 1440 minutes per twentyfour-
hour period. If the well yield is sufficient, shorter pumping
periods can be used, but should be no less than eight hours in
duration.
c. If the demand exceeds 100,000 gallons per day, a New Jersey
Water Allocation Permit must be obtained from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 16.21.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.21.060
1.01:580
§ 16.21.070. Observation Well Requirements-Well Testing.
[Amended by Ord. 05-4]
d. For mixed developments containing both residential and
nonresidential properties, each portion will be tested
separately. Wells installed for the residential portion must be
used as observation wells for the nonresidential testing and
wells installed for nonresidential use must be used as
observation wells for the residential testing.
e. The pumping rate will be determined by equipping the
discharge pipe with a calibrated flow meter to measure flow
rate and determine total volume pumped from the well.
f. The discharge shall be directed so that it leaves the site
without infiltrating to the aquifer. The pumped water discharge
location must be at least 200 feet from the pumping well. Any
and all permits required by the NJDEP and/or local authorities
for the discharge of pumped water must be obtained prior to
starting the test.
A. Observation Wells.
1. The number of observation wells required per aquifer test will
depend on the number of dwelling units and/or commercial water
demand. New and existing observation wells may be located such
that they can be used as future water-supply wells but they shall be
located in such a manner that will yield the most accurate
information concerning the aquifer.
2. Observation wells should be completed to similar depths as the
pumping well.
3. Observation wells must be located parallel and perpendicular to
strike of the primary regional fractures and those intersected by
the tested well. Additional observation wells should be located to
evaluate potential secondary fractures and impacts to adjacent
properties.
4. A fracture trace analysis showing the location and orientation of
fracture lineaments must be included with the Aquifer Test Plan.
This same analysis with additional information regarding septic
system locations must be included in the Final Hydrogeologic
Report. The fracture trace analysis must be used to identify all
observation wells on the site and to identify neighboring property
owner's wells to be monitored during the test.
5. All wells must be located in accordance with the minimum
distances required by N.J.A.C. 7:10 12.12.
6. One observation well should be located within 200 feet of the test
well and at least one observation well should be located along a
§ 16.21.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.21.070
1.01:581
§ 16.21.080. Nearby Well/Spring Owners Notification Requirements
and Procedures. [Amended by Ord. 05-4]
fracture trace or preferential fracture direction between 200 and
500 feet from the pumping well.
7. For residential developments of two new residential units or more,
the number of observation wells shall be as shown in Table B-1.
8. Non-Residential Developments: For non-residential developments
with anticipated daily demands exceeding 800 gallons per day, the
number of observation wells shall be as shown in Table B-2.
9. The observation wells and the pumping well must have a geologic
log describing the depth and types of soils and rocks encountered
and the depth and yields of all water-bearing fracture zones. The
logs must include static water-level measurements and total yield
estimates for each well.
Table B-1: Observation Well Requirements for Residential
Subdivisions
Number of Proposed
New Units Number of Observation Wells
2 to 5 2 (minimum of 1 new well within
proposed development)
6 to 25 3 (minimum of 2 new wells within
proposed development)
26 to 49 5 (minimum of 4 new wells within
proposed development)
50 or more Test proposal submitted to Board and
NJDEP for review and approval
Table B-2: Observation Well Requirements for
Nonresidential Developments.
Average Demand
(Gallons Per Day) Number of Observation Wells
800 to 1,999 2 (minimum of 1 new well within
proposed development)
2,000 to 9,999 3 (minimum of 2 new wells within
proposed development)
10,000 to 99,999 5 (minimum of 2 new wells within
proposed development)
100,000 or more Obtain NJDEP Water Allocation
Permit
A. Notification and Response of Nearby Owners.
§ 16.21.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.21.080
1.01:582
1. Notification.
a. Owners of existing wells and springs on lots located within 500
feet of the subdivision/site plan boundary shall be given an
opportunity to have their wells/springs monitored during the
aquifer test.
b. Such opportunity shall be given by the applicant by notice via
certified mail and shall state the time and place of the aquifer
test and any other additional information as may be required
by the Planning Board. A notice acceptable to the Township of
Raritan is included in the aquifer test application package.
c. The notice shall indicate that such existing well may be
monitored, if agreed to by the well owner, provided the well is
readily accessible. Such notice shall indicate that the existing
well owner must respond within seven days of notice receipt
and the applicant's responsibility is to monitor up to three
wells on properties within 500 feet of the subdivision
boundaries.
d. The applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance for itself
and all contractors utilized and pay all costs associated with
the monitoring of any existing residential well.
e. Prior to monitoring, all buried wells must be raised to a
minimum of 12 inches above grade to allow access and
retrofitted with pitless well adapters etc. per N.J.A.C.
7:10-12.20 well head requirements.
f. All wells shall be chlorinated each time they are opened for
service or monitoring, unless the owner specifically waives the
requirement of chlorination in writing.
g. The costs of extending, restoring or replacing a well damaged
as a result of testing shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
h. The applicant shall indemnify and hold the Township and its
consultants and representatives harmless from any liability in
connection with these testing requirements.
2. Response.
a. If the owner of the lot within 500 feet of the subdivision
boundaries decides to participate by agreeing to have their
existing well monitored, they shall notify the applicant by
certified mail.
b. Such response shall be provided within seven days of receipt of
the certified notice from the applicant.
c. If the applicant receives no response within the time provided,
the response shall be deemed to be negative.
§ 16.21.080 CODE ADOPTION § 16.21.080
1.01:583
§ 16.21.090. Sample Notice of Aquifer Test. [Amended by Ord. 05-4]
Chapter 16.22
ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
§ 16.22.010. Establishment of Zones. [Prior code § 15-9.1; amended
by Ord. 91-35; Ord. 93-24; Ord. 98-47; Ord. 99-1; Ord. 01-28; Ord.
02-42; Ord. 02-47; Ord. 07-33; Ord. 08-8; Ord. 08-11; Ord. 08-12;
Ord. 08-13; Ord. 08-17; Ord. 12-1; Ord. 14-20; Ord. 2016-1; Ord.
2016-11; 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-20; 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-23]
d. Protection of Monitored Wells and Selection of Wells for
Monitoring.
i. All reasonable efforts must be made to protect the
potability of water from the monitored well.
ii. In the case when more than three property owners within
500 feet of the subdivision boundaries decide to
participate and to have their existing wells monitored, only
three must be monitored.
iii. However, if any of the property owners requesting
monitoring have wells completed to a depth less than 100
feet, these wells must also be monitored in addition to
three other wells.
iv. A map depicting the location of all wells to be monitored
and a list of all property owners within 500 feet of the
subdivision boundary that requested monitoring is to be
submitted to the Board's hydrogeologist for review and
approval prior to implementing the test.
v. The observation wells on neighboring properties should be
selected to assess water-level drawdown impacts from the
pumping well will extend beyond the subdivision boundary
in any direction.
vi. The Board reserves the right to retain a qualified
hydrogeologist to review the proposed monitoring
locations and to make recommendations to revise the
locations to be monitored.
A. Sample Notice of Aquifer Test. Sample Notices shall follow the form as
recommended and approved by the Township Planning Board. An
application package containing the recommended form shall be kept on
file in the Planning Board Office.
A. For the purpose of this Title, Raritan Township is divided into the
following zone districts:
§ 16.21.080 RARITAN CODE § 16.22.010
1.01:584
§ 16.22.020. Zoning Map. [Prior code § 15-9.2; amended by Ord.
12-1]
AR-5 Agricultural Residential District
AR-2 Agricultural Residential District 2
R-1 Rural Residential (very low density) District
R-1A Rural Residential (low density) District
R-2 Rural Residential (conservation density) District
R-3 Residential (low density) District
R-4 Residential (moderate density) District
R-5 Planned Residential Development District
R-6 Residential (single-family attached and detached) District
R-6LM Low and Moderate Income Housing District
R-7 Residential (multifamily) District
R-8 Planned Age Restricted Adult Community Zone District
R-9 Planned Age Restricted, Assisted Living Facility
Development District
MF 100% Affordable Housing Overlay Zone
B-1 Neighborhood Business District
B-2 Commercial District
B-3 Community Commercial District
B-4 Highway Business District
B-5 Low Intensity Highway District
I-1 Restricted Industrial District
I-2 Major Industrial District
O-1 Professional Office District
O-2 Business Office District
P Public and Institutional District
H Hospital District
PCOS Planned Commercial-Office Service District
RJR Raritan Junction Redevelopment District
GH Group Homes Overlay Zone
C-R-R Commercial-Recreation-Residential Overlay Zone
OR Outdoor Recreation Overlay Zone
SJRR South Junction Road Redevelopment District
UBR U.S. Bronze Redevelopment District
A. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts within Raritan
Township are established on the 2011 Zoning Map of the Township,
§ 16.22.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.22.020
1.01:585
§ 16.22.025. Zoning Map Amendments.
which is made a part of Title 16 of the Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Raritan. The map, and all notations, references and
designations shown thereon, shall be as much a part of the Title as if it
was fully described and set forth herein.
B. A copy of the 2011 Zoning Map shall be on file in the Planning Board
Office and shall bear the signature of the Township Clerk and the date
of adoption on the cover sheet.
A. The Zoning Map shall be amended to show Block 9, Lot 18 as being in
the GH (Group Homes) Zone overlay zone. [Amended by Ord. 08-8]
B. The Zoning Map shall be amended to show Block 16.01, Lots 37.01 and
54 as being located in the I-2 zone with an overlay zoning of R-10.
[Amended by Ord. 08-11]
C. The Zoning Map shall be amended to include Block 63.01, lots 6, 7, 8,
8.01 and 8.02, and Block 86, lots 3, 6, 8, 26.02 and 29 in the AR-5 Zone.
[Amended by Ord. 08-13]
D. The Zoning Map shall be amended to rename the AR zone to the AR-5
zone. [Amended by Ord. 08-13]
E. The Zoning Map shall be amended to show Block 16, Lots 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 13, and 50 and Block 9, Lots 20 and 21 being in the R-3 zone.
[Amended by Ord. 08-14]
F. The Zoning Map shall be amended to show Block 16, Lots 14.03, 14.04,
15, 67 and 67.03, and Block 16.03, Lot 1, as being in the OR - Outdoor
Recreation overlay zone. [Amended by Ord. 08-17; 6-5-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-14]
G. The Zoning Map shall be amended to show Block 48, Lot 1, and Block
49, Lots 2, 2.01, 2.02 and 4 and Block 52, Lot 1 and Block 53.01, Lot
1.58 being in the P zone. [Amended by Ord. 08-30]
H. The Zoning Map shall be amended by designating the entirety of the
designated redevelopment area, consisting of Block 16.02/Lot 41
containing approximately 44.61 acres, within a new RJR Raritan
Junction Redevelopment District. [Amended by Ord. 12-1]
I. The Zoning Map shall be amended by deleting "R-10" and replacing it
with "MF" for the designation of the entirety of the designated
redevelopment area, consisting of Block 16.01/Lots 37.01 and 54
containing approximately 11.59 acres. [Amended by Ord. 14-20]
J. The Zoning Map shall be amended to designate the entirety of the
designated redevelopment area consisting of Block 27, Lot 22,
containing approximately 7.7 acres, as a new SJRR South Junction Road
Redevelopment District. [Added 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-20]
§ 16.22.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.22.025
1.01:586
Chapter 16.24A
R-1 RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE
§ 16.24A.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.3(a); amended by Ord.
08-3]
Recognizing the physical and ecological constraints in this area as
documented in the Township Master Plan, it is the purpose of this zone to
limit development to agricultural and large lot rural residential and related
uses.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I and II set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title, and the
following regulations.
§ 16.24A.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.3(b);
amended by Ord. 90-18; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24A.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.3(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
K. The Zoning Map shall be amended to designate the entirety of the
designated redevelopment area consisting of Block 40, Lot 4,
containing approximately 21 acres, as a new UBR U.S. Bronze
Redevelopment District. [Added 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-23]
A. Single-family detached dwellings;
B. Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including farm product sales, in
accordance with the requirements of Section 16.24A.050. Commercial
greenhouses are permitted as part of a farm as defined in this Title;
C. Golf course and country club, provided such is located on a lot having
an area of at least 100 acres, and provided that no structure or building
shall be located closer than 200 feet to any property line.
1. Activities may include club house, pro shop, noncommercial
swimming pool, noncommercial tennis courts, maintenance
buildings.
2. Off-street parking shall be provided as specified by this Title. No
portion of such off-street parking area shall be located closer to any
property line than 100 feet.
3. The Planning Board may require appropriate screening of parking
areas, tennis courts, swimming pool and similar outdoor activities
and may require shielding of outdoor lighting to prevent glare on
adjacent properties.
A. Private garages and carports;
§ 16.22.025 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24A.030
1.01:587
§ 16.24A.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.3(d); amended
by Ord. 94-5; Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24A.050. Limitations. [Prior code § 15-9.3(e); amended by Ord.
08-3]
B. Swimming pools and other recreational facilities for the residential
uses and normally conducted on a residential lot;
C. Signs, fences and storage sheds;
D. The taking in of not more than two roomers or boarders;
E. Home offices;
F. Customary uses incidental to an agricultural or horticultural use
permitted in this zone;
G. Noncommercial kennels. (See Section 16.02.030, Definitions)
A. Public and private schools and child care centers;
B. Houses of worship;
C. Public uses;
D. Essential services;
E. Farm stands;
F. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations;
G. Home occupations;
H. Camps;
I. Riding academies and boarding stables;
J. Animal hospitals and commercial kennels;
K. Agricultural research facilities;
L. Accessory apartments. (See Section 16.02.030, Definitions);
M. Group homes;
N. ECHO unit.
A. Keeping of Animals on Residential or Nonfarm Lots. On residential and
nonfarm lots:
1. The keeping or raising of livestock, horses, poultry or rabbits shall
be limited to lots of at least three acres in area and shall be limited
to one head of livestock or horses, or 20 fowl or rabbits per acre.
The keeping or raising of swine, fur-bearing animals or animals
§ 16.24A.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.24A.050
1.01:588
§ 16.24A.060. Exceptions to Minimum Lot Size, Lot Width and
Cluster Development Prohibition. [Amended by Ord. 98-36; Ord.
98-31; Ord. 08-3]
which, by reason of the nature of their diet and/or living habits
normally cause or result in objectionable odors, is prohibited.
2. The keeping of household pets such as birds, cats, dogs and rabbits
is not in any way regulated by Subsection A.1. of this section and
does not require any minimum acreage.
B. Sale of Household Goods and Services. The sale of household goods and
services, and the advertising and display of such goods for sale are
prohibited, except in the case of garage or yard sales held no more than
twice a year.
C. Farm Product Sales. Farm product sales may take place on any farm or
residential lot, provided that:
1. Only farm produce grown on the lot comprising the farm or
residence may be sold;
2. The produce shall be displayed on the ground or on a table or other
similar portable display. Any display area shall not exceed 100
square feet in surface area;
3. The display shall be removed at the end of the sales season;
4. The display area shall be set back at least 20 feet from the edge of
the traveled lane to provide for sufficient room for parking;
D. Noncommercial kennels shall be permitted on a minimum of three
acres with a minimum setback of 50 feet.
A. Any vacant lot existing as of the date of adoption of the ordinance
codified in this section in the R-1 zoning district which lot shall become
nonconforming as to lot area or width or both as a result of said
ordinance (which amended Schedules I-III set out in the Appendix
following this Title) may be improved with a single-family dwelling and
permitted accessory structures provided:
Such lot could have been improved with a single-family dwelling and
accessory structures under the R-1 zoning district regulations existing
immediately prior to adoption of said ordinance.
B. No lot improved with a single-family dwelling as of the date of adoption
of the ordinance codified in this section shall be precluded from being
expanded or from adding otherwise permitted accessory structures or
uses onto such lot because such will not comply with the lot area and/or
lot width requirements of the R-1 zoning district as amended by said
ordinance provided:
§ 16.24A.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24A.060
1.01:589
Chapter 16.24B
R-1A RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE
§ 16.24B.010. Zone Created. [Amended by Ord. 89-11; Ord. 08-3]
There is created and R-1A zoning district classification. The following area
shall comprise the R-1A zoning district:
All of the area shown on the official Zoning Map of the Township of Raritan
in the R-3 zoning district in the following blocks:
Block 60
Block 63
Block 63.01
Block 83
Block 84
Block 86
Block 86.01
1. Such expansion or accessory structure or use would have been
permitted under the R-1 zoning district regulations existing
immediately prior to adoption of said ordinance;
2. Such expansion or accessory structure or use otherwise complies
with all required yard regulations of the R-1 zoning district.
C. A development application for any property located in the R-1 zoning
district which application was deemed complete in accordance with
these development regulations and the municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.
40:55D-1 et seq., prior to the introduction of Ordinance No. 98-31 on
July 27, 1998 shall be exempt from the provisions of Ordinance No
98-31 and continue to be processed under the provision of the R-1
zoning district as such existed to the adoption of Ordinance No. 98-31.
Any substantial revision to the preliminary plat application as part of
the Planning Board review process of those completed applications
qualifying under this exemption, shall continue to be processed under
the provisions of the R-1 zoning district as such existed prior to the
adoption of Ordinance No. 98-31.
Following the approval of a preliminary and/or final plat of such
subdivision application exempt from the provisions of Ordinance No.
98-31, or the discontinuance, withdrawal or denial of such application,
no further subdivision application to create an additional lot or lots
shall be accepted or approved, except such applications which comply
with the provisions of said ordinance.
§ 16.24A.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.24B.020
1.01:590
§ 16.24B.020. Uses and General Requirements. [Amended by Ord.
89-11; Ord. 94-5; Ord. 08-3; Ord. 08-10]
All zoning and development ordinance regulations and requirements
including use, height, yard and building requirements, applying to an R-3
zoning district, shall apply to the R-1A zoning district except that the
minimum lot area applicable to the R-1A district for a single-family
residential permitted use shall be 100,000 square feet. It is specifically
the intent that no use shall be permitted in the R-1A district unless such
use is a principal permitted use, permitted accessory use or conditional
use in the R-3 zoning district. It is specifically the intent to include as
conditional uses in the R-1A zoning district all conditional uses in the R-3
zoning district including low intensity highway-oriented uses and ECHO
units subject to the standards for such conditional uses as set forth in the
zoning ordinances. It is specifically the intent to permit subject Planning
Board approval lot averaging and cluster development in the R-1A zoning
district except that the conventional lot size applicable to the R-1A district
shall be not less than 100,000 square feet.
Footnote 17 on Schedule I of Schedule of Area, Yard and Building
Requirements of the Development Ordinance declared to be a part of Title
16 by Section 16.64.010 is not applicable to the R-1A zoning district.25
§ 16.24B.030. Existing Lots. [Amended by Ord. 08-31]
Chapter 16.24C
A. Any vacant lot existing as of April 28th, 2008 in the R-1A zoning district
which lot shall become nonconforming as to lot area or width or both as
a result of the minimum lot size increase from 80,000 to 100,000 square
feet, pursuant to Ordinance No. 08-10, may be improved with a singlefamily
dwelling and permitted accessory structures provided that such
lot could have been improved with a single-family dwelling and
accessory structures under the R-1A zoning district regulations existing
immediately prior to April 28th, 2008.
B. No lot improved with a single-family dwelling as of April 28th, 2008
shall be precluded from being expanded or from adding otherwise
permitted accessory structures or uses onto such lot because such will
not comply with the lot area and/or lot width requirements of the R-1A
zoning district provided that:
1. Such expansion or accessory structure or use would have been
permitted under the R-1A zoning district regulations existing
immediately prior to Ordinance No. 08-10 adopted on April 28th,
2008.
2. Such expansion or accessory structure or use otherwise complies
with all required yard regulations of the R-1A zoning district.
25.Editor's Note: Footnote 17 on Schedule I was deleted by Ord. 08-4.
§ 16.24B.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24B.030
1.01:591
R-2 RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE
§ 16.24C.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.4(a); amended by Ord.
08-3]
Recognizing the important historic heritage associated with this area, it is
the purpose of this zone to limit development to low density residential,
agricultural, and related uses compatible with the existing structures and
uses.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I and II set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title, and the
following regulations.
§ 16.24C.020. Prinicipal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.4(b);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24C.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.4(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24C.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.4(d); amended
by Ord. 94-5; Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-3]
A. Single-family detached dwellings;
B. Any form of agriculture or horticulture, excluding commercial
greenhouses. However, the sale of farm products is permitted in
accordance with the requirements of Section 16.28.050.
A. Private garages and carports;
B. Swimming pools and other recreational facilities for the residential
uses and normally conducted on individual lots;
C. Signs, fences and storage sheds;
D. The taking in of not more than two roomers or boarders;
E. Home offices;
F. Customary uses incidental to an agricultural or horticultural use
permitted in this zone.
A. Public and private schools and child care centers;
B. Public uses;
C. Essential services;
D. Home occupations;
E. Accessory apartments. (See Section 16.02.030. Definitions);
§ 16.24B.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.24C.040
1.01:592
§ 16.24C.050. Limitations. [Prior code § 15-9.4(e); amended by Ord.
08-3]
Chapter 16.24D
R-3 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
§ 16.24D.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.5(a); amended by Ord.
08-3]
It is the purpose of this zone to preserve the open agricultural character of
this section of the Township and, at the same time, provide areas for lowdensity
single-family residential development and related uses.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I, II and III set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title, and the
following regulations.
F. Group homes;
G. ECHO unit.
A. Keeping of Animals on Residential or Nonfarm Lots. The keeping or
raising of livestock, horses, poultry or rabbits shall be limited to lots of
at least three acres in area, and shall be limited to one head of livestock
or horse or 20 fowl or rabbits per acre. The keeping or raising of swine,
fur-bearing animals, which by reason of the nature of their diet and/or
living habits normally cause or result in objectionable odors, is
prohibited.
B. Sale of Household Goods and Services. The sale of household goods and
services, and the advertising and display of such goods for sale are
prohibited, except in the case of garage or yard sales held no more than
twice a year.
C. Farm product Sales. Farm product sales may take place on any farm or
residential lot provided that:
1. Only farm produce grown on the lot comprising the farm or
residence may be sold;
2. The produce shall be displayed on the ground or a table, or other
similar portable display. Any display area shall not exceed 100
square feet in surface area;
3. The display shall be removed at the end of the sales season;
4. The display area shall be set back at least 20 feet from the edge of
the traveled lane to provide for sufficient room for parking.
§ 16.24C.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24D.020
1.01:593
§ 16.24D.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.5(b);
amended by Ord. 90-18; Ord. 96-15; Ord. 98-50; Ord. 08-3]
A. Single-family detached dwellings;
B. Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including farm product sales in
accordance with the requirements of Section 16.24D.050. Commercial
greenhouses are permitted as part of a farm as defined in this Title;
C. Golf course and country club provided such is located on a lot having an
area of at least 100 acres and provided that no structure or building
shall be located closer than 200 feet to any property line.
1. Activities may include club house, proshop, noncommercial
swimming pool, noncommercial tennis courts, maintenance
buildings.
2. Off-street parking shall be provided as specified by this Title. No
portion of such off-street parking area shall be located closer to any
property line than 100 feet.
3. The Planning Board may require appropriate screening of such
parking areas, tennis courts, swimming pool and similar outdoor
activities and may require shielding of outdoor lighting to prevent
glare on adjacent properties.
4. It is the intent of the amendment to also permit a golf course and
golf course and country club in the R-1A zoning district subject to
the same provision as specified for the R-3 zoning district.
D. Research Farms.
1. Research farm for agricultural experimentation and trials.
Ancillary uses may include but not be limited to laboratories,
meetings and conference rooms, offices, facilities used for storing
agricultural products and supplies, garages for the storage and
repair of farm machinery used on the premises only and facilities
associated with the disposition and of agricultural waste materials.
Such facilities associated with the disposition and treatment of
agricultural waste materials shall be subject to necessary
permitting by appropriate governmental units or agencies.
2. Development Standards for Research Farms.
a. No building or structure except for fencing and gating shall be
located within 300 feet of any property line.
b. No more than 5% of the property shall be occupied by
buildings and structures.
c. The height of buildings and structures shall not exceed 3 1/2
stories. In no case shall such 3 1/2 stories exceed a height of 45
feet.
§ 16.24D.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.24D.020
1.01:594
§ 16.24D.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.5(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24D.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.5(d); amended
by Ord. 94-5; Ord. 96-15; Ord. 98-47; Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-3]
d. The minimum lot size shall be 150 acres.
A. Private garages and carports;
B. Swimming pools and other recreational facilities for the residential
uses and normally conducted on individual lots;
C. Signs, fences and storage sheds;
D. The taking in of not more than two roomers or boarders;
E. Home offices;
F. Customary uses incidental to an agricultural or horticultural use
permitted in this zone;
G. Noncommercial kennels. (See Section 16.02.030, Definitions and
Section 16.24D.050.D.
A. Public and private schools and child care centers;
B. Houses of worship;
C. Public Uses;
D. Essential services;
E. Farm stands;
F. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations;
G. Home occupations;
H. Camps;
I. Riding academies and boarding stables;
J. Animal hospitals and commercial kennels;
K. Hospitals;
L. Low-intensity highway-oriented uses;
M. Accessory apartments. (See Section 16.02.030, Definitions);
N. Group homes;
O. ECHO unit;
P. Low-intensity highway-oriented conditional uses — NJSH-12.
§ 16.24D.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24D.050
1.01:595
§ 16.24D.050. Limitations. [Prior code § 15-9.5(e); amended by Ord.
08-3]
Chapter 16.24E
R-4 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
§ 16.24E.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.6(a); amended by Ord.
08-3]
Recognizing the developmental conflicts in this area of topographic
constraints versus the availability of public utilities, it is the purpose of
this zone to limit development to medium density single-family residential
development and related uses.
A. Keeping of Animals on Residential or Nonfarm Lots. On residential and
nonfarm lots:
1. Keeping or raising of livestock, horses, poultry or rabbits shall be
limited to lots of at least three acres in area and shall be limited to
one head of livestock or horses, or 20 fowl or rabbit per acre. The
keeping or raising of swine, fur-bearing animals or animals which,
by reason of the nature of their diet and/or living habits normally
cause or result in objectionable odors, is prohibited.
2. The keeping of household pets such as birds, cats, dogs and
rabbits, is not in any way regulated by Subsection A.1. of this
section, and does not require any minimum acreage.
B. Sale of Household Goods and Services. The sale of household goods and
services, and the advertising and display of such goods for sale are
prohibited, except in the case of garage or yard sales held no more than
twice a year.
C. Farm Product Sales. Farm product sales may take place on any farm or
residential lot, provided that:
1. Only farm produce grown on the lot comprising the farm or
residence may be sold;
2. The produce shall be displayed on the ground or a table, or other
similar portable display. Any display area shall not exceed 100
square feet in surface area;
3. The display shall be removed at the end of the sales season;
4. The display area shall be set back at least 20 feet from the edge of
the traveled lane to provide for sufficient room for parking.
D. Noncommercial kennels shall be permitted on a minimum of three
acres with a minimum setback of 50 feet.
§ 16.24D.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.24E.010
1.01:596
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I, II and III set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title, and the
following regulations.
§ 16.24E.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.6(b);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24E.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.6(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24E.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.6(d); amended by
Ord. 94-5; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24E.050. Limitations. [Prior code § 15-9.6(e); amended by Ord.
08-3]
A. Single-family detached dwellings;
B. Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including farm product sales in
accordance with the requirements of Section 16.24E.050.
A. Private garages and carports;
B. Swimming pools and other recreational facilities for the residential
uses and normally conducted on individual lots;
C. Signs, fences and storage sheds;
D. The taking in of not more than two roomers or boarders;
E. Home offices;
F. Customary uses incidental to an agricultural or horticultural use
permitted in this zone.
A. Public and private schools and day nurseries;
B. Houses of worship;
C. Public uses;
D. Essential services;
E. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations;
F. Home occupations;
G. Nursing homes;
H. Accessory apartments. (See Section 16.02.030, Definitions);
I. Group homes;
J. ECHO Units.
§ 16.24E.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24E.050
1.01:597
Chapter 16.24F
R-5 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
§ 16.24F.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.7(a); amended by Ord.
08-3]
It is the purpose of this zone to provide appropriate areas of the Township
for higher density, predominantly residential development, including a
range of dwelling-unit types, from single-family detached homes to
apartments.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I, II and III set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title, and the
following regulations.
A. Keeping of Animals on Residential or Nonfarm Lots. On residential and
nonfarm lots:
1. The keeping or raising of livestock, horses, poultry or rabbits shall
be limited to lots of at least three acres in area and shall be limited
to one head of livestock or horses or 20 fowl or rabbits per acre.
The keeping or raising of swine, fur-bearing animals which, by
reason of the nature of their diet and/or living habits normally
cause or result in objectionable odors, is prohibited.
2. The keeping of household pets such as birds, cats, dogs and rabbits
is not in any way regulated by Subsection A.1. of this section and
does not require any minimum acreage.
B. Sale of household goods and services. The sale of household goods and
services, and the advertising and display of such goods for sale are
prohibited, except in the case of garage or yard sales held no more than
twice a year.
C. Farm Product Sales. Farm product sales may take place on any farm or
residential lot, provided that:
1. Only farm produce grown on the lot comprising the farm or
residence may be sold;
2. The produce shall be displayed on the ground or on a table, or other
similar portable display. Any display area shall not exceed 100
square feet in surface area;
3. The display shall be removed at the end of the sales season;
4. The display area shall be set back at least 20 feet from the edge of
the traveled lane to provide for sufficient room for parking.
§ 16.24E.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.24F.020
1.01:598
§ 16.24F.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.7(b);
amended by Ord. 85-27; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24F.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.7(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24F.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.7(d); amended by
Ord. 08-3]
A. Single-family-detached dwellings;
B. Planned residential developments in accordance with the requirements
of Section 16.24F.060;
C. Housing for elderly or low and moderate-income families in accordance
with the requirements of Section 16.24F.070;
D. Two-family houses shall be permitted, provided they comply with the
following standards:
1. Safe and proper means of entrance and exit shall be provided.
Staircases providing access to units shall be enclosed or located to
the rear of the structure. Each unit shall have a separate,
independent structure.
2. Each unit shall be connected to public sewer and public water.
Such usage shall follow approval by the Board of Health.
3. Each two-family house shall be located on a lot area of at least
40,000 square feet and minimum frontage width of 200 feet.
4. Each unit shall have a total floor area of at least 500 square feet
and at least one bedroom;
E. Maximum Number of Bedrooms. The maximum number of all bedrooms
on the land proposed to be developed for planned residential
development shall not exceed eight bedrooms times the number of
acres in the tract. In computing the maximum number of bedrooms that
shall be permitted, the following areas of land shall not be included in
the acreage: existing easements land in channel and floodways, and
land on slopes in excess of 20%.
A. Private garages and carports;
B. Swimming pools and other recreational facilities for the residential
uses and normally conducted on individual lots;
C. Signs, fences and storage sheds;
D. The taking in of not more than two roomers or boarders;
E. Home offices.
A. Public and private day schools and day nurseries;
§ 16.24F.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24F.040
1.01:599
§ 16.24F.050. Limitations. [Prior code § 15-9.7(e); amended by Ord.
08-3]
B. Houses of worship;
C. Public uses;
D. Essential services;
E. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations;
F. Nursing homes;
G. Home occupations;
H. Accessory apartments. (See Section 16.02.030, Definitions);
I. Group homes.
A. Keeping of Animals on Residential or Nonfarm Lots. On residential and
nonfarm lots:
1. The keeping or raising of livestock, horses, poultry or rabbits is
prohibited on lots of any size.
2. The keeping of household pets such as birds, cats, dogs and rabbits
is not in any way regulated by Subsection A.1. of this section and
does not require any minimum acreage.
B. Sale of Household Goods and Services. The sale of household goods and
services, and the advertising and display of such goods for sale are
prohibited, except in the case of garage or yard sales held no more than
twice a year.
C. Farm Product Sales. Farm product sales may take place on any farm or
residential lot, provided that:
1. Only farm produce grown on the lot comprising farm or residence
may be sold;
2. The produce shall be displayed on the ground or a table, or other
similar portable display. Any display area shall not exceed 100
square feet in surface area;
3. The display shall be removed at the end of the sales season;
4. The display area shall be set back at least 20 feet from the edge of
the traveled lane to provide for sufficient room for parking.
§ 16.24F.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.24F.060
1.01:600
§ 16.24F.060. Planned Residential Development. [Prior code
§ 15-9.7(f); amended by Ord. 85-25; Ord. 90-28; Ord. 91-31; Ord.
08-3]
The intent of this section is to allow in all portions of the R-5 zone served
by public sewers and public water, and under reasonable requirements,
planned residential developments allowing a variety of housing types within
the overall density limits established. The standards established herein are
based on the premise that a portion of the Township's future housing supply
shall be other than single-family detached housing, to meet the needs of
single- and two-person households of all ages and all income levels.
A. Where Permitted. Planned residential developments shall be permitted
in all portions of the R-5 zone served by public sewer and public water.
B. Minimum Acreage Required. Fifty contiguous acres shall be the
minimum required area for a planned residential development.
C. Uses Permitted. Planned residential development shall include singlefamily
detached structures, single-family attached and multifamily
structures. Cooperative, condominium, rental or sales may be
permitted. Retail and service uses, including parking not in excess of
5% of the land area, shall be permitted. Such uses shall be so located as
to serve the residents of the development.
D. Timing of Development. The Planning Board shall establish reasonable
timing schedules on the sequence and number of housing types that
may be constructed annually as part of planned residential
development.
E. Maximum Number of Bedrooms. The maximum number of all bedrooms
on the land proposed to be developed for planned residential
development shall not exceed eight bedrooms times the number of
acres in the tract. In computing the maximum number of bedrooms that
shall be permitted, the following areas of land shall not be included in
the acreage: existing easements, land in channel and floodways, and
land on slopes in excess of 20%.
F. Maximum Number by Type. Not more than 40% of all bedrooms shall be
in any housing type, single-family detached, single-family attached or
multifamily.
G. Minimum Standards for Single-Family Detached. Single-family
detached housing shall be built in accordance with the standards of the
R-5 zone as may be modified by Section 16.64.020.
H. Minimum Standards for Multifamily Housing (Apartment Units).
1. Placement of Buildings.
a. No building or structure for dwelling use shall face the rear of
another such building, or structure, or the rear of buildings or
§ 16.24F.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24F.060
1.01:601
structures on adjoining properties unless separated by a
minimum distance of 100 feet.
b. Any building or structure which cannot properly be served by
emergency or service vehicles from a street or road abutting
the lot shall be made accessible to such vehicles by a paved
driveway.
c. The minimum distance between buildings and structures shall
be 50 feet. The minimum distance from any building or
structure to any rear or side lot line shall be 50 feet.
Notwithstanding the above, the unenclosed deck on the rear or
side of a multifamily unit may extend not more than 10 feet into
such required 50 feet of distance between buildings and
structures or such required distance from any building or
structure to any rear or side lot line.
2. Parking, Roads and Sidewalks.
a. Parking shall be provided as required by Section 16.70.040.
Dimensions and standard shall be as required in Chapter 16.70
and the standards for site plan review.
b. Roads designed to serve multifamily units shall have a
minimum width of 30 feet, paved and curbed in accordance
with applicable standards.
c. Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet and be
located along streets, between buildings, and between parking
areas and buildings.
3. Maximum number of units in any apartment structure, no more
than eight dwelling units in any unbroken building line of such
structures. A setback of not less than four feet shall be deemed a
satisfactory break in the building line.
4. Recreation. Recreation facilities shall be developed suitably to
serve the residents of the dwelling units. They shall be located in an
area which will not be detrimental to adjacent property owners or
residents by virtue of noise, light, glare and any other objectionable
features emanating from such a facility.
5. Services. No outside area or equipment shall be provided for the
handling of laundry or the outside airing of laundry in any manner.
Sufficient area and equipment shall be made available within each
building for the laundering and artificial drying of laundry of the
occupants of each building. Waste materials and garbage must be
privately disposed of by a method approved by the Township Board
of Health.
6. Landscaping. All developments shall be provided with
professionally designed and executed landscaping. All areas not
§ 16.24F.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.24F.060
1.01:602
utilized for parking areas, driveways, streets and roads,
recreational facilities, patios or terraces shall be provided with
lawns or other suitable groundcover, trees and shrubs. Continuous
evergreen screening shall be provided where multifamily or
attached units abut the tract boundary line, such screening to be
no less than four feet high when planted. In addition, the Planning
Board may, if conditions warrant, require supplemental screening
by a solid fence up to six feet in height. Shade trees shall be
provided along walks, driveways, parking areas, streets and roads.
Screening or buffers consisting of fencing or landscaping may be
required around recreation, parking, utility and refuse disposal
areas, and around other similar areas, at the discretion of the
Planning Board. All landscaping shall be maintained in good
condition and shall be replaced when necessary. Yards, patios and
gardens on individual lots shall be shielded with walls as approved
by the Planning Board to the extent necessary to achieve a
reasonable degree of privacy. No trees shall be planted between
the curb and sidewalks.
7. Minimum Dwelling Unit Size.
a. Efficiencies, 400 square feet.
b. One bedroom, 600 square feet.
c. Two bedroom or more, 750 square feet.
I. Minimum Standards for Single-Family Attached Housing.
1. Individual Lot Requirements.
a. Minimum Width. The average width of all individual lots shall
be not less than 22 feet, and no individual lot shall have a width
of less than 20 feet, such width to be measured at the actual
building setback line for each individual lot.
b. Minimum Area. The average area of all individual lots shall be
not less than 2,200 square feet, and no individual lot shall have
an area of less than 2,000 square feet.
c. Front and Rear Yards. Each individual lot shall have a front and
rear yard, and no such yard shall be less than 20 feet. The
average front and rear yards for all individual lots in any tract
shall be not less than 25 feet.
The number of individual lots with front or rear yards of less
than 25 feet shall be equal to those with front or rear yards of
more than 25 feet, and by the same number of feet.
Corner lots shall observe a setback of at least 25 feet from
each street right-of-way line or edge of pavement, whichever is
greater.
§ 16.24F.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24F.060
1.01:603
d. Side Yard. There shall be a single side yard of not less than 10
feet at the ends of each row.
2. Building Requirements.
a. Design.
No dwelling unit shall have a floor area of less than 800 square
feet.
Each dwelling unit shall have not less than two exposures.
There shall be no more than eight dwelling units in any single
group of dwelling units.
No dwelling unit, or group of dwelling units, shall exceed 2 1/
2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. No living space shall be
permitted above the second floor.
No more than two adjacent dwelling units may be constructed
without providing a front wall setback of not less than two feet.
b. Siting.
Each dwelling unit shall have two means of ingress and egress.
Each group of dwelling units shall set back no less than 50 feet
from any tract boundary line, except that where the rear yard
of an individual lot abuts the rear yard of property adjacent to
the tract, this setback may be reduced to 35 feet if necessary
to enhance the design of the tract.
No group of dwelling units within the tract shall be closer than
30 feet to any other group of dwelling units within the tract.
Dwelling units and accessory buildings on individual lots shall
not, in the aggregate, cover more than 60% of the area of each
individual lot.
c. Parking Requirements. As required in Chapter 16.70.
d. Utilities, Facilities and Landscaping.
i. Refuse storage areas shall be located on each individual
lot and shall be so designed as to minimize any detrimental
effect on the character of the development, and shall meet
the setback requirements set forth herein for groups of
dwelling units.
ii. All utility wiring shall be underground.
iii. Common accessory buildings and facilities shall be
designed to harmonize with the overall character of the
development and shall meet the setback requirements set
forth herein for groups of dwelling units.
§ 16.24F.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.24F.060
1.01:604
iv. Landscaping shall be as required in Subsection H.6 of this
section.
J. Ownership of Common Areas. Common areas of any tract utilized for a
PRD which are not accepted by the Township shall be deemed to a
corporation, association, individuals or other legal entity consisting of a
majority of the property owners within the development, for their use,
control, management and maintenance. Any agreements providing for
such ownership shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board
to ensure that adequate safeguards are included guaranteeing the
continuance of the agreement in perpetuity and protecting the
Township from harm. In any event, the agreement shall give the
Township the right to perform maintenance and assess the cost to the
property owners in the event that the property owners fail to maintain
the property in accordance with the agreement pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55d-43.
K. Maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property
to maintain all off-street parking, loading and unloading areas,
driveways, aisles and accessways in good condition, free of litter and
refuse, potholes, cracked pavement, ice, snow or other seasonal
hazards, etc. All lighting, bumpers, markings, signs, drainage and
landscaping shall be similarly kept in workable, safe and good
condition. If the owner fails to undertake repairs, after proper
notification by the building inspector, the Township Committee may
authorize repairs to be made at the owner's expense if, in the
Committee's opinion, conditions constitute a hazard to the safety and
welfare of the Township residents and visitors.
L. Additional housing for elderly or low and moderate income families.
1. Bonus Provision. The maximum number of bedrooms permitted
under Subsection E of this section may be exceeded by up to 10%,
provided that the 10% or portion thereof is planned, constructed
and maintained as housing for low and moderate income families or
elderly low and moderate income families. This bonus provision
may be applied to any housing type. Such housing for low and
moderate income families or elderly low and moderate income
families shall be subject to all Raritan Township non-zoning
affordable housing ordinances and regulations in effect or as may
be adopted or amended.
2. Waiver. The regulations governing the minimum number of parking
spaces, the minimum square footage of dwelling units or other
similar requirements may be waived, after a public hearing by the
Planning Board, when it becomes necessary for such housing to
meet the specific requirements or recommendations of a
recognized state or federal subsidization program, or covenant
trust system. It is not intended that the density or number of bonus
units may be increased over that provided in this chapter, or that
§ 16.24F.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24F.060
1.01:605
§ 16.24F.070. Senior Citizen Housing. [Prior code § 15-9.7(g);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
Senior citizen housing shall meet the minimum standards for multifamily
housing found in Section 16.24F.060, with the following exceptions and
additions:
setback, height or other requirements shall be waived except
through normal variance procedures.
M. Recreation and Common Open Space. A minimum of 25% of the gross
tract area shall be set aside as common open space as follows:
1. A minimum of 10% of the gross tract area shall be in formal
recreational facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts,
baseball diamonds, playgrounds and playing fields.
2. A minimum of 10% of the gross tract areas shall be in natural
features, vistas, significant wooded areas, vegetation and other
usable open space, which shall be defined as lands other than in
channels and flood-ways, and on slopes in excess of 25%, or water
bodies, whether used for recreation, retention or detention
purposes.
3. Five percent of the gross tract area may include all lands excluded
in Subsection M.2. of this section and water bodies.
N. Preliminary Subdivision and Site Plan Approval of PRD Sections.
1. See preliminary plat, requirements and procedures set forth in the
subdivision and site plan chapters of this Code. Site plans for
multifamily and attached housing, recreation and commercial areas
shall be submitted at a scale of no less than one inch equals 50 feet.
2. Detailed stormwater and soil erosion and sediment control plans
for the entire project shall be submitted, along with the preliminary
submission for Subsection N.1. of the project.
3. Changes in unit count and road, unit, drainage basin, etc. locations
may be required from the sketch plat if, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, the detailed engineering indicates the need.
4. A detailed submission of the homeowners' association bylaws and
legal instrument shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its
attorney's review and approval.
O. Final Submission and Site Plan Approval of PRD Sections. See final plat
requirements and procedures set forth in the subdivision and site plan
chapters of this revision. Site plans shall be submitted at a scale of no
less than one inch equals 50 feet.
A. Minimum project lot size, five acres.
§ 16.24F.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.24F.070
1.01:606
Chapter 16.24G
R-6 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
§ 16.24G.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.8(a); amended by Ord.
08-3]
It is the purpose of this zone to provide areas for medium density residential
use, relatively small lot sizes and attached, as well as detached, singlefamily
units.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I, II and III set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title and the
following regulations.
§ 16.24G.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code 15-9.8(b);
amended by Ord. 08-3; Ord. 08-15]
§ 16.24G.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.8(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
B. Maximum density, 12 units per net acre.
C. Parking requirement, 1/2 space per unit.
D. Minimum dwelling unit size:
1. Efficiency, 400 square feet.
2. One bedroom, 470 square feet.
3. Two bedroom, 550 square feet.
4. Three or more bedrooms not permitted.
E. Utilities required: public sewer and water.
A. Single-family detached dwellings;
B. Any form of agriculture or horticulture, excluding commercial
greenhouses. However, the sale of farm products is permitted in
accordance with the requirements of Section 16.24G.050. 30% of the
Gross Lot Area shall be set aside as either passive or active open space.
A. Private garages and carports;
B. Swimming pools and other recreational facilities for the residential
uses and normally conducted on individual lots;
C. Signs, fences and storage sheds;
D. The taking in of not more than two roomers or boarders;
§ 16.24F.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24G.030
1.01:607
§ 16.24G.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.8(d); amended
by Ord. 94-5; Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24G.050. Limitations. [Prior code § 15-9.8(e); amended by Ord.
08-3]
E. Home offices.
A. Public and private schools and child care centers;
B. Houses of worship;
C. Public uses;
D. Essential services;
E. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations;
F. Nursing homes;
G. Home occupations;
H. Accessory apartments. (See Section 16.02.030, Definitions);
I. Group homes;
J. ECHO unit.
A. Keeping of Animals on Residential or Nonfarm Lots. On residential and
nonfarm lots:
1. The keeping or raising of livestock, horses, poultry or rabbits shall
be limited to lots of at least three acres in area and shall be limited
to one head of livestock or horses, or 20 fowl or rabbits per acre.
The keeping or raising of swine, fur-bearing animals or animals
which, by reason of the nature of their diet and/or living habits
normally cause or result in objectionable odors, is prohibited.
2. The keeping of household pets such as birds, cats, dogs and rabbits
is not in any way regulated by Subsection A.1. of this section and
does not require any minimum acreage.
B. Sale of Household Goods and Services. The sale of household goods and
services and the advertising and display of such goods for sale are
prohibited except in the case of garage or yard sales held no more than
twice a year.
C. Farm Product Sales. Farm product sales may take place on any farm or
residential lot, provided that:
1. Only farm produce grown on the lot comprising the farm or
residence may be sold;
§ 16.24G.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.24G.050
1.01:608
§ 16.24G.060. Single-Family Attached Dwellings. [Amended by Ord.
08-15]
See now 16.24H.070 in the R-6 LM Residential District.
Chapter 16.24H
R-6LM RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 16.24H.010. Created. [Amended by Ord. 87-30; Ord. 98-41; Ord.
08-3]
There is created an R-6LM district within the Township. The following
properties shall be in the R-6LM zoning district.
Block Lot
53 3
53 5
53 9
53 11
53 15
45 2
18 2
18 3
18 13
18 19
18 20
18 21
18 100
63 21
§ 16.24H.020. Low and Moderate Income Units Required. [Amended
by Ord. 87-30; Ord. 90-28; Ord. 99-35; Ord. 08-3]
All development of single-family attached dwellings in the R-6LM district
shall be required to provide housing affordable to low and moderate income
2. The produce shall be displayed on the ground or a table or other
similar portable display. Any display area shall not exceed 100
square feet in surface area;
3. The display shall be removed at the end of the sales season;
4. The display area shall be set back at least 20 feet from the edge of
the traveled lane to provide for sufficient room for parking.
§ 16.24G.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24H.020
1.01:609
households at the rate of at least 20% of the number of dwellings units to
be constructed. All single-family detached dwellings in the R-6LM district
shall be required to provide housing affordable to low and moderate income
households at the rate of at least 15% of the number of dwelling units to be
constructed.
Such low and moderate income units may be provided in single-family
attached units or multifamily dwellings. Any multi-family housing shall
comply with Section 16.24F.060 and Section 16.20.040.B as well as all
applicable provisions of the site plan section of the development ordinance.
If the required percentage of low and moderate income housing units
required to be constructed in an R-6LM district yields a fraction of 1/2 or
more, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number; if the
required percentage yields a fraction of less than 1/2, the number may be
rounded down to the next whole number.
In any development that is staged, phased, or sectioned, the number of
low and moderate income units provided in each stage shall as much be
practical be 20% of the total number of units in each stage, phase, or section
for single-family attached units and 15 for single-family detached units.
§ 16.24H.030. Maximum Height. [Amended by Ord. 87-30; Ord.
08-3]
The maximum height of buildings shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories. In no case
shall such 2 1/2 stories exceed a height of 35 feet.
§ 16.24H.040. Other Area and Bulk Requirements. [Amended by
Ord. 87-30; Ord. 98-41; Ord. 08-3]
All area and bulk requirements in the R-6 zoning district applying to singlefamily
attached units, shall apply to single-family attached units in the
R-6LM zoning district including lot width, minimum yard requirements for
principal and accessory structures and maximum hard surface coverage.
Any multifamily units for low and moderate income households shall be
evenly dispersed through the entire development and shall comply with
all required minimum yard setback regulations and maximum coverage
requirements applicable to single-family attached units in the R-6LM zoning
district.
Open space and active recreation facilities shall be provided as required
by the site development standards of Chapter 16.20 for a single-family
attached dwelling development. Such development shall include units for
low and moderate income households unless such low and moderate income
units have been provided elsewhere through an agreement or arrangement
acceptable to the Municipal Agency, such as via a regional contribution
agreement.
In addition to open space and active recreation facilities permitted
accessory uses may include a clubhouse building. Such clubhouse building
§ 16.24H.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.24H.040
1.01:610
shall be for the exclusive use of the residents of the development to which
it is accessory.
Active recreation facilities and/or a clubhouse building may be located on a
lot other than the lot or lots upon which the single-family attached dwelling
units are located, provided that such lot upon which such active recreation
facilities and/or clubhouse are located is in the same zoning district as the
lot or lots upon which the single-family attached units are located; and
provided further, that such lot upon which active recreational facilities and/
or clubhouse are located is or will be owned by a homeowner's association
which will also own other open space and active recreation facilities in
the development; and provided further, that the location of such active
recreation facilities and/or clubhouse is acceptable to the Municipal Agency.
If a structure for active recreation use or clubhouse use is located on a lot
other than the lot or lots upon which the single-family attached units are
proposed, such structure shall not be located closer to any front property
line than 50 feet, closer to any rear property line than 40 feet nor closer to
any side property line than 20 feet. The height of any recreation structure or
clubhouse shall not exceed one story nor shall such height exceed 20 feet.
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with ordinance
requirements for such active recreation facilities and/or clubhouse on the
lot upon which such facilities are located, except that a swimming pool for
the exclusive use of residents of a development to which such pool and
clubhouse are an accessory, shall provide off-street parking at the following
minimum rate:
Swimming Pool: one space for each 90 square feet of pool surface area (not
including children's wading pools).
Where off-street parking is provided for a swimming pool and an adjacent
clubhouse, both of which are accessory uses to a single-family attached
development and where both facilities are located on the same lot, the
Municipal Agency may reduce the required number of off-street parking
spaces for the two facilities by not more than 20% of the total required
number of parking spaces.
§ 16.24H.050. Permitted Uses. [Amended by Ord. 87-30; Ord. 99-35;
Ord. 08-3]
A. Single-family attached dwellings which shall meet the minimum
standards for single-family attached housing found in Section
16.34.060 of this Title and Sections 16.38.020, 16.38.030, 16.38.040
and 16.38.060 of this chapter.
B. Single-family detached dwellings which shall meet the minimum
standards set forth in Chapter 16.30, R-3 Residential Zone, and subject
to Section 16.38.020.
C. Permitted accessory uses to single-family detached dwellings as set
forth in Section 16.30.030, Section 16.24D.030, Subsections A through
§ 16.24H.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24H.050
1.01:611
§ 16.24H.060. Minimum Standards. [Amended by Ord. 87-30; Ord.
08-3]
§ 16.24H.070. Single-Family Attached Dwellings. [Prior code
§ 15-9.8(f); amended by Ord. 87-27; Ord. 87-30; Ord. 08-3; Ord.
08-15]
Single-family attached dwellings shall meet the minimum standards for
single-family attached housing found in Section 16.24F.060, and the
following:
E which shall meet the minimum standards pertaining to such
permitted accessory uses as set forth in Chapter 16.24D, R-3
Residential Zone.
A. Minimum project lot size, 30 acres.
B. Maximum density, six units per net acre including low and moderate
income housing units. Net acreage shall be calculated by subtracting
from gross acreage, land devoted to existing rights-of-way, existing
easements, land within the 100-year floodplain and land on slopes in
excess of 20%.
C. Utilities required, public water and sewer.
D. Open space required, minimum of 30% of the net tract area. The
Planning Board shall not generally approve open space areas of less
than five acres except when such a site is considered adequate for its
specific use.
E. Ownership of common areas pursuant to Section 16.24F.060.
F. All attached units shall front on an internal street of the project.
A. Minimum project lot size, 15 acres.
B. The maximum density of single-family attached dwellings in the R-6
zoning district shall be 3.3 units per net acre. Net acreage shall be
calculated by subtracting from gross acreage, land devoted to existing
rights-of-way, existing easements, land within the 100-year floodplain
and land on slopes in excess, of 20%.
C. Utilities required, public sewer and water.
D. Unit mix: single-family detached dwellings may be included in the
development.
E. Open space required: minimum of 35% of the net tract area. The
Planning Board shall not generally approve open space areas of less
than five acres except when such a site is considered adequate for its
specific use.
F. Ownership of common areas pursuant to Section 16.24F.060.
§ 16.24H.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.24H.070
1.01:612
Chapter 16.24I
R-7 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
§ 16.24I.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.10(a); amended by Ord.
08-3]
It is the purpose of this zone to provide an area of medium-high density
appropriate to and reserved primarily for the development of apartments
and townhouse dwelling units.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedule I set out in the Appendix
following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title, and the following
regulations.
§ 16.24I.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Amended by Ord. 08-3;
Ord. 08-9]
§ 16.24I.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.10(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24I.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.10(d); amended
by Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-3]
G. All attached units shall front on an internal street of the project.
A. Apartments and townhouses in accordance with the requirements of
Section 16.24I.060;
B. Senior citizen housing in accordance with the requirements of Section
16-24F.070. (Prior code § 15-9.10(b))
C. Single Family dwellings in accordance with the requirements for single
family dwellings in the R-6 zone (Section 16.24G).
A. Private garages and carports;
B. Swimming pools and other recreational facilities for the residential
uses;
C. Signs, fences and storage sheds;
D. Home offices.
A. Public and private schools and child care centers;
B. Public uses;
C. Essential services;
D. Accessory apartments. (See Section 16.02.030, Definitions);
§ 16.24H.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24I.040
1.01:613
§ 16.24I.050. Limitations. [Prior code § 15-9.10(e); amended by
Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24I.060. Apartments and Townhouses. [Prior code § 15-9.10(f);
amended by Ord. 85-27; Ord. 08-3]
Apartments shall meet the minimum standards for multifamily housing
found in Section 16.24F.060, and townhouses shall meet the minimum
standards for single-family attached housing found in Section 16.24F.060
and the following:
§ 16.24I.070. Low and Moderate Income Housing Units. [Amended
by Ord. 87-30; Ord. 90-28; Ord. 08-3]
All developments of apartments and townhouses in the R-7 district shall
be required to provide housing affordable to low and moderate income
households at the rate of at least 20% of the number of dwelling units to be
constructed.
The maximum density including such low and moderate income units be 7.2
units per net acre.
E. Group homes.
A. Keeping of Animals on Residential or Nonfarm Lots. On residential and
nonfarm lots:
1. The keeping or raising of livestock, horses, poultry or rabbits is
prohibited on lots of any size.
2. The keeping of household pets such as birds, cats, dogs and rabbits
is not in any way regulated by Subsection A.1. of this section, and
does not require any minimum acreage.
B. Sale of Household Goods and Services. The sale of household goods and
services and the advertising and display of such goods for sale are
prohibited, except in the case of garage or yard sales held no more than
twice a year.
A. Minimum project lot size, five acres.
B. Maximum density:
1. Apartments, six units per net acre.
2. Townhouses, six units per net acre.
C. Utilities required: public sewer and water.
D. All dwellings shall have access from an internal street of the project.
E. Ownership of common areas pursuant to Section 16.24F.060.
§ 16.24I.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.24I.070
1.01:614
Net acreage shall be calculated by subtracting from gross acreage, land
devoted to existing rights-of-way, existing easements, land within the
100-year floodplain and land on slopes in excess of 20%.
If the required percentage of low and moderate income housing units
required to be constructed in an R-7 district yields a fraction of 0.5 or, more,
the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number; if the required
percentage yields a fraction of less than 0.5, the number may be rounded
down to the next whole number.
In any development that is staged, phased or sectioned, the number of low
and moderate income units constructed in each stage shall as much as
practical be 20% of the total number of units in each stage, phase or section.
Such housing affordable to low and moderate income households shall be
subject to all Raritan Township non-zoning affordable housing ordinances
and regulations in effect or as may be adopted or amended.
Chapter 16.24J
R-8 PLANNED AGE RESTRICTED ADULT COMMUNITY ZONE
§ 16.24J.010. Compliance Required. [Prior code § 15-9.11B(a);
amended by Ord. 98-47; Ord. 08-3]
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with applicable sections of this chapter,
and the following regulations.
§ 16.24J.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.11B(b);
amended by Ord. 98-47; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24J.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.11B(c);
amended by Ord. 98-47; Ord. 08-3]
Permitted accessory uses for permitted principal uses not located within a
planned age restricted adult community development which accessory uses
shall be subject to the area and bulk requirements of the R-3 zoning district
applying to such accessory uses:
A. Single-family detached dwelling and permitted accessory uses thereto
not located within a planned age restricted adult community
development shall meet all area and bulk requirements of the R-3
residential zoning district;
B. Any form of agriculture or horticulture not located within a planned age
restricted adult community development provided such activity
complies with the requirements of the R-3 zoning district;
C. Planned age restricted adult community development in accordance
with Section 16.24J.060.
§ 16.24I.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24J.030
1.01:615
All accessory uses permitted in the R-3 zoning district.
§ 16.24J.040. Permitted Conditional Uses. [Prior code
§ 15-9.11B(d); amended by Ord. 98-47; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24J.050. Limitations. [Prior code § 15-9.11B(e); amended by
Ord. 98-47; Ord. 08-3]
Limitations pertaining to the keeping of animals on residential or nonfarm
lots, sale of household goods and services and farm product sales shall be
the same as applicable in the R-3 residential zoning district.
§ 16.24J.060. Planned Age Restricted Adult Community
Development. [Prior code § 15-9.11B(f); amended by Ord. 98-47;
Ord. 03-35; Ord. 08-3; Ord. 09-1126]
A. Permitted conditional uses within a planned age restricted adult
community development.
1. Houses of worship;
2. Public uses;
3. Essential services;
4. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
B. Permitted conditional uses on lots not located within a planned age
restricted development but within the R-8 zoning district subject to
specific conditional use standards applying thereto and the
requirements of the R-3 zoning district;
1. All conditional uses permitted in the R-3 zoning district.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this type of development to provide
appropriate areas within the Township for housing opportunities for
older citizens (55 and over) via age restrictive covenants, a variety of
housing options, and the inclusion of appropriate recreation, pedestrian
circulation, limited retail, and professional offices as deemed
supportive of this use.
B. Principal permitted uses within a planned age restricted adult
community development:
1. Single-family detached dwellings;
2. Single-family semi-detached dwellings;
26.Note: Section 3 of Ordinance No. 09-11 provides: This Ordinance shall take effect after the
condominium and homeowner associations in the R-8 Planned Age Restricted Adult
Community Zone amend the applicable association documents consistent with this
Ordinance, the Department of Community Affairs registers an amended Public Offering
Statement consistent with this Ordinance, final passage and publication in accordance
with all applicable laws and statutes.
§ 16.24J.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.24J.060
1.01:616
3. Two family dwellings;
4. Quadruplex units.
C. Permitted accessory uses within a planned age restricted adult
community development:
1. Private garages and carports;
2. Recreation facilities to serve the occupants of dwellings within the
planned age restricted adult community development consisting of
swimming pool, tennis courts, exercise rooms, and similar
facilities;
3. Meeting and gathering rooms to serve the occupants of dwellings
within a planned age restricted adult community development;
4. Home office;
5. Signs and fences. Storage sheds having an area less than 100
square feet;
6. Limited retail and professional offices not exceeding 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area in total;
7. Clinics and medical offices not exceeding in total 5,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
D. Minimum tract size for a planned age restricted adult community
development: 50 acres. The computation of minimum tract acreage for
a planned age restricted adult community zoning district may include
property on both sides of a municipal street, when such street bisects
commonly owned property and is part of a single development plan
within the same R-8 zoning district.
E. Maximum Density. The maximum density shall not exceed four dwelling
units per gross acre. Such density shall not include any existing public
street right-of-way area which abuts or traverses the site.
F. Utilities. Property to be developed as a planned age restricted adult
community shall be served by public water and public sewer.
G. Permanent Deed Restrictions.
1. The developer of a planned age restricted adult community shall
submit permanent deed restrictions detailing on the deed for the
entire tract and in the deeds for each individual lot within the
development methods of implementing the age restrictions to the
Municipal Agency for its review and approval. Such permanent
deed restrictions shall be filed prior to issuance of any zoning
permit for any dwelling in such development and shall incorporate
the following:
§ 16.24J.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24J.060
1.01:617
Planned age restricted adult community development shall include
one or more parcels of land within a contiguous total acreage
forming an area as required by this chapter and providing for a
range of living accommodations and support facilities for people
who are 55 years of age or older or for couples, one of whom is
at least 55 years of age. Through its corporations, associations or
owners, the land and structures (whether owned in fee or rented)
shall be restricted by bylaws, rules regulations and restrictions of
record to be approved by the Planning Board Attorney, for use by
permanent residents 55 years of age or older:
2. As of the effective date of this Ordinance No. 09-11, every deed of
conveyance in conjunction with the conveyance, sale or resale of
any dwelling in the age restricted zone must incorporate specific
deed restriction language indicating the age restriction limitations
and exceptions set forth in Subsection T. hereof.
H. Maintenance of Common Elements. The developer shall submit
proposals for ownership and maintenance of common elements
including open space, recreation facilities, meeting rooms, parking
areas, driveways, private streets and similar facilities. The proposal
shall be reviewed and approved by the Municipal Agency prior to or as
a condition of preliminary site plan approval.
I. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage. The maximum impervious
hard surface coverage shall not exceed 40% of the area of the proposed
development.
J. Maximum Height. No principal building in a planned age restricted
adult community development shall exceed a height of two stories and
such stories shall not exceed a height of 35 feet. No accessory building
shall exceed a height of 15 feet.
K. Minimum standards for single-family detached dwellings within a
planned age restricted adult community development are as follows:
1. Minimum lot area, 4,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width, 50 feet.
(The minimum lot width on the turnaround of a cul-de-sac and
on the outside of a horizontal curve may be reduced to 30 feet;
however, the lot width at the required front yard setback shall be
not less than 50 feet.)
3. Minimum yard requirements:
a. Minimum front yard, 15 feet.
b. Minimum side yard, five feet.
c. Minimum rear yard, 15 feet.
§ 16.24J.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.24J.060
1.01:618
4. Minimum Yard Requirements for Accessory Building. Such
accessory building or structure shall only be located in a rear yard
and not closer than five feet to any property line. On a corner lot, an
accessory structure shall not be located closer to a street than the
dwelling on such lot and shall not be located closer than five feet to
any other property line.
L. Minimum Standards for Single Family Semi-Detached Dwellings Within
a Planned Age Restricted Adult Community Development. Each
dwelling unit shall be located on a lot meeting the following
requirements:
1. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 2,500 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width per dwelling unit: 25 feet.
3. Minimum front yard: 15 feet.
4. Minimum side yard: eight feet (non-attached side)
5. Minimum rear yard: 15 feet.
6. Minimum Yard Requirements for Accessory Buildings. Such
accessory building or structure shall only be located in a rear yard
and not closer than five feet to any property line.
M. Minimum Standards for More than One Principal Building on One Lot
Within a Planned Age Restricted Adult Community Development.
1. Minimum distance between principal residential structures: 20
feet.
2. Minimum distance between nonresidential structures: 15 feet.
3. Minimum building setback to collector or arterial streets: 30 feet.
4. Minimum building setback to local streets: 15 feet. (The minimum
required setback shall be measured from the street right-of-way
line, curb line or edge of pavement, whichever requires the
greatest setback.)
5. Minimum building setback from tract perimeter: 50 feet.
N. No portion of any parking area or other paved area shall be located
closer than 30 feet to any perimeter property line of the development
except that such requirement shall not include any street pavement,
curb or sidewalk which is intended to be extended beyond the
development. A buffer strip shall be established and maintained within
such 30 feet from any perimeter property line as may be required by the
Planning Board during site plan review.
O. At least 30% of the site area of such planned age restricted adult
community development shall be devoted to open space. Natural
features such as treed areas, scenic views, wetlands and associated
§ 16.24J.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24J.060
1.01:619
wetland transition areas, slopes, drainage ways shall be preserved
as much as possible in designing such planned age restricted adult
community development.
P. If a development is to be staged over a period of years, a phased
development plan shall be prepared as part of a preliminary site plan
submission.
Q. A planned age restricted adult community development may provide a
ground sign not to exceed 32 square feet which may be placed at the
primary entrances to such development. Signs accessory to office, clinic
or retail uses shall not exceed 5% of the facade of such building used for
office, clinic or retail purposes.
R. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, an entrance
gatehouse located outside of any required sight easement and designed
to complement the architecture of the overall project design may be
located at the entrance to the development.
S. Low and Moderate Income Units Required. A planned age restricted
adult community development in the R-8 zoning district shall be
required to provide units affordable to low and moderate income
persons and households at the rate of 10 such units for each 100
housing units or major fraction of 100 housing units to be constructed
in planned age restricted adult community.
Such low and moderate income units may be provided within a planned
age restricted adult community development in accordance with
Township requirements and Council on Affordable Housing regulations.
Such units shall comply with all rules and regulations pertaining to
low and moderate income units adopted by the Township and rules and
regulations of COAH.
T. Age-Restriction. The use, ownership and occupancy of dwellings in the
age-restricted housing zone development shall be by persons 55 years
of age or older only ("Permissible Occupant"), subject to the following
permissible exceptions consistent with the requirements of the Fair
Housing Act:
1. An occupant under 55 years of age who is permanently residing
with his or her spouse, domestic partner, parent or other family
member who is a Permissible Occupant, provided that any such
occupant is 19 years of age or older.
2. An individual under 55 years of age, if it is established that the
presence of such individual is essential to the physical care of one
or more of the Permissible Occupants of the same dwelling,
provided that any such individual is 19 years of age or older.
3. A surviving spouse, child or other family member of a deceased
Permissible Occupant who was permanently residing with the
§ 16.24J.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.24J.060
1.01:620
Chapter 16.24K
R-9 PLANNED AGE RESTRICTED, ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 16.24K.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.11C; amended by Ord.
99-1; Ord. 08-3]
The planned age restricted, assisted living facility development zoning
district provides for the development and construction on a coordinated
basis within the district of assisted living facilities and age restricted
housing units and provides for the construction of low and moderate income
units or the provision of payment in lieu of construction of such low and
moderate income units.
Within the R-9 planned age restricted, assisted living facility development
zoning district, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with applicable sections of this chapter
and the following regulations.
§ 16.24K.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.11C(a);
amended by Ord. 99-1; Ord. 08-3]
Permissible Occupant at the time of his or her death, provided that
such person is 19 years of age or older.
As of the effective date of this Ordinance No. 09-11, in no instances
shall individuals under the age of 19 be permitted permanently to
reside in any dwelling in the age-restricted housing zone.
Through its corporation, association or owners, the land and
buildings within an age-restricted housing zone shall be restricted
by rules, restrictions of record, bylaws and regulations as to use,
ownership and occupancy by persons 55 years of age or older,
subject to the above exceptions consistent with the requirements of
the Fair House Act. [The "Fair Housing Act" shall mean the Federal
Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1988, P.L. 100-430 (September
13, 1998) and any amendments thereto including, but not limited
to, the Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995, P.L. 104-76
(December 1995) and any judicial or administrative interpretations
or decisions affecting said legislation or any amendments thereto.]
A development in the age-restricted housing zone shall comply with
all applicable requirements of the Federal Fair Housing Act, and
any Urban Development (HUD) regarding such use, ownership, and
occupancy, and shall further comply with all applicable HUD rules
and regulations for self-certification of compliance with the Act.
A. Assisted living facility;
§ 16.24J.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24K.020
1.01:621
§ 16.24K.030. Supplementary Regulation Applying to All Uses in
the R-9 District. [Prior code § 15-9.11C(b); amended by Ord. 99-1;
Ord. 08-3]
B. Single-family detached dwellings for older persons (55 years of age and
over).
Prior to issuance of a zoning permit for such single-family detached
dwellings, the developer shall prepare and file a permanent deed
restriction limiting the occupancy of such units in accordance with
Section 16.24K.050B of this chapter;
C. Permitted accessory uses as set forth in Section 16.24K.040 and
16.24K.050 of this chapter.
A. Minimum Lot Area and Land Use Distribution for Developments.
1. The minimum Lot area required in the R-9 district for a
development of assisted living units and age restricted units shall
be 25 acres. The minimum lot width shall be 500 feet.
2. The land use distribution between permitted uses shall be as
follows:
Assisted Living
Facility
Age Restricted
Housing Units
Minimum percent of
proposed site area to be
developed within a planned
age restricted assisted living
development
40% 55%
Maximum percent of
proposed site area to be
developed within a planned
age restricted assisted living
development to be devoted
to such use
45% 60%
B. Landscaping and Buffers. It is a requirement of this chapter that those
areas between County Road 523 and the assisted living facility
buildings and between Route 12 and the assisted living facility
buildings not devoted to aisles, off-street parking and sidewalks be
landscaped to form an attractive landscaped feature and to form a
buffer between such buildings and Route 523 and such buildings and
Route 12.
In addition to the above, landscaping within the assisted living facility
site and age restricted housing unit site and along the perimeter of
each site shall be provided. A landscaped buffer as required in the
performance standards section of this Title shall be provided along
the perimeter of each site and between the age restricted facility site
§ 16.24K.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.24K.030
1.01:622
§ 16.24K.040. Supplementary Regulations Applying to Assisted
Living Facility Within the R-9 District. [Prior code § 15-9.11C(c);
amended by Ord. 99-1; Ord. 08-3]
and age restricted housing unit site where deemed necessary and
appropriate by the Board. Where in the opinion of the Board natural
vegetation on the site can reasonably form such buffer, the Planning
Board may designate on the site plan that such existing vegetation is
to remain and such existing vegetation shall be adequately protected
during on-site construction.
C. Utilities Required. Property to be developed within the R-9 planned age
restricted, assisted living facility development district shall be served
by public water and public sewers.
A. An assisted living facility shall be located on a lot meeting the following
requirements:
Size of Facility
(Number of Beds)
Minimum Gross Site Area
(Acres)
30 or less 5
31-50 10
51-100 12
Each additional 50 2
B. The maximum height of structures as part of an assisted living facility
shall not exceed two stories. In no such case shall such two stories
exceed a height of 28 feet.
C. The minimum front, rear and side yards for principal and accessory
structures to be used as an assisted living facility use shall be as
follows:
1. Front yard: 200 feet from C.R. 523 and 125 feet from Route 12;
2. Side yard (each): 50 feet;
3. Rear yard: 50 feet.
No blacktop driveway, aisle or off-street parking area shall be located
within 85 feet of County Road 523 and within 100 feet of Route 12.
D. Signs shall be limited to one ground sign not exceeding 32 square feet
in area per lot.
E. Low and Moderate Income Units Required. An assisted living facility
shall be required to provide bedrooms affordable to low and moderate
income persons and households at the rate of at least 10% of the
number of bedrooms to be constructed. Such low and moderate income
§ 16.24K.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24K.040
1.01:623
§ 16.24K.050. Supplementary Regulations Applying to Age
Restricted Housing Units Within the R-9 Zoning District. [Prior
code § 15-9.11C(d); amended by Ord. 99-1; Ord. 08-3]
units may be provided via a regional contribution agreement or
payment in lieu of construction.
F. Off-street parking shall be provided for an assisted living facility at the
rate of one-half of one space for each unit and shall be considered a
permitted accessory use.
G. The maximum hard surface for an assisted living facility shall not
exceed 30%.
H. An assisted living facility shall be licensed by the state of New Jersey
Department of Health.
I. An assisted living facility shall have received a certificate of need from
the state of New Jersey, Department of Health.
J. Common dining, recreational and laundry facilities, housekeeping and
maintenance services, personal and health care services and
community and administrative facilities and services, all in support of
and for the sole benefit of the residents of the assisted living facility,
shall be considered customary accessory uses to an assisted living
facility.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this type of development to provide
appropriate areas within the Township for housing opportunities for
older citizens (55 and over) via age restrictive covenants, and the
inclusion of appropriate recreation and open space amenities.
B. Principal Permitted Uses.
1. Single-family detached dwellings for older persons (55 years of age
and over);
2. A dwelling which exists within the R-9 zoning district at the time of
submission of a subdivision and/or site plan for development may
continue to be used as a single-family dwelling. Such single-family
dwelling shall be located on a lot having a minimum lot area of
20,000 square feet and a minimum lot width of 100 feet and shall
be serviced by public water and public sewers. Such existing
dwelling only need not be age restricted. Such dwelling shall
comply with all other minimum yard, height and bulk requirements
applicable to single-family detached dwellings for older persons in
the R-9 zoning district.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Private garages, off-street parking;
§ 16.24K.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.24K.050
1.01:624
2. Recreation facilities to serve the occupants of dwellings within the
age restricted development consisting of swimming pool, tennis
courts, exercise rooms and similar facilities;
3. Meeting, clubhouse or recreation building to serve the occupants
of dwellings within an age restricted adult development;
4. Home office;
5. Swimming pool;
6. Signs and fences. Storage sheds having an area less than 100
square feet.
D. Maximum Density. The maximum density shall not exceed 3.1 dwelling
units per gross acre. Such density shall not include any existing public
street right-of-way area which abuts the site.
E. Permanent Deed Restrictions. The developer of the age restricted
housing units shall submit permanent deed restrictions detailing on the
deed for the entire tract and in the deeds for each individual lot within
the development, methods of implementing the age restrictions to the
Municipal Agency for its review and approval. Such permanent deed
restrictions shall be filed prior to issuance of any zoning permit for any
dwelling in such development and shall incorporate the following:
1. An age restricted development shall include one or more parcels of
land within a contiguous total acreage forming an area as required
by this chapter and providing for support facilities for people who
are 55 years of age or older or for couples, one of whom is at least
55 years of age. Through its corporations, association of owners,
said land and structures (whether owned in fee or rented) shall be
restricted by bylaws, rules, regulations and restrictions of record to
be approved by the Planning Board Attorney, for use by permanent
residents 55 years of age or older, with the following exceptions:
a. A member of a household under the age of 55 years who
resides with another member of a household who is 55 years of
age or over;
b. Persons who are the child of a permitted occupant residing
with such permitted occupant, provided the child is of the age
of 19 years or over;
c. One adult under 55 years of age (other than a spouse) will be
admitted as a permanent resident if it is established and
approved by the homeowners' association that the presence of
such person is essential to the physical care of one or more of
the adult occupants. If more than one adult under 55 years of
age is necessary to care for the adult occupant, approval shall
be required from the homeowners' association and a copy of its
§ 16.24K.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24K.050
1.01:625
decision shall be filed with the Township Clerk of the Township
of Raritan.
F. Maintenance of Common Elements. The developer shall submit
proposals for ownership and maintenance of common elements
including open space, recreation facilities, meeting rooms, parking
areas, driveways, private streets and similar facilities. The proposal
shall be reviewed and approved by the Municipal Agency prior to or as
a condition of preliminary site plan approval.
G. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage. The maximum impervious
hard surface coverage shall not exceed 40% of the area of the proposed
development.
H. Maximum Height. No principal building in an age restricted
development shall exceed a height of two stories and such stories shall
not exceed a height of 28 feet. No accessory building shall exceed a
height of 15 feet.
I. Minimum standards for single-family detached dwellings within a
planned age restricted adult community development are as follows:
1. Minimum lot area: 6,600 square feet;
2. Minimum lot width: 60 feet (the minimum lot width on the
turnaround of a cul-de-sac and on the outside of a horizontal curve
may be reduced to 30 feet; however, the lot width at the required
front yard setback shall be not less than 60 feet);
3. Minimum yard requirements:
a. Minimum front yard: 20 feet;
b. Minimum side yard: 10 feet;
c. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet;
4. Minimum Yard Requirements for Accessory Building. Such
accessory building or structure shall only be located in a rear yard,
except for "home backup power generators" as that term is defined
in Section 16.02.030 of the Township Code which may be located in
a side or rear yard, and not closer than five feet to any property
line. On a corner lot, an accessory structure shall not be located
closer to a street than the dwelling on such lot and shall not be
located closer than five feet to any other property line. [Amended
3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 19-01]
J. No portion of any parking area or other paved area shall be located
closer than 30 feet to any perimeter property line of the development
except that such requirement shall not include any street pavement,
curb or sidewalk which is intended to be extended beyond the
development.
§ 16.24K.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.24K.050
1.01:626
§ 16.24K.060. Conditional Uses. [Amended by Ord. 01-24; Ord.
06-31; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.24K.070. Supplemental Regulations Applying to Development
in the R-9 District. [Amended by Ord. 01-24; Ord. 08-3]
K. At least 20% of the site area of such age restricted development shall be
devoted to open space. Natural features such as treed areas, scenic
views, wetlands and associated wetland transition areas, slopes,
drainage ways shall be preserved as much as possible in designing such
planned age restricted adult community development. Such open space
shall not include areas devoted to private lots or streets but may include
common space devoted to a clubhouse or meeting room, associated offstreet
parking and outdoor recreation space.
L. If a development is to be staged over a period of years, a phased
development plan shall be prepared as part of a preliminary site plan
submission.
M. An age restricted development may provide a ground sign not to exceed
32 square feet which may be placed at the primary entrances to such
development.
N. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, an entrance
gatehouse located outside of any required sight easement and designed
to complement the architecture of the overall project design may be
located at the entrance to the development.
O. Low and Moderate Income Units Required. A planned age restricted
adult community development in the R-9 zoning district shall be
required to provide units affordable to low and moderate income
persons and households at the rate of 15% of the total number of age
restricted units to be developed on the site.
Such low and moderate income units may be provided within a planned
age restricted adult community development in accordance with
Township requirements and COAH regulations or may be provided,
if acceptable, to the Township of Raritan via a regional contribution
agreement or a payment in lieu of construction.
Such units shall comply with all rules and regulations pertaining to low
and moderate income units adopted by the Township of Raritan and
rules and regulations of the N.J. Council on Affordable Housing.
A. Houses of worship;
B. Public and private schools and child care centers;
C. Essential services;
D. Public uses.
§ 16.24K.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24K.070
1.01:627
Chapter 16.24L
AR-5 AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE
§ 16.24L.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 02-42; Ord. 08-3; Ord.
08-1327]
It is the purpose of this zone to provide areas within the Township where
residential and agricultural uses can be developed in conjunction with one
another, to reduce the conflict between such uses, and protect existing
agricultural operations, in accordance with the recommendations of the
Township Master Plan and the State Planning Guidelines.
Within this zone, no lot, structures or accessory structures shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I, II, and III set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title and the
following regulations.
A. Unless otherwise noted in supplemental regulations applying to
assisted living facilities and age restricted housing units in the R-9 zone
the following regulations shall apply to all development in the R-9 zone.
B. The maximum height shall not exceed two stories or 28 feet.
C. The minimum front, rear and side yards for principal and accessory
structures shall be as follows:
1. Front yard: 200 feet from C.R. 523 and 125 from Route 12;
2. Side yard (each): 50 feet;
3. Rear yard: 50 feet;
4. No blacktop driveway, aisle or off street parking area shall be
located within 85 feet of County Road 523 and within 100 feet of
Route 12.
D. Signs shall be limited to one ground sign not exceeding 32 square feet
in area per lot.
E. The maximum hard surface coverage shall not exceed 30%.
F. Landscaping along the perimeter of each site shall be provided. A
landscaped buffer as required in the performance standards section of
this Title shall be provided along the perimeter of each site. When in the
opinion of the Planning Board natural vegetation on the site can
reasonably form such buffer, the Planning Board may designate on the
site plan that such existing vegetation is to remain and such existing
vegetation shall be adequately protected during on-site construction.
27.Note: Ord. 08-13 renamed the AR Zone to the AR-5 Zone.
§ 16.24K.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.24L.020
1.01:628
§ 16.24L.020. Zone Created. [Amended by Ord. 02-42; Ord. 08-3;
Ord. 08-13]
There is created an Agricultural Residential (AR-5) zoning district
classification. The following area shall comprise the AR-5 zoning district:
Block and Lots: Block 63.01, Lots 6, 7, 8, 8.01, 8.02, Block 83, Lot 2, Block
84, Lots 2, 2.01, 2.02, 2.03, 2.04, 2.05, 2.06, 2.07, 2.08, 3, 3.01, 3.02, 3.03,
4, 5, 6.01, 12, 12.01, 12.02, 12.02, 12.03, 12.04, 12.05, 12.06, 12.07, 12.08,
12.09, 12.10, 13, 13.01, 14, 15, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 26.01, 17, 27.01, 28,
29, 30, 31, 31.01, 31.02, 31.03, 31.04, 31.05, 31.06, 31.07, 31.08, 31.09,
31.10, 32, 33, 35.02, 35.03, 35.04, 35.05, 35.06, 35.07, 35.08, 35.09, 35.10,
36, 36.01, 43, 100, Block 86, Lots 1, 1.01, 2, 2.001, 2.02, 2.03, 3, 4, 6, 8,
9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 15.01, 15.02, 15.03, 16, 22, 26, 26.01, 26.02, 29, 100,
100.01, and Block 86.01, Lot 1
§ 16.24L.030. Principal Permitted Uses. [Amended by Ord. 02-42;
Ord. 08-3; Ord. 08-13]
A. Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including farm product sales in
accordance with the requirements of Section 16.24D.050. Commercial
greenhouses are permitted as part of a farm as defined in this Title.
B. Golf course and country club provided such is located on a lot having an
area of at least 100 acres and provided that no structure or building
shall be located closer than 200 feet to any property line.
1. Activities may include club house, pro-shop, non-commercial tennis
courts, non-commercial swimming pool, maintenance buildings.
2. Off street parking provided as specified by this Title. No portion of
such off-street parking area shall be located closer to any property
line than 100 feet.
3. Screening of such parking areas, tennis courts, swimming pool and
similar outdoor activities and lighting shall be in accordance with
screening, buffering and lighting requirements found elsewhere in
this Title.
C. Research Farm for Agricultural Experimentation and Trials.
1. Ancillary uses may include but not be limited to laboratories,
meeting and conference rooms, offices, facilities use for storing
agricultural products and supplies, garages for the storage and
repair of farm machinery uses on the premises only and facilities
associated with the disposition and of agricultural waste materials.
Such facilities associated with the disposition and treatment of
agricultural waste materials shall be subject to necessary
permitting by appropriate governmental units or agencies.
2. Development Standards for Research Farms.
§ 16.24L.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24L.030
1.01:629
§ 16.24L.040. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Amended by Ord. 02-42;
Ord. 08-3; Ord. 08-13]
§ 16.24L.050. Conditional Uses. [Amended by Ord. 08-3; Ord. 08-13]
§ 16.24L.060. Limitations. [Amended by Ord. 03-5; Ord. 08-3; Ord.
08-13]
a. No building or structure except for fencing and gating shall be
located within 300 feet of any property lines.
b. No more than 5% of the property shall be occupied by
buildings or structures.
c. The height of buildings and structures shall not exceed 3 1/2
stories. In no case shall such 3 1/2 stories exceed a height of 45
feet.
d. The minimum lot size shall be 150 acres.
D. Single Family Residences.
A. Private garages and carports;
B. Swimming pools and other recreational facilities for residential uses
and normally conducted on individual lots;
C. Signs, fences and storage sheds;
D. The taking-in of not more than two roomers or boarders;
E. Home offices;
F. Customary uses incidental to an agricultural or horticultural use
permitted in this zone;
G. Non-commercial kennels;
H. Farm stands when such use is accessory to an existing agricultural or
horticultural use and when at least 50% of items sold are grown on site.
A. Houses of worship;
B. Public uses;
C. Essential services;
D. Home occupations;
E. Riding academies and boarding stables;
F. Animal hospitals and commercial kennels;
G. ECHO unit.
§ 16.24L.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.24L.060
1.01:630
A. Keeping of Animals on Residential or non-farm lots. See Section
16.24D.050, Subsection A.
B. Sale of Household Goods and Services. See Section 16.24D.050,
Subsection B.
C. Farm Products Sales. See Section 16.24D.050, Subsection C.
D. Non-commercial Kennels. See Section 16.24D.050, Subsection D.
E. Cluster Requirements - Agricultural Residential Zone.
1. Tracts of land 40 acres or greater in size either at the time of the
adoption of this Ordinance or that are assembled after the adoption
of this Ordinance, and tracts of land 30 acres or greater in size
either at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance or that are
assembled after the adoption of this ordinance and are located
adjacent to land which has been deed restricted for farmland or
open space preservation, shall develop as 50,000 square foot Open
Space Clusters with the requirements found in this section and
those requirements found in Schedule I (Schedule of Area, Yard
and Building Requirements), Schedule II (Minimum Utility
Requirements) and Schedule III (Cluster Requirements) listed
under AR-5 Zone.
2. Tracts of land 30 acres or greater in size but less than 40 acres,
either at the time of the adoption of this ordinance of that are
assembled after the adoption of this ordinance and are not located
adjacent to land which has been deed restricted for farmland or
open space preservation may elect to develop as 50,000 square foot
Open Space Clusters with the requirements found in this section
and those requirements found in Schedule I (Schedule of Area,
Yard and Building Requirements), Schedule II (Minimum Utility
Requirements) and Schedule III (Cluster Requirements) listed
under AR-5 Zone.
3. Cluster Standards.
a. Minimum tract area: 40/30 acres (see above).
b. Minimum open space set-aside: 65% of tract.
c. Each building lot shall have a minimum improvable lot area
equal to the minimum lot area for the R-3 zone when serviced
by on-site septic and wells (see Section 16.64.090).
d. A minimum fifty-foot wide buffer shall be provided between
residential use and any land utilized for agricultural purposes.
This buffer area shall be deed restricted from development and
shall contain a Type B bufferyard planting (see Section
16.20.030.E).
§ 16.24L.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24L.060
1.01:631
e. Maximum Number of Lots: Shall be determined in accordance
with Section 16.64.020.A.
f. Disposition and Use of Open Space:
i. Dedicated open space areas shall be deemed free and
clear of all mortgages and encumbrances with the
exception of any easements, restrictions, or encumbrances
set forth as part of any subdivision approved under this
section.
ii. A property owner, homeowners' association, or the
Township may hold title to any open space parcel.
iii. Any common open space resulting from the Application of
Standards for density, or intensity of land use as part of the
requirements of this section, shall be set aside for the use
and benefits of the owners or residents of the development
and subject to the provisions of N.J.S. 40:55D-43
(Standards for the Establishment of Open Space
Organization). [Amended by Ord. 03-5]
iv. Any open space parcel shall be appropriately deed
restricted from future development. Such restriction shall
exclude any farm related structures, which may be erected
in conformance with Township standards, included, but
not limited to, setbacks, floor area, and hard surface
coverage.
v. Farmette. The open space parcel may be provided through
multiple lots provided the lots are no less than 15 acres in
area each. Each individual lot may contain a single-family
residential dwelling and associated farm structures
provided all other bulk and zoning requirements found
within this ordinance are met. Each lot shall contain deed
restrictions restricting any further subdivision and
providing for each condition as listed in this section. Said
dwelling unit(s) shall count to the overall number of lots
permitted as calculated under Subsection E.3.f. of this
section.
vi. Any storm water management system required as part of
the subdivision of any parcels under this section may be
placed upon the open space lot(s) or farmette lot(s)
(Subsection E.3.f.), provided all other requirements are
met.
vii. The open space or farmette parcel(s) shall be so located
and designed so as to minimize the impact and conflicts
upon adjacent agricultural uses. The residential cluster
shall be kept in tight configuration to minimize the edge of
§ 16.24L.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.24L.060
1.01:632
Chapter 16.24M
AR-2 AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE
§ 16.24M.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 08-12]
It is the purpose of this zone to provide areas within the Township where
residential and agricultural uses can be developed in conjunction with one
another, to reduce the conflict between such uses, and protect existing
agricultural operations, in accordance with the recommendations of the
Township Master Plan and the State Planning Guidelines.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structures shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I, II, and III set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title and the
following regulations.
§ 16.24M.020. Zone Created. [Amended by Ord. 08-12]
There is created an Agricultural Residential (AR-2) zoning district
classification. The following area shall comprise the AR-2 zoning district:
Block 71, Lots 8, 10, 11, 11.01, 12, 12.01, 13, 14, 15, 16, 16.01, 16.02,
16.03, 17, 18, 19, 19.01, 19.02, 20, 34, 36; and
Block 77, Lots 7, 9, 10.17, 21, 37; and
Block 80, Lots 8, 8.01, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 13.01, 14, 17, 18, 18.01, 29, 30,
30.01, 32, 33, 35; and
Block 81, Lots 2, 2.01, 2.02, 2.03; and
Block 81.04, Lots 15, 30, 31, 32; and
Block 82, Lots 1, 1.01, 1.02, 2, 3, 3.01, 4, 4.01, 4.02, 5, 6, 7, 7.01, 7.02; and
Block 85, Lots 3, 3.01, 6, 6.01, 7.03, 15.01, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48; and
Block 89, Lots 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
§ 16.24M.030. Principal Permitted Uses. [Amended by Ord. 08-12]
the residential development that abuts any agricultural
use. [Amended by Ord. 02-42]
viii. (Reserved)
ix. In furtherance of the purposes of zoning, and the purposes
and intent of this Ordinance amendment, agricultural uses
and type of uses are not mandated, but are encouraged on
any common open space areas, including but not limited
to, by way of example, owner's community gardens,
pastures, and/or riding areas for horses.
§ 16.24L.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24M.030
1.01:633
§ 16.24M.040. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Amended by Ord. 08-12]
§ 16.24M.050. Conditional Uses. [Amended by Ord. 08-12]
A. Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including farm product sales in
accordance with the requirements of Section 16.24D.050. Commercial
greenhouses are permitted as part of a farm as defined in this Title.
B. Golf course and country club provided such is located on a lot having an
area of at least 100 and provided that no structure or building shall be
located closer than 200 feet to any property line.
1. Activities may include club house, pro-shop, non-commercial tennis
courts, non-commercial swimming pool, maintenance buildings.
2. Off street parking provided as specified by this Title. No portion of
such off-street parking area shall be located closer to any property
line than 100 feet.
3. Screening of such parking areas, tennis courts, swimming pool and
similar outdoor activities and lighting shall be in accordance with
screening, buffering and lighting requirements found elsewhere in
this Title.
C. Agricultural equipment manufacturing not to exceed a floor area ratio
of 1%.
D. Single family residences.
A. Private garages and carports.
B. Swimming pools and other recreational facilities for residential uses
and normally conducted on individual lots;
C. Signs, fences and storage sheds;
D. The taking in of not more than two roomers or boarders;
E. Home offices;
F. Customary uses incidental to an agricultural or horticultural use
permitted in this zone;
G. Noncommercial kennels.
H. Farm stands when such use is accessory to an existing agricultural or
horticultural use and when at least 50% of items sold are grown on site.
A. Houses of worship;
B. Public uses;
C. Essential services;
D. Home occupations;
§ 16.24M.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.24M.050
1.01:634
§ 16.24M.060. Limitations. [Amended by Ord. 08-12]
E. Riding academies and boarding stables;
F. Animal hospitals and commercial kennels;
G. ECHO unit;
H. Public schools.
A. Keeping of Animals on Residential or Non-Farm Lots. See Section
16.24D.050, Subsection A.
B. Sale of Household Goods and Services. See Section 16.24.050D.
Subsection B.
C. Farm Product Sales. See Section 16.24D.050, Subsection C.
D. Non-Commercial Kennels. See Section 16.24D.050, Subsection D.
E. Cluster Requirements - Agricultural Residential Zone.
1. Tracts of land 40 acres or greater in size, and tracts of land 30
acres or greater in size that are located adjacent to land which has
been deed restricted for farmland or open space preservation, shall
develop as 35,000 square foot. Open Space Clusters with the
requirements found in this section and those requirements found in
Schedule I (Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements),
Schedule II (Minimum Utility Requirements) and Schedule III
(Cluster Requirements) listed under AR-2 Zone.
2. Tracts of land 30 acres or greater in size but less than 40 acres and
are not located adjacent to land which has been deed restricted for
farmland or open space preservation may elect to develop as
35,000 square foot. Open Space Clusters with the requirements
found in this section and those requirements found in Schedule I
(Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements), Schedule II
(Minimum Utility Requirements) and Schedule III (Cluster
Requirements) listed under AR-2 Zone.
3. Cluster Standards.
a. Minimum tract area: 40/30 acres (see above).
b. Minimum open space set-aside: 55% of tract.
c. Each building lot shall have a minimum improvable lot area
equal to 35,000 square feet (see Section 16.64.090).
d. A minimum 100-foot wide buffer shall be provided between any
residential use and any land utilized for agricultural purposes.
This buffer area shall be deed restricted from development and
shall contain a Type A bufferyard planting (see Section
16.20.030.E).
§ 16.24M.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24M.060
1.01:635
e. (Reserved)
f. Maximum Number of Lots: Shall be determined in accordance
with Section 16.64.020.A.
g. Disposition and Use of Open Space:
i. Dedicated open space areas shall be deemed free and
clear of all mortgages and encumbrances with the
exception of any easements, restrictions, or encumbrances
set forth as part of any subdivision approved under this
section.
ii. A property owner, homeowners association, or the
Township may hold title to any open space parcel.
iii. The open space parcel(s) shall be maintained as farmland
either by leasing to an outside party for the purposes of
agriculture or by maintenance by the property owner(s)
for the purposes of agriculture.
iv. Any open space parcel shall be appropriately deed
restricted from future development. Such restriction shall
exclude any farm related structures, which may be erected
in conformance with Township standards, included, but
not limited to, setbacks, floor area, and hard surface
coverage.
v. Farmette. The open space parcel may be provided through
multiple lots provided the lots are no less than 15 acres in
area each. Each individual lot may contain a single-family
residential dwelling and associated farm structures
provided all other bulk and zoning requirements found
within this Ordinance are met. Each lot shall contain deed
restrictions restricting any further subdivision and
providing for each condition as listed in this section. Said
dwelling unit(s) shall count to the overall number of lots
permitted as calculated under Subsection E.3.f. of this
section.
vi. Any storm water management system required as part of
the subdivision of any parcels under this section may be
placed upon the open space lot(s) or farmette lot(s)
(Subsection E.3.f.), provided all other requirements are
met.
vii. Any open space or farmette parcel containing a residential
dwelling unit shall meet all the requirements for the
development of a single family dwelling on a cluster lot in
the AR-2 zone with the exception of lot area. The dwelling
unit shall be so located on the parcel as to minimize the
visual impact of the unit.
§ 16.24M.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.24M.060
1.01:636
§ 16.24M.070. Existing Lots. [Amended by Ord. 08-31]
Chapter 16.24N
MF 100% AFFORDABLE HOUSING OVERLAY ZONE
NOTE: Effect of Redevelopment Agreement.
The execution of the Redevelopment Agreement shall convey the right
to prepare a site plan or subdivision application for development to the
Raritan Township Planning Board in accordance with the terms of the
Redevelopment Agreement and this Ordinance No. 14-20, among other
rights that may be granted by the Redevelopment Authority. In addition,
the execution of the Redevelopment Agreement shall establish the period
of time for the right to develop in the Redevelopment Area.[Amended by
Ord. 14-20]
NOTE: Expiration
The Redevelopment Plan established by Ordinance No. 14-20, adopted
12-16-2014 shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 10 years from
viii. The open space or farmette parcel(s) shall be so located
and designed so as to minimize the impact and conflicts
upon adjacent agricultural uses. The residential cluster
shall be kept in tight configuration to minimize the edge of
the residential development that abuts any agricultural
use.
A. Any vacant lot existing as of April 28th, 2008 in the AR-2 zoning district
which lot shall become nonconforming as to lot area or width or both as
a result of the change from the R-3 zone to the AR-2 zone, pursuant to
Ordinance No. 08-12, may be improved with a single-family dwelling
and permitted accessory structures provided that such lot could have
been improved with a single-family dwelling and accessory structures
under the R-3 zoning district regulations existing immediately prior to
April 28th, 2008.
B. No lot improved with a single-family dwelling as of April 28th, 2008
shall be precluded from being expanded or from adding otherwise
permitted accessory structures or uses onto such lot because such will
not comply with the lot area and/or lot width requirements of the AR-2
zoning district provided that:
1. Such expansion or accessory structure or use would have been
permitted under AR-2 zoning district regulations existing
immediately prior to Ordinance No. 08-12 adopted on April 28th,
2008.
2. Such expansion or accessory structure or use otherwise complies
with all required yard regulations of the AR-2 zoning district.
§ 16.24M.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24M.070
1.01:637
the date of adoption of Ordinance No. 14-20 by the Township Committee.
However, the period of time granting rights for the redevelopment of any
particular parcel within the Junction Road Redevelopment Area shall be as
established in an executed Redevelopment Agreement.[Amended by Ord.
14-20]
§ 16.24N.010. Intent and Purpose.
The intent of the development regulations of this overlay zone is to create
an aesthetically pleasing low rise apartment complex for persons of low and
moderate income over the developable area of the tract. It is anticipated
that the redevelopment will occur in one development phase.
§ 16.24N.020. Created.
There is created the MF 100% Affordable Housing Overlay Zone zoning
district. The following area shall comprise the MF 100% Affordable Housing
Overlay Zone zoning district: Block 16.01, Lots 37.01 and 54.
§ 16.24N.030. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 14-20]
Any permitted, conditional, and accessory uses not defined herein shall be
as defined in Title 16 of the Land Development Code (LDC) of the Township
of Raritan.
APARTMENT — A dwelling for a single household located within a building
of at least four such dwellings with direct access to the exterior which may
occupy a single or multiple floors or part of such floor or floors.
BALCONY — An unroofed outdoor living area cantilevered from the face
of a building on second or higher floors extending no more than eight feet
therefrom.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A separate building or section of a building
that contains one or more rooms for social, recreational and leisure time
activities for use by individuals or groups residing within a residential
complex. A community center may contain sales, rental and administrative
offices and maintenance facilities.
DECK — A raised unroofed platform either attached to a dwelling or
freestanding in the approved yard area.
INCOME RESTRICTED — A dwelling that is deed restricted to an eligible
very low, low or moderate income household as defined by the Fair Housing
Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq. and administrative rules promulgated under
its authority.
MUNICIPAL PURPOSE — Land owned or controlled by the Township of
Raritan or its agencies for essential services, open space or other municipal
use necessary to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
PATIO — A ground level masonry or wood structure used as outdoor living
space.
§ 16.24M.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.24N.030
1.01:638
PORCH — An outdoor living space with a roof supported by columns that is
attached to a dwelling.
SIGN, DIRECTORY — A sign designed for the use of motorists and
pedestrians within the interior of a site or apartment complex which is
intended to direct such persons to individual buildings or dwellings.
SIGN, INCIDENTAL — A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, including but not
limited to "No parking", "Loading Zone", or "No Trespassing", or other
similar directives such as playground use or office hours and signs for
emergency purposes.
§ 16.24N.040. Principal Permitted Uses. [Amended by Ord. 14-20]
§ 16.24N.050. Conditional Use. [Amended by Ord. 14-20]
§ 16.24N.060. Accessory Permitted Uses and Structures Permitted.
[Amended by Ord. 14-20]
A. No lot within the redevelopment shall be used and no structure shall be
erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following
permitted principal uses:
1. Apartments limited to income-restricted tenants as defined herein,
complying with Uniform Housing Affordability Controls.
2. Open space.
3. Municipal purpose.
A. Electrical transmission lines conforming to the following criteria:
1. The line is located within an existing easement; and
2. The line serves a regional need; and
3. The line has received state and/or federal regulatory approval for
its installation.
A. Any of the following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in
the Redevelopment Area when used in conjunction with a principal
permitted use:
1. A manager's apartment.
2. Rental center.
3. Community center.
4. Maintenance building.
5. Outdoor recreation.
6. Common open space.
§ 16.24N.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24N.060
1.01:639
§ 16.24N.070. Area, Yard, Coverage and Other Requirements.
[Amended by Ord. 14-20]
Except as otherwise modified, the following area, yard, and coverage
standards contained herein shall apply to all development in the Junction
Road Redevelopment Area. These regulations shall not apply to any lot
dedicated for public utility uses or solely used for storm water management.
7. Off-street parking and loading.
8. Fences, walls and street furniture.
9. Signs.
10. Essential services necessary for the redevelopment of the Junction
Road Redevelopment Area.
11. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to a
principal use.
A. Tract Requirements.
1. Minimum Tract Area. The minimum contiguous tract area shall be
11 acres.
2. Minimum Tract Frontage. The minimum frontage on an arterial
road shall be 150 lineal feet.
3. Density Limitation. The number of dwellings shall not exceed 7.5
units per gross acreage of the tract.
4. Minimum Open Space and Recreation Area. The minimum area set
aside for open space and recreation shall equal or exceed 30% of
the gross tract acreage, calculated as follows:
a. The minimum required area shall not include any land
encumbered by a conservation easement.
b. The minimum required area may include land encumbered by
the JCP&L easement if used for recreation and approved by the
utility.
5. Maximum Building Coverage. The maximum building coverage
shall be 15% of the total gross acreage of the tract.
6. Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage. The maximum impervious
surface coverage shall be 40% of the total gross acreage of the
tract.
7. Tract Perimeter. No building, except as modified herein, shall be
located closer than 30 feet to the perimeter boundary line of the
tract. This limitation shall not preclude the ability for attached
balconies, decks or patios to encroach into the perimeter setback
provided that the encroachment is no greater than six feet and the
§ 16.24N.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.24N.070
1.01:640
surface area of the balcony, deck or patio is no greater than 80
square feet.
B. Building Requirements.
1. The maximum number of dwellings per building shall not exceed
14.
2. Minimum separation distances between buildings. No orientation
of the buildings shall place the front of a building facing the rear of
another building.
Requirement Limitation
Minimum distance from
building front to building
front
80 feet
Minimum distance from
building front to building side
50 feet
Minimum distance from
building side to building rear
80 feet
Minimum distance from
building rear to building rear
40 feet
Minimum distance from
building side to building side
20 feet
Minimum distance from a wall
containing a window to
another wall containing a
window
30 feet
3. Additional building dimensions. Additional minimum and maximum
building dimensions shall be as indicated in the following table:
Requirement Limitation
Minimum building depth
through the short axis
30 feet
Maximum building length
through the long axis
180 feet
Maximum height - apartment
buildings
3 stories and 40 feet
Maximum height - community
center
1 1/2 stories and 28 feet
Maximum height -
maintenance and other
buildings
1 story and 18 feet
§ 16.24N.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24N.070
1.01:641
§ 16.24N.080. Performance and Design Standards. [Amended by
Ord. 14-20]
The following performance and design standards shall be used the
redevelopment of the Junction Road Redevelopment Area. "Shall" is
mandatory and "should" is permissive.
4. Building setbacks from parking spaces, driveways and private
streets. The building setback, measured from the edge of paving or
curbing to the closest point of a building, shall be a minimum of 15
feet. Porches in the yard area between the front of a building and a
parking space and not exceeding 50 square feet in floor area may
be setback a minimum of 12 feet. Porches in the yard area between
the side of a building and a parking space and not exceeding 150
square feet in floor area may be setback a minimum of 11 feet.
A. Building Design Requirements.
1. Buildings should have architectural features and patterns that
provide visual interest from the perspective of pedestrians and
motorists. Buildings should include substantial variation in mass
through the use of the three main elements of base, field and
entablature in the facade. Primary building facades shall be
enhanced by the use of vertical and horizontal elements, such as
plinths, pilasters, arches, and cornices. The field of the building
shall be differentiated from the base by a horizontal transition line.
The design of the base, as well as the quality and durability of its
materials, should be emphasized in the architectural design.
2. Doorways, windows and other openings in the facade of buildings
should be proportioned to reflect a pedestrian scale. Multiple front
entrances or architectural features should be incorporated into the
building design in order to produce human scale elements in the
facade of the buildings.
3. Colors should be selected to create a common color palette (e.g.,
warms or cools together; primary or complementary together) to
be used throughout the redevelopment(s). Contrasting colors
should be used for accent purposes in highlighting architectural
features and limited to 10% of the facade area or less.
B. Conservation Easement. Any use or disturbance of the conservation
easement shall require the written permission of the easement holder,
unless already permitted by the language of the easement. The
easement holder may impose conditions on the permission, including
but not limited to, replacement of trees and other standards for revegetation
and security instruments to ensure same. Such permission
shall not be construed to limit the requirement of the redeveloper to
obtain any other governmental approval pertaining to the use or
disturbance of the conservation easement.
§ 16.24N.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.24N.080
1.01:642
C. Green Design Requirements. The design of buildings and their site
development components shall promote the conservation of energy
through the use of site planning, architectural elements and
construction techniques to minimize energy consumption and to
provide for the maximum utilization of renewable energy sources. With
the submission of a preliminary site plan or subdivision, whichever
comes first, the redeveloper shall prepare and submit a "Sustainable
Design Assessment." The Sustainable Design Assessment shall set forth
ways in which the proposed development will utilize building design,
construction materials, mechanical systems, site design and
development techniques, and facility management practices which
promote natural resource preservation and the minimization of energy
consumption. The Sustainable Design Assessment shall include and
address the following topics in narrative and graphic form as
appropriate:
1. Sustainable site development.
a. The minimization of site disturbance and soil erosion during
construction and the maximization of tree retention.
b. The extent to which natural drainage systems can be utilized
and naturalized control structures designed following NJDEP
Best Management Practices and, if feasible, green
infrastructure, for storm water management.
c. The preservation or restoration of natural site features.
d. The use of building orientation and landscaping features to
capitalize on passive heating and cooling.
e. Any provision for allowing community gardens.
2. Water efficiency.
a. The use of captured rainwater for internal and external water
demand, if feasible.
b. The use of low-flow and no flow fixtures and fittings.
3. Energy efficiency. The Sustainable Design Assessment will include
a narrative if any of the following techniques in promoting energy
efficiency are proposed (including their extent) in the
redevelopment of the tract:
a. The use of passive solar heating/cooling and natural
ventilation.
b. Enhancing the penetration of daylight to interior spaces to
reduce the need for artificial lighting.
§ 16.24N.080 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24N.080
1.01:643
c. The use of a thermally efficient envelope to reduce the size of
the HVAC system or systems over conventional construction
methods.
d. The use of energy management systems, monitoring, and
controls to continuously calibrate, adjust, and maintain energyrelated
systems.
e. The provision of individual occupant controls when not in
conflict with Subsection C.3.d.
4. Indoor environmental quality.
a. The methods to be used to control pollutant sources.
b. The use of low-emission materials.
c. The provision of outdoor views for occupants.
d. The provision of recycling stations in public areas.
5. Transportation.
a. The provisions for pedestrian and bicycle connections to public
open space, shopping and areas of job concentration.
b. The use of bicycle parking facilities.
c. The provisions for multi-modal motorized transportation for
residents, if available.
6. Construction materials.
a. The means whereby the consumption of building materials may
be minimized.
b. The process whereby the durability and adaptability of building
materials for new use is determined and implemented.
c. The use of salvaged and refurbished materials in the
redevelopment.
D. Landscaping and Tree Preservation. The following performance
standards shall supplement the buffer yard standards of Section
16.20.040.D of the Land Development Code:
1. Landscape design. The protection of wooded areas, specimen trees,
and existing vegetation suitable for landscaping within the
redevelopment shall be a factor in determining the location of open
space, buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas,
playgrounds, parking areas and finished grade levels and shall be
based on a survey of the natural features of the tract.
2. Perimeter buffer requirements. Landscape buffers shall be
required along all perimeter property lines and public rights-of-way
§ 16.24N.080 RARITAN CODE § 16.24N.080
1.01:644
except north of the former railroad right-of-way and within the
JCP&L easement. The perimeter buffer shall be a minimum width
of 30 feet, except for balcony, deck and patio encroachments as
permitted under Tract Requirements. The minimum landscaped
width shall be 20 feet and suitable for its function of site
enhancement, screening, and control of climatic effects. The
perimeter buffer shall meet the minimum standards of the Type
B buffer in 16.20.040.E.4.b.ii of this Title. A stream or freshwater
wetland corridor may substitute for a perimeter buffer if
appropriately vegetated. The landscape buffer design should retain
existing vegetation which is of high quality and appropriate density.
Where existing vegetation is unsuitable, it shall be augmented or
replaced by new plantings in accordance with a landscape plan
submitted to and approved by the Planning Board.
3. Tree and shrub replacement. A limit of disturbance line shall be
established during the review of an application for development
taking into account grading, utility placement, and anticipated
construction activities. Within the area encompassed by the limit of
disturbance, there shall be no requirement for the replacement of
trees. The provisions of Ordinance No. 10-27 and Ordinance No.
11-3 shall not apply within the Redevelopment Area. Within the
area to be disturbed by construction activities, the redeveloper
shall liberally install trees, shrubs and groundcover in accordance
with a landscape plan submitted to and approved by the Planning
Board.
4. Native plants required. In the design of the landscaping plan, no
non-native or invasive species of plants shall be used.
5. Parking lot landscaping. Landscape islands shall be provided within
parking fields at the end of all parking bays and in other
appropriate locations to minimize heat island effects. A minimum of
5% of the total parking lot area shall be in a landscaped island.
Each individual landscape island should be a minimum of eight feet
width and the depth of one or two parking stalls, depending on the
width of the parking bay. Such islands should not be less than 160
square feet nor greater than 320 square feet in area. One shade
tree (2 1/2 inch caliper minimum planting size) and four shrubs
(two gallon minimum planting size) shall be provided for each 160
square feet of landscape area. The remaining permeable surface
shall consist of ground cover, turf, and/or planting beds. The
minimum depth of topsoil in parking lot islands shall be 16 inches.
E. Lighting.
1. General. All outdoor lighting should be coordinated as to style,
material and color. Lighting throughout the site should overlap,
creating an even level of illumination throughout the parking area.
All exterior lighting shall be designed, located, installed and
directed in such a manner as to prevent objectionable light at and
§ 16.24N.080 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24N.080
1.01:645
across the property lines and to prevent glare at any location on or
off the property. The use of light emitting diode (LED) fixtures is
encouraged for energy efficiency and uniform illumination.
2. Illumination shall be no more than one foot-candle level at a street
line, at least two-foot-candles at vehicular entrances and exits, and
no more than 1/4 foot-candle at other perimeter property lines.
3. Lighting poles and footers together shall not exceed 25 feet in
height in driveways and private streets and 12 feet illuminating
pedestrian walkways outside of parking lots, though where
feasible, bollard lighting shall be the preferred type with a height
not to exceed three feet.
4. Pedestrian level lighting shall be used along any pedestrian
walkways not illuminated by parking lot lighting. The minimum
illumination of pedestrian areas shall be 0.5 foot-candle over the
walkway surface.
5. Lamps shall emit a color temperature between 3,200°K and
5,000°K. with a minimum color rendering index of 70 or higher.
F. Parking and Circulation Design.
1. The minimum parking provided shall be equal to two parking
spaces per dwelling unit. The Planning Board may consider and
approve a plan allowing for up to 20% of the total required number
of parking spaces to be banked. In the event that banked spaces are
approved, one or more of the banked spaces shall be constructed
by the owner following initial occupancy upon a certification by the
Township Planner or Township Engineer that the site as originally
constructed has inadequate parking. The number of spaces to be
constructed shall be determined by the Township Engineer.
2. The minimum size of a standard parking space shall be nine feet by
18 feet for 90° parking and nine feet by 23 feet for parallel parking.
3. The minimum drive aisle/parking aisle width shall be 24 feet.
Where a bifurcated entrance driveway or private street is
proposed, each one-way lane of travel shall be a minimum of 14 feet
in width.
4. Where sidewalk abuts a parking space, the total width of the curb
and sidewalk shall be a minimum of six feet in width.
5. Barrier free parking spaces shall be distributed throughout the
apartment complex in a ratio as required by N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.10.
6. Barrier free parking space dimensions shall comply with the 2010
ADA Standards for Accessible Design, Section 502, as it may be
amended or superseded.
§ 16.24N.080 RARITAN CODE § 16.24N.080
1.01:646
7. A bus shelter shall be provided along the frontage of Junction Road
and connected via a pedestrian pathway to the internal pedestrian
circulation system, unless the redeveloper can adequately
demonstrate that no operator will service the site after occupancy.
8. The redeveloper shall make adequate provision for pedestrian and
bicycle circulation and bicycle parking throughout the site. The
redeveloper shall make adequate legal provision in the form of an
easement for the eventual connection of the site to the Pioneer
Fields public open space parcel located to the west and northwest
of the Redevelopment Area.
G. Roof Design.
1. General. To add interest and reduce the scale of the buildings,
variations in roof lines shall be used through the use of
overhanging eaves, parapets, dormers, height variations and
entrance features.
2. Roof design shall incorporate the following design features:
a. Three or more roof slope planes; and/or
b. Overhanging eaves, parapet or canopy projections, which
extend no less than two feet past the supporting walls.
3. Photovoltaic panels. Roofs shall be designed to accommodate the
installation of photovoltaic panels.
H. Signs. Any development within the Junction Road Redevelopment Area
shall conform to the following sign types and limitations:
1. One monument-style ground sign shall be permitted when located
adjacent to an entrance driveway or private street, not to exceed 50
square feet in sign area and eight feet in height. Such sign shall be
located no closer than 15 feet to a public right-of-way and 30 feet
from a side property line.
2. In the event that the main entrance driveway is bifurcated, one
ground mounted directional sign each shall be permitted indicating
the flow of traffic into and out of the site may be installed. Such
sign shall be no taller than 30 inches in height and four square feet
in area.
3. One ground mounted directory sign shall be permitted located at
the first branching of the main driveway or subsequent branchings
indicating by map or arrows location of the various buildings on
site. Such sign shall be no taller than six feet in height and 18
square feet in area.
4. One freestanding sign shall be permitted each for the sales and
rental office, manager's office (if different from the sales and rental
office), and community center located between a parking area or
§ 16.24N.080 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24N.080
1.01:647
§ 16.24N.090. Public Improvements. [Amended by Ord. 14-20]
Public improvements are anticipated to be required and installed at the full
expense of the designated redeveloper as individual lots and tracts of land
are redeveloped consistent with the design policies and standards that are
contained within this Plan. The redeveloper is expected to install necessary
public improvements on the property they control as well as abutting rightsof-
way. The redeveloper is expected to construct any off-tract improvements
necessitated by their redevelopment. No recapture of off-site improvement
expenses from future development should be anticipated. However, nothing
contained herein shall be construed to preclude the ability of the
municipality or redeveloper from obtaining any governmental programs,
grants, loans, or other financial support or incentives for public
infrastructure improvements or other construction.
private street and the main building entrance not to exceed 1.5
square feet in area and four feet in height, pole-mounted.
5. Incidental signs shall be permitted provided that the sign is
attached to a wall, stenciled to an exterior door or attached to a
fence, except for emergency signs. Emergency signs may be placed
on poles, A-frame supports or other structure. The signs shall not
exceed 1.5 square feet in area.
6. Each building shall be lettered or numbered with a wall sign in
accordance with the requirements of the municipality's emergency
management office. The minimum letter height shall be eight
inches. Each apartment shall be signed with the apartment number
located on the door or next to the door jamb in accordance with the
requirements of the municipality's emergency management office.
The minimum letter height shall be four inches.
I. Solid Waste Management.
1. One outdoor collection area for trash, garbage and recyclable
materials shall be provided for each 50 dwellings or part thereof
which shall be separate from parking spaces whether such spaces
are inside or outside of any building.
2. All trash and recycling locations shall be enclosed and located in a
manner which is obscured from public view from parking areas,
private streets and adjacent residential uses or zoning districts by a
fence, wall, planting or combination of the three.
3. All exterior solid waste enclosures shall be constructed of materials
the same or substantially similar to the architectural materials of
the buildings to which it is associated.
A. Streets.
§ 16.24N.080 RARITAN CODE § 16.24N.090
1.01:648
§ 16.24N.100. Development Plan Review and Approval. [Amended by
Ord. 14-20]
1. The redeveloper shall be responsible for any street improvements
along the frontage of Junction Road determined to be required in
the site plan review process at the appropriate governmental level.
2. All streets within the Redevelopment Area shall be privately owned.
B. Utilities.
1. All development within the Redevelopment Area shall be served by
public water and sewer. The Redevelopment Area is currently
located within the service areas of the Raritan Township Municipal
Utilities Authority for public sewer and the New Jersey American
Water Company for water. The redeveloper shall install the mains,
service lines, standpipes and other facilities required for the
redevelopment in accordance with the policies and standards of the
company. There is no identified treatment capacity constraint for
the level of redevelopment anticipated by this Ordinance for
service to be supplied by the Raritan Township Municipal Utilities
Authority. The redeveloper shall install the interceptors, soil lines,
pumping stations and other facilities required for the
redevelopment in accordance with the policies and standards of the
Municipal Utilities Authority.
2. All cabling systems for electric service, cable television, telephone,
internet and similar wiring shall be placed underground by the
redeveloper necessary for the redevelopment.
A. Pre-Application Conference and Concept Plan.
1. Prior to submission of any application for development, the
redeveloper shall meet for a pre-application conference with the
Technical Review Committee (TRC) to insure that the requirements
of this Chapter 16.24N (Ordinance No. 14-20) are addressed. The
Technical Review Committee, for the purposes of development
within the Redevelopment Area only, may also include one or more
members of the Redevelopment Authority, but one fewer than
constitutes a quorum of that body.
2. The redeveloper shall submit a concept plan (also known as an
informal plan) to the TRC at an early stage of the design process.
The redeveloper shall present concept drawings illustrating
compliance with this Chapter 16.24N. The TRC shall provide the
redeveloper with written comments and if need be, alternative
sketches, in response. The concept plan shall be compared with the
design standards in this chapter as the basis for the review.
B. Escrow Fee. Redevelopers seeking approval of a development in the
Redevelopment Area shall establish an escrow account with the
Redevelopment Authority from which any consultants necessary for the
§ 16.24N.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24N.100
1.01:649
review of the redevelopment shall be paid. Such escrow account shall
be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2. The Redevelopment
Authority shall adopt a fee schedule by resolution and may amend it
from time to time as circumstances warrant.
C. Application for Development.
1. The application for development shall be submitted in such form,
and accompanied by such maps, documents, and materials as are
prescribed in Section 16.20.020 of the Land Development Code of
the Township of Raritan and Development Application Checklist(s),
with the following additional submission requirements:
a. An architectural elevation of each facade.
b. A detail of each of the following building elements:
i. Main and secondary buildings entrances. A typical
entrance may be shown if the main and secondary
entrances are the same.
ii. Typical window and surrounding architrave.
iii. Cornice.
iv. Transition.
c. A sample board or boards for review by the Technical Review
Committee upon which are attached the actual materials to be
used on each facade, including but not limited to, windows
glass, window frame, architrave, base, field, cornice and
accent materials. The sample board should be arranged to
indicate the relative proportions of the materials to be used in
the facade to the relative proportions of the materials on the
subject board. Simultaneously, or as a separate application, the
materials to be used in any signage for the building or
structure shall be submitted for review.
d. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions
applying or to be applied to the subject land, excepting concept
plans. For proposed deed restrictions or protective covenants,
these may be submitted in draft form.
e. Any existing or proposed easement or land dedicated or
reserved for public use beyond that already indicated in this
chapter. For proposed easements, these may be submitted in
draft form.
f. A list of all required regulatory approvals at the municipal,
county, state, and federal level of government and their status.
D. Redevelopment Authority Approval. The Redevelopment Authority shall
certify the consistency of an application for development with this
§ 16.24N.100 RARITAN CODE § 16.24N.100
1.01:650
chapter prior to its submission by the redeveloper to the Raritan
Township Planning Board upon recommendation of the TRC. As a
condition precedent to the filing of any application for development
to the Planning Board for any property governed by this chapter, the
Redevelopment Authority shall execute the Redevelopment Agreement
with the redeveloper.
E. Public Notice and Hearing. Any action towards the certification of
consistency of a redevelopment with this chapter by the Redevelopment
Authority shall be taken at a public hearing of the Redevelopment
Authority that is open to the public. The redeveloper shall provide
notice to the public in the official newspaper of the Township at least 10
days prior to said hearing in accordance with the procedures contained
within N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. for an application for development.
F. Planning Board Review.
1. Site plan and subdivision review shall be conducted by the Raritan
Township Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Site
plan review shall consist of a preliminary site plan application and a
final site plan application. Subdivisions shall consist of a
preliminary major subdivision application and a final major
subdivision application. Subdivisions shall be filed with the County
Recording Officer by plat.
2. The Raritan Township Planning Board may grant deviations from
the strict application of the regulations contained within this
chapter, except those standards and regulations specified in
Subsection F.3. below, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60 and -70c.
3. No deviations shall be granted that result in any of the following
effects or conditions:
a. To allow a use not specifically permitted within the MF 100%
Affordable Housing Overlay Zone;
b. Exceeding the maximum building or structure height as
measured in feet and/or stories in excess of that permitted to
be reviewed by the Planning Board in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(6).
c. Deviation from the phasing plan for public improvements or
other contractual obligations of the redeveloper to the
Redevelopment Authority. Such deviations sought from these
effects or conditions or the phasing schedule shall require an
amendment of this chapter.
G. Effect of Planning Board Approval. The effects of any Planning Board
approval shall be consistent with the rights granted by Municipal Land
Use Law 40:55D-1 et seq.) except to the extent they may be modified by
the Redeveloper's Agreement.
§ 16.24N.100 CODE ADOPTION § 16.24N.100
1.01:651
Chapter 16.24O
OVERLAY ZONE-GROUP HOMES
§ 16.24O.010. Overlay Zone Created. [Amended by Ord. 08-8]
The Group Home Zone shall be an overlay zone and shall not replace the
preexisting underlying zoning.
§ 16.24O.020. Permitted Principal Uses. [Amended by Ord. 08-8]
§ 16.24O.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Amended by Ord. 08-8]
§ 16.24O.040. Utilities. [Amended by Ord. 08-8]
§ 16.24O.050. Maximum Density. [Amended by Ord. 08-8]
Maximum Density: 2 bedrooms/acre
Chapter 16.26A
B-1 NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS ZONE
§ 16.26A.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.11(a); amended by Ord.
08-3]
It is the purpose of this zone to provide areas in which business uses are
limited to the convenience-type serving the residents and employees of the
immediate area only.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I and II set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title, and the
following regulations.
§ 16.26A.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.11(b);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
Retail service uses as set forth below and not exceeding a per unit (shop)
size of 4,000 square feet in gross floor area.
A. Group homes.
A. Administrative offices accessory to the principal group home use.
A. Any group home use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer.
A. Grocery, baker, meat and fruit shops;
B. Drug and pharmaceutical shops;
C. Stationery and tobacco shops;
§ 16.24N.100 RARITAN CODE § 16.26A.020
1.01:652
§ 16.26A.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.11(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.26A.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.11(d); amended
by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.26A.050. Buffer Strips. [Prior code § 15-9.11(e); amended by
Ord. 08-3]
All lots or parts of lots which are improved with a predominantly
nonresidential use and whose side or rear lines are adjacent to a residential
D. Hardware and garden supply shops;
E. Florist and gift shops;
F. Funeral homes;
G. Barber and beauty shops;
H. Tailoring, dressmaking and shoe repair shops;
I. Dry cleaning drop-off shops;
J. Radio, television, small sound equipment and small appliance sales and
repair shops;
K. Restaurants, excluding fast-food restaurants;
L. Professional offices;
M. Package liquor and beverage shops;
N. Banks.
O. Child care center. Child care centers are not subject to the 4,000 square
foot in gross floor area limit.
A. Public and private parking;
B. Signs and fences;
C. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use;
D. Apartments over shops and offices in accordance with Section
16.26A.060.
A. Public and private schools and day nurseries;
B. Public uses;
C. Essential services;
D. Home businesses. (See Section 16.02.030, Definitions.)
§ 16.26A.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26A.050
1.01:653
zone shall be screened from such residential zone by landscaped buffer
strips or other such screening along said side or rear lines as may be
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 16.74.130.
§ 16.26A.060. Apartments Over Shops and Offices. [Prior code
§ 15-9.11(f); amended by Ord. 08-3]
Chapter 16.26B
B-2 COMMERCIAL ZONE
§ 16.26B.010. Purpose. [Prior code 15-9.12(a); amended by Ord.
02-9; Ord. 08-3]
It is the purpose of this zone to define and provide controls for the major
shopping and business areas of the Township, serving the needs of both
Township residents and the regional population, and transient highway
users.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I and II set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title and the
following regulations.
§ 16.26B.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.12(b);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
A. A building containing a permitted shop or office on the first floor may be
constructed with a maximum of two apartment units on the second
floor.
B. There shall be provided a lot area of 1,000 square feet in area for every
apartment, in addition to the lot requirements for the permitted
nonresidential uses, for the applicable zone.
C. Each apartment shall be self-contained and shall have a gross floor area
of at least 400 square feet.
D. Public sewer and water shall be required.
E. Entrances to apartments shall be from the rear of the building.
F. Parking for tenants shall be provided at the rear of the building.
A. Retail and services uses, excluding those uses listed under Section
16.26B.040;
B. Banks, business and professional offices;
C. Hotels and motels;
D. Theaters and civic and cultural facilities;
§ 16.26A.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.26B.020
1.01:654
§ 16.26B.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.12(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.26B.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.12(d); amended
by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.26B.050. Buffer Strips. [Prior code § 15-9.12(e); amended by
Ord. 08-3]
All lots or parts of lots which are improved with a predominantly
nonresidential use and whose side or rear lines are adjacent to a residential
zone shall be screened from such residential zone by landscaped buffer
E. Commercial recreation, provided that loudspeakers and concessions
are prohibited on the premises unless the activity is totally contained
within a building, then interior concessions may be part of the activity;
F. Wholesale and wholesale-distribution uses, except bulk petroleum
products in excess of tankage permitted pursuant to Section
16.64.100.C;
G. Animal hospital and kennels;
H. Commercial greenhouses;
I. Funeral homes, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations;
J. Printing and publishing shops;
K. Mini-warehouses;
L. Child care center.
A. Public and private parking;
B. Signs and fences;
C. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
A. Public and private schools and day nurseries;
B. Public uses;
C. Essential services;
D. Shopping centers;
E. Gasoline filling stations and public and repair garages;
F. New car, farm machinery and construction equipment agencies;
G. Used car sales (see Section 16.68.060(E);
H. Home businesses.
§ 16.26B.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26B.050
1.01:655
strips or other such screening along said side or rear lines as may be
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 16.74.120.
Chapter 16.26C
B-3 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL ZONE
§ 16.26C.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.13(a); amended by Ord.
02-9; Ord. 08-3]
It is the purpose of this zone to provide areas in which business uses are
intended to serve the community and surrounding residents and activities
when said uses can be adequately serviced by the sanitary sewer system.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I and II set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title and the
following regulations.
§ 16.26C.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.13(b);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
A. Retail and service uses except:
1. Shopping centers on lots greater than three acres,
2. Fast-food restaurants,
3. Recreational activities,
4. Wholesale and distribution uses,
5. Commercial greenhouses, except those associated with a florist
shop,
6. Theaters,
7. Gasoline filling stations and public and repair garages,
8. New car, farm machinery and construction equipment agencies,
9. Dry-cleaning and laundry processing plants,
10. Group homes;
B. Hotels and motels;
C. Civic and cultural facilities;
D. Banks, business and professional offices;
E. Funeral homes, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations;
F. Printing and publishing shops;
§ 16.26B.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.26C.020
1.01:656
§ 16.26C.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.13(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.26C.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.13(d); amended
by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.26C.050. Buffer Strips. [Prior code § 15-9.13(e); amended by
Ord. 08-3]
All lots or parts of lots which are improved with a predominantly
nonresidential use and whose side or rear lines are adjacent to a residential
zone shall be screened from such residential zone by landscaped buffer
strips or other such screening along said side or rear lines as may be
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 16.74.120.
Chapter 16.26D
B-4 HIGHWAY BUSINESS ZONE
§ 16.26D.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.13A(a); amended by Ord.
93-24; Ord. 02-9; Ord. 08-3]
It is the purpose of this zoning district to reserve appropriate areas for
business development within a park-like setting by requiring a landscaped
strip to a depth of 100 feet along such highway frontage, when said uses
can be adequately serviced by the sanitary sewer system. Within this zone,
no lot, structure or accessory structures shall be used in whole or in
part unless it complies with Schedules I and II set out in the Appendix
following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title and the following
regulations.
G. Institutions;
H. Child care center.
A. Public and private parking;
B. Signs and fences;
C. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
A. Public and private schools and day nurseries;
B. Public uses;
C. Essential services;
D. Home businesses. (See Section 16.02.030, Definition);
E. Occupational, vocational and academic training center for handicapped
persons.
§ 16.26C.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26D.020
1.01:657
§ 16.26D.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.13A(b);
amended by Ord. 93-24; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.26D.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.13A(c);
amended by Ord. 93-24; Ord. 08-3]
A. Retail and service uses except:
1. Fast-food restaurants,
2. Recreational activities, except that bowling alleys are permitted,
3. Wholesale and distribution uses,
4. Commercial greenhouses, except those associated with a florist
shop,
5. Gasoline filling stations and public and repair garages,
6. New car, farm machinery and construction equipment agencies,
7. Dry cleaning and laundry processing plants,
8. Group homes,
9. Funeral homes, clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations,
10. Animal hospitals and kennels,
11. Printing and publishing shops except map reproduction and copy
centers,
12. Mini warehouses,
13. Home businesses;
B. Hotels and motels;
C. Theaters, civic and cultural facilities;
D. Banks, business and professional offices;
E. Child care centers.
(The conditional use standards set forth for "Shopping Centers" in Chapter
16.68 shall not be applied to any development in the B-4 zoning district
reaching or exceeding the size threshold as set forth in the definition of
"shopping center" in Section 16.02.030. Any shopping center shall be subject to
the restrictions applying to principal permitted uses in the B-4 zoning district
and area, yard and building requirements set forth on Schedule I applying to
the B-4 zoning district.)
A. Public and private parking;
B. Signs and fences;
§ 16.26D.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.26D.030
1.01:658
§ 16.26D.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.13A(d); amended
by Ord. 93-24; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.26D.050. Buffer Strips. [Prior code § 15-9.13A(e); amended by
Ord. 93-24; Ord. 02-9; Ord. 08-3]
All lots or parts of lots which are improved with a predominantly
nonresidential use and whose side or rear lines are adjacent to a residential
zone shall be screened from such residential zone by landscaped buffer
strips or other such screening along the side or rear lines as may be
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 16.74.120.
Chapter 16.26E
B-5 LOW INTENSITY HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL
§ 16.26E.010. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 01-28; Ord. 08-3]
It is the purpose of this zoning district to provide for low intensity highway
oriented uses along highways within the Township and to provide for
transitional uses between residential areas and to provide for transitional
uses between residential areas and the state highways. These uses are to
be limited in the type of use, developable area, hours of operation, and floor
area to limit the overall negative impacts associated with such development
including but not limited to traffic generation, noise, glare, run-off and
pollution.
Within this zone, no lot, structure, or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I and II set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title, and the
following regulations.
§ 16.26E.020. Zone Created. [Amended by Ord. 01-28; Ord. 02-53;
Ord. 08-3]
There is created a B-5 zoning district classification. The following area shall
comprise the B-5 zoning district:
All of the area shown on the official zoning map of the Township of Raritan
in the R-1A/Low Intensity Highway Oriented Conditional Use Zone in the
following Block and Lots: Block 63.01, Lots 11, 12, 12.01, 13, 13.01, Block
84, Lots 6, 7, 8, 9, 16, 17, 18, 19, 34, 34.01, 37, 100.01, Block 84.03, Lot 1,
Block 85, Lots 19, 24, 25 and 42, and Block 86, Lots 8, 26.02 and 29.
C. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
A. Public uses;
B. Essential services.
§ 16.26D.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26E.030
1.01:659
§ 16.26E.030. Principal Permitted Uses. [Amended by Ord. 01-28;
Ord. 02-53; Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.26E.040. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Amended by Ord. 01-28;
Ord. 08-3]
A. Professional offices;
B. Business offices;
C. Restaurants (excluding fast food);
D. Mini-warehouse;
E. Medical offices;
F. Card and gift store;
G. Veterinarian;
H. Travel agency;
I. Nursing home/assisted living facility;
J. Antique store;
K. Art gallery;
L. Any form of agriculture and horticulture, including farm product sales
in accordance with Section 16.24A.050;
M. Dry cleaning drop off shops;
N. Banks;
O. Tailoring, dressmaking and shoe repair shops;
P. Florist;
Q. Funeral homes;
R. Photographer;
S. Computer, tv, and electronics repair;
T. Indoor recreational training facility;
U. Barber and beauty shops;
V. Child care centers
A. Public and private parking;
B. Signs and fences;
C. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to principal permitted
use.
§ 16.26E.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.26E.050
1.01:660
§ 16.26E.050. Conditional Uses. [Amended by Ord. 01-28; Ord.
02-53; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.26E.060. Hours of Operation. [Amended by Ord. 01-28; Ord.
08-3]
Any non-residential use within the B-5 zone shall be limited in its hours of
operation, including deliveries to 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
Chapter 16.26F
PCOS - PLANNED COMMERCIAL-OFFICE-SERVICE DISTRICT
§ 16.26F.010. Created. [Amended by Ord. 02-37; Ord. 08-3]
There is created a PCOS Planned Commercial-Office-Service District within
the Township. The following properties shall be in the PCOS zoning district:
Block 16.01, Lots 35 & 36.
§ 16.26F.020. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 02-47; Ord. 08-3; Ord.
2017-14]
It is the purpose of this amendment to permit the development of a
residential component to the existing Raritan Town Square to permit the
development of a rental housing component that will include apartments
affordable to low and moderate income households when such uses provide
adequate open space, architectural detail, public and semi-public area's,
provide for a mixture of uses, and are serviced by public sanitary sewer and
public water.
§ 16.26F.030. Principal Permitted Uses. [Amended by Ord. 02-47;
Ord. 08-3; Ord. 2017-14]
A. Public and private schools and day nurseries;
B. Public uses;
C. Essential services;
D. Houses of worship
A. Retail;
B. Professional offices;
C. Business offices;
D. Restaurants (including outdoor seating areas);
E. Delicatessen;
F. Medical offices;
§ 16.26E.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26F.030
1.01:661
G. Optometrist, including eye glass sales;
H. Movie theaters;
I. Catering and assembly halls;
J. Hotels (excluding motels);
K. Dry cleaning drop off shops;
L. Banks;
M. Barbers, beauty salons, nail salons, spas and other cosmetic services;
N. Travel agents;
O. Photographers;
P. Real Estate offices;
Q. Indoor recreational uses;
R. Outdoor recreational facilities;
S. Public uses;
T. Theaters and civic facilities;
U. Parking structures;
V. Light manufacturing provided the use is not visible by the general
public and the use is conducted solely within a building;
W. Child care centers;
X. Multi-family residential housing units, subject to conditions in Section
16.20.040. [Amended by Ord. 2017-14]
Y. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
1. Car wash.
2. Vehicle repair.
3. Vehicle sales.
4. Wholesale and distribution facilities.
5. Kennels.
6. Motels.
7. Outdoor storage of goods or materials.
8. Permanent outdoor sales.
9. (Reserved) [Amended by Ord. 2017-14]
§ 16.26F.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.26F.040
1.01:662
§ 16.26F.040. Conditional Uses. [Amended by Ord. 08-3; Ord.
2017-14]
§ 16.26F.050. Floor Area Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 08-3;
Ord. 2017-14]
A. Essential services.
B. Public and private schools and day nurseries.
C. Houses of worship.
D. Seasonal sales areas.
A. Maximum total FAR 590,250 square feet (0.24) for Lots 35 & 36.
Use Category
(Principal
Use)
Min. Required Square
Feet
(% of total retail
square feet
developed)
Max. Developable Square
Feet
(% of total floor area
developed)
1. (Retail) N/A 65%
2. (Service
Uses)
74,995 square feet No Maximum
3. (Office Uses) 12,636 No Maximum
B. Residential apartment buildings are not included in floor area ratio
calculations.
1. Category 1: Retail Sales.
2. Category 2: Service Uses, Child Care, Restaurants (including take
out and exterior eating areas), Hotels, Banquet Facilities,
Conference Facilities, Recreation, Movie Theaters, Theaters, Public
Uses, Civic Uses, Light Manufacturing, Insurance and Real Estate
offices, and Travel Agencies.
3. Category 3: Office Uses (including professional, business, medical,
research labs) (See Section 16.63.060.B for additional
requirements).
Any Civic Use developed shall count towards Category 2 as 1.5
square feet for every 1 square feet developed when approved by
the Planning Board (See Section 16.63.060.8.3).
4. Category 4: Residential Uses: The maximum permitted total units
for multi-family apartment housing within the district is 140
dwelling units of which 20% or 28 dwelling units shall be deed
restricted so as to remain affordable to low and moderate income
households.
§ 16.26F.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26F.050
1.01:663
§ 16.26F.060. Open Space and Buffer Requirements. [Amended by
Ord. 02-47; Ord. 08-3; Ord. 2017-14]
C. The market rate rental apartments units shall be either efficiency units,
one-bedroom or two bedroom units only. There shall be no market rate
units with more than two bedrooms. The affordable units shall comply
with the bedroom allocation requirements pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93 —
7.3(a).
D. The phasing of market rate to affordable units during construction will
meet the construction sequence schedule set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:93 —
5.6(d).
E. Each structure shall have a mix of market rate and affordable units,
intermixed throughout the building structure and floors. The exterior of
the affordable units shall be visually similar in appearance to the
market rate units.
A. A 100-foot open space buffer area shall be provided along the frontage
of a State highway and a fifty-foot open space buffer shall be provided
along the frontage of any County or Township road.
1. The open space buffer shall not be used for parking, loading,
storage, or any activity that is either part of or accessory to the
proposed use.
2. The open space buffer may contain utility lines, driveways, or
pedestrian or bicycle paths, provided that:
a. The proposed locations of such uses are necessary for their
proper functioning, and such uses cross the buffer where
feasible, rather than lie along the length of the buffer; and
b. The total width of the buffer is maintained.
3. Detention basins shall not be permitted in the open space buffer,
with the exception that retention ponds and/or underground storm
water management systems are permitted.
B. A minimum of 10% of the total lot area shall be set aside and/or
developed for usable open space, public and/or civic uses. All open
space and civic or public uses shall be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Board.
1. The open space requirement may be provided by exterior green
spaces or interior civic or other public indoor recreational facility
or interior public spaces or any combination thereof. The use of
interior civic or public recreational spaces shall be considered as a
Category 2 use, as listed in Section 16.26F.050. Interior spaces
shall account for no more than 50% of the total open space
requirement. Interior spaces may be located in individual
§ 16.26F.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.26F.060
1.01:664
§ 16.26F.070. Utilities. [Amended by Ord. 08-3; Ord. 2017-14]
§ 16.26F.080. Shared Development. [Amended by Ord. 08-3; Ord.
2017-14]
Either through private agreements, joint ownership, joint application, or
other means the hard surface coverage, parking, open space and floor
areas for the various uses may be provided, transferred and/or clustered on
one or all sites (i.e. the entire zone may be developed as one site). Such
transfer will require approval of any and all agreements, easements or other
necessary documentation by the Planning Board.
§ 16.26F.090. Parking. [Amended by Ord. 08-3; Ord. 2017-14]
§ 16.26F.100. Mixture of Building Sizes. [Amended by Ord. 08-3]
A mixture of the size of the retail facilities provided is required to ensure a
diversity in the types of uses developed. For every 100,000 square feet (or
buildings, on upper floors, portions of buildings, or any
combination thereof.
2. The Residential Uses shall provide a recreational amenity located
in proximity to the Residential building and provide a minimum
area of 400 square feet for play- area or structure.
3. Maximum impervious cover = 55%.
4. Any interior civic space may be counted as 1.5 square feet of floor
area under Category 2 in Section 16.26F.050 Floor Area
Requirements, for every one square foot of gross floor area
developed when such civic space is approved by the Planning
Board.
A. All uses must be serviced by sanitary sewer and public water. Applicant
shall submit evidence of sufficient sanitary sewer and potable water
capacity, as per the municipal application checklist requirements before
application can be heard.
B. All public utilities must be located underground.
A. Parking requirements on the site may be reduced to 1 space per 250
square feet of gross floor area provided an adequate mixture of land
uses is provided that permits the sharing of parking facilities.
Additional sharing, of parking facilities may be permitted after review
by the Planning Board.
B. Parking for the residential use must meet RSIS standards.
C. Parking islands and landscaping to meet existing Township standards.
D. Handicapped parking spaces must be provided in accordance with
State of New Jersey regulations.
§ 16.26F.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26F.100
1.01:665
portion thereof) of gross retail space, at least three separate retail spaces
must be constructed. There are no individual size requirements for each
facility and the spaces may be connected.
§ 16.26F.110. Design Guidelines. [Amended by Ord. 08-3; Ord.
2017-14]
A. Design Guidelines.
1. Signs (both ground and wall signs) shall be coordinated in color
and design. Directional signs shall be provided throughout any
development to assist in the flow of traffic to the most efficient
entry and exit point.
2. A common green space complimentary to civic and recreational
uses shall be provided.
3. A mixed use (retail/office/service/civic) area shall be provided
adjacent to the central green space.
4. Uses should be clustered within any development to aid in
pedestrian access among the various uses. Uses shall not be
located on isolated building pads.
5. Multi-story development is encouraged.
6. Parking facilities should be designed so that they are shielded from
view from the public areas within the site and from passers-by on
exterior roadways. Parking areas should be so located as to aid in
the sharing of parking facilities.
7. All parking areas, storm water systems, buffers, green spaces and
other areas shall be landscaped as per Township requirements.
8. The overall architectural design of the site should be coordinated in
color, scale and design. Each individual use shall be architecturally
delineated.
9. Loading and other building service areas shall be shielded from
view from the public and shall be combined, where possible.
10. Lighting shall be kept to a minimum and shall follow requirements
found elsewhere in this Title 16.
11. Any parking structures shall be adequately lit. In addition, any such
structure shall be incorporated into the overall architectural design
of the site.
12. School Bus Pads that meet the standards of the Raritan Township
public school districts need to be provided. [Amended by Ord.
2017-14]
13. Each residential shall have a mix of market rate and affordable
units, intermixed throughout the building structure and floors. The
§ 16.26F.100 RARITAN CODE § 16.26F.110
1.01:666
§ 16.26F.120. Hours of Operation. [Amended by Ord. 08-3; Ord.
2017-14]
All uses shall be closed to the general public from 2 a.m. to 5:00 a.m. of
every day, except uses within 200 feet of the Residential Buildings shall limit
hours of operation to 12:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.
Chapter 16.26G
COMMERCIAL-RECREATION-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 16.26G.010. Intent. [Amended by Ord. 07-33; Ord. 08-3; Ord.
2016-11]
It is the intent of this chapter to permit the development of residential,
commercial and recreational uses within this zone when such uses provide
adequate open space and a mixture of uses.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I and II set out in the
Appendix following this Title and other applicable sections of this Title.
§ 16.26G.020. Overlay Zoning. [Amended by Ord. 07-33; Ord. 08-3;
Ord. 2016-11]
Block 9, Lots 8, 15.01, 16, 16.01, 16.02 17, 17.01, 19, 23 and 23.01
(designated on 2015 Tax Maps) which are currently zoned I-2, shall have
the option to use the following Commercial Recreational Residential zoning
requirements provided all zoning requirements are met. Any such property
electing to use the requirements of this section must do so entirely and not
combine the I-2 and CR zonings on one property.
§ 16.26G.030. Permitted Uses. [Amended by Ord. 07-33; Ord. 08-3;
Ord. 2016-11]
exterior of the affordable units shall be visually similar in
appearance to the market rate apartment units. [Amended by
Ord. 2017-14]
A. No building or structure shall be erected nor shall any land or building
be designed, used for any purpose other than the following:
1. Commercial and non-commercial indoor and outdoor recreation;
2. Museums;
3. Theaters and Civic Facilities;
4. Catering and Assembly Halls;
5. Restaurants;
§ 16.26F.110 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26G.030
1.01:667
§ 16.26G.040. Accessory Uses. [Amended by Ord. 07-33; Ord. 08-3;
Ord. 2016-11]
§ 16.26G.050. Conditional Uses. [Amended by Ord. 07-33; Ord. 08-3;
Ord. 2016-11]
6. Hotels;
7. Movie theaters;
8. Child care facilities;
9. Banks;
10. Agricultural uses;
11. Dry Cleaners;
12. Utilities;
13. Retail Uses;
14. Residential Dwellings Units (Market rate and Affordable per
Section 16.26G.060);
15. Public and Private Schools (Conditional standards contained in
Section 16-68.060G shall not apply);
16. Offices including business, medical and professional offices.
17. Mixed uses in a single structure;
18. Accessory uses and accessory structures customarily incidental to
the above uses.
A. Accessory Uses.
1. Recreational Lighting in compliance with the requirements of this
section;
2. Public and Private Parking, including multilevel parking (subject to
height limits in Schedule I);
3. Signs and Fences;
4. Outdoor Seating;
A. Conditional Uses.
1. Public Uses.
2. Essential Services.
3. Houses of Worship.
§ 16.26G.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.26G.060
1.01:668
§ 16.26G.060. Affordable Residential Rental Housing. [Amended by
Ord. 07-33; Ord. 08-3; Ord. 2016-11]
A. The development shall include an inclusionary rental housing
component in accordance with the following standards:
1. Unit Count.
a. The project shall consist of a minimum of 305 dwelling units
and a maximum of 339 dwelling units, of which 20% of the total
count shall be affordable rental units in accordance with New
Jersey requirements for low- and moderate-income housing as
set forth in N.J.A.C 5:80-26.1 et seq.
b. Any deviation below the minimum in the unit count of 305
dwelling units shall be considered a design waiver pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51, not a variance pursuant to N.J.A.C
40:55D-70, provided that 20% of the total count are affordable
units.
c. The project may be phased with the initial phase consisting of a
minimum of 130 Dwelling units. Each phase shall provide that
20% of the dwelling units of that phase are affordable units.
2. Unit Distribution.
a. Each housing structure shall contain a minimum of 1
affordable unit for every 8 market-rate units. Where the ratio
results in a fraction, the requirement shall be rounded up to
the nearest whole number.
b. No market rate unit shall have in excess of two bedrooms.
3. Unit Design.
a. Market-rate and affordable-rate dwelling units shall be
designed to appear as an integrated development and shall not
be distinguishable from the exterior.
b. Bedroom distribution for the affordable units shall be in
accordance N.J.A.C 5:80-26.3.
4. Administrative Requirements.
a. Affordable housing units shall not be age-restricted.
b. Range of affordability. The range of affordability shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3 except that 20% of the
affordable units shall be three bedroom units and 13% of the
units shall be for very low income households.
c. Each individual applicant for affordable tenancy shall be
reviewed by the Owner and qualified by the Township's
Administrative Agent, presently Central Jersey Housing
§ 16.26G.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26G.060
1.01:669
§ 16.26G.070. Utilities. [Amended by Ord. 07-33; Ord. 08-3; Ord.
2016-11]
All uses must be serviced by public sanitary sewer and public water. Said
utility service may be a condition of any approval.
§ 16.26G.080. Shared Development. [Amended by Ord. 07-33; Ord.
08-3; Ord. 2016-11]
Either through private agreements, joint ownership, joint application, or
other means the hard surface coverage, parking, open space, density and
floor areas for the various uses may be provided, transferred and/or
clustered on one or all sites (i.e. the entire zone may be developed as
one site). Such transfer will require approval of any and all agreements,
easements or other necessary documentation by the Planning Board and the
Township Attorney.
§ 16.26G.090. Hours of Operation. [Amended by Ord. 07-33; Ord.
08-3; Ord. 2016-11]
All outdoor uses shall be closed from 12:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. of every day
other than lighting for the safe exit of patrons and employees.
§ 16.26G.100. Design Guidelines. [Amended by Ord. 07-33; Ord.
08-3; Ord. 2016-11]
Resources Center, Inc. The Applicant shall provide on a timely
basis and upon request to the Township Planner and
Administrative Agent with all the information necessary for the
Township to document affordable housing compliance. There
will be a thirty-year deed restriction on the affordable housing
units, which will restrict the use of the affordable housing
in accordance with the rules and regulation of the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., and
the substantive rules of the Council on Affordable Housing, if
applicable, as amended and in effect. The form of this deed
restriction shall be reviewed by the Raritan Township Special
Affordable Housing Attorney for conformity to this Resolution
and will be recorded with the Hunterdon County Clerk prior to
the start of construction.
d. Phasing Schedule. Affordable units shall be built in accordance
with N.J.A.C 5:97-6.4(d). A newly constructed unit shall be
considered complete when a certificate of occupancy is issued.
A. The following guidelines are intended to supplement existing site plan
design standards.
1. Signs (both ground and wall signs) shall be coordinated in color
and design. Directional signs shall be provided throughout any
§ 16.26G.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.26G.100
1.01:670
§ 16.26G.110. Recreational Lighting. [Amended by Ord. 07-33; Ord.
08-3; Ord. 2016-11]
development to assist in the flow of traffic to the most efficient
entry and exit point.
2. Parking areas should be so located as to aid in the sharing of
parking facilities.
3. The overall architectural design of the site should be coordinated in
color, scale and design and shall be approved by the Planning
Board.
4. Loading and other building service areas shall be shielded from
view from the public and shall be combined, where possible.
5. A minimum of 2.0 parking spaces per residential unit shall be
provided within 200 feet of the residential structures. Additional
required parking, to meet RSIS standards may be shared parking
on Lots 15.01, 16, 16.01, 16.02, 17.01 or 23 with different uses.
A. In the Commercial-Recreational-Residential Zone the following
recreational lighting requirements shall apply:
1. Recreational lighting providing light to a permitted outdoor
recreational use shall be considered an accessory use in the
Commercial-Recreational-Residential Zone (except for the
purposes of setback requirements as noted in Subsection A, 5
below).
2. Lighting shall be accomplished only through the use of fixtures
conforming to IESNA full-cutoff criteria, or as otherwise approved
by the Township based on suitable control of glare and light
trespass.
3. For new recreational facilities and recreational facilities wishing to
change their hours of operation; during hours of darkness, sporting
events shall be timed so that all lighting in the sports facility, other
than lighting for safe exit of patrons, shall be extinguished by 12:00
a.m., regardless of such occurrences as extra innings or overtimes.
4. Any structures related to the lights including light poles shall meet
the setbacks for principal structures within the zone.
5. Maximum mounting heights for recreational lighting shall be in
accordance with the following:
a. Basketball 20 feet.
b. Football 70 feet.
c. Soccer 70 feet.
d. Little League Baseball.
§ 16.26G.100 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26G.110
1.01:671
Chapter 16.26H
OUTDOOR RECREATION ZONE
§ 16.26H.010. Overlay Zone. [Amended by Ord. 08-17]
The Outdoor Recreation Zone shall be an overlay zone and shall not replace
the preexisting underlying zoning.
§ 16.26H.020. Permitted Principal Uses. [Amended by Ord. 08-17]
§ 16.26H.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Amended by Ord. 08-17]
§ 16.26H.040. Utilities. [Amended by Ord. 08-17]
Any use shall be serviced by public sanitary sewer.
i. 200 feet Radius 60 feet.
ii. 300 feet Radius 70 feet.
e. Miniature Golf 20 feet.
f. Tennis 20 feet.
g. Track 20 feet.
A. Outdoor commercial recreation.
A. Administrative offices accessory to the principal use.
B. Indoor commercial recreational incidental to the principal outdoor use.
C. Recreational sports lighting in accordance with Subsection
16.26H.050.
D. Fencing for recreational uses may be up to 30 feet in height provided no
such fencing is located in any front setback area.
E. (Reserved)
F. Existing single-family dwellings may continue to be used for residential
purposes. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any such single-family
dwelling, and any part thereof, within the boundaries of the OR Zone as
that zone was configured on the effective date of Ordinance No. 19-14,
may be leased or rented as sleeping accommodations to individuals
engaged or involved with the principal permitted use of the Outdoor
Recreation Zone. This subsection shall not permit such accessory uses,
as set forth above, in any properties included within the OR Zone after
the effective date of Ordinance No. 19-14. [Added 6-5-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-14]
§ 16.26G.110 RARITAN CODE § 16.26H.050
1.01:672
§ 16.26H.050. Outdoor Commercial Recreation Lighting Standards.
[Amended by Ord. 08-17]
§ 16.26H.060. Use of Pervious Materials. [Amended by Ord. 08-17]
A minimum of 50% of all parking spaces shall be paved with pervious
materials that have been approved for use by the Township Engineer.
§ 16.26H.070. Buffering. [Amended by Ord. 08-17; 6-5-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-14]
All outdoor commercial recreation uses shall be treated as a mediumintensity
commercial use for the purposes of determining the required
buffer yards. Where the zone abuts a residential zone, the higher-intensity
residential buffer standards in Table I shall apply (see Section 16.20.040).
§ 16.26H.080. Scheduling of Events. [Added 6-5-2019 by Ord. No.
19-14]
All events shall be scheduled to cease at 11:00 p.m. where practicable.
Chapter 16.26I
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
§ 16.26I.010. Overlay Zone. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
The intent of this Chapter 16.261 ("this chapter") is to allow in the portion
of the I-1 Zone identified in Section 16.261.020, below (the "Overlay Zone"),
if served by public sewers and public water and under other reasonable
requirements, a planned residential development with a variety of housing
types within the overall density limits established with the goal of achieving
50 affordable units consistent with the Township's Revised Affordable
Housing Compliance Plan. The standards established herein are based on
the master plan recommendation that this area be developed with agerestricted
senior housing, along with affordable housing in order to meet
the needs of households of all ages and all income levels, as an inclusionary
affordable housing development pursuant to and consistent with the Mt.
A. This subsection pertains to lights installed to principally provide
illumination for outdoor sports facilities.
B. All outdoor uses shall be closed from 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. of
every day and all lighting extinguished other than security lighting and
lighting for the safe exit of patrons and employees. This revised lighting
standard shall take precedence over any prior ordinances or
resolutions. [Amended 6-5-2019 by Ord. No. 19-14]
C. Lighting stanchions shall not exceed 90 feet in height.
D. All lighting shall minimize glare and light pollution.
§ 16.26H.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26I.010
1.01:673
Laurel Doctrine, the Fair Housing Act and the regulations of the Council on
Affordable Housing ("COAH"), including (without limitation) Subchapter 10
of the COAH regulations (N.J.A.C. 5:97-10.1 to 10.5).
§ 16.26I.020. Zone Created. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
The Overlay Zone shall consist of Block 36.05, Lots 1 through 143, Block
36.06, Lot 1, previously known as Block 36, Lot 17. Subject to compliance
with applicable subdivision requirements, nothing contained in this section
shall preclude the subdivision of the Overlay Zone into two or more lots,
including, without limitation, separate lots for the affordable housing
section and the age-restricted housing section (as described below).
§ 16.26I.030. Minimum Acreage Required. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-19]
Ninety-five contiguous acres shall be the minimum required area for a
planned residential development.
§ 16.26I.040. Uses Permitted. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
The planned residential development shall include age-restricted, singlefamily,
detached structures, age-restricted townhouse structures and nonage-
restricted affordable housing multifamily structures. The housing types
may also include duplexes, quads and one-story ranches to add variety to
the housing mix.
§ 16.26I.050. Accessory Uses Permitted. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-19]
Accessory Uses Permitted. Private garages, public parking areas,
clubhouses, playgrounds and other recreational amenities, meeting and
gathering places, and emergency generators subject to requirements of
Section 16.26I.130C, and rental and/or administrative offices shall be
permitted accessory uses in the Overlay Zone. Other incidental uses to
serve the residents of the development shall be permitted at the discretion
of the Planning Board.
§ 16.26I.060. Timing of Development. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-19]
The Planning Board shall establish reasonable timing schedules on the
sequence and number of housing types and associated utilities and
amenities that may be constructed as part of the planned residential
development. Construction of the development in phases shall be permitted
upon the request of the developer.
§ 16.26I.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.26I.070
1.01:674
§ 16.26I.070. Maximum Number Units in Overall Tract. [Adopted
8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
The maximum number of units to be constructed in the Overlay Zone shall
not exceed 300 units.
§ 16.26I.080. Minimum Number of Affordable Units. [Adopted
8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
20% of the overall number of market-rate units shall be affordable units,
which shall meet the regulations and requirements of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH).
§ 16.26I.090. Required Conditions. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
The following conditions shall apply to a PRD in the Overlay Zone:
A. The minimum tract area for passive or active open space within the agerestricted
section shall be 40%, and the minimum open space within the
affordable section shall be 30%. To the extent it is feasible to do so
without reduction of the number of units otherwise permitted in the
Overlay Zone pursuant to Section 16.26I.070 above, care shall be given
to protect natural features such as the treed areas, scenic views,
wetlands and associated wetland transition areas and buffer areas,
steep slopes and drainageways.
B. The maximum hard surface coverage in the age-restricted section shall
be 40% of the total area of such section, and the maximum hard surface
coverage in the affordable section shall be 30% of the total area of such
section.
C. The design of the buildings shall provide, where possible, that the front
of one building does not face the back of another building or accessory
building.
D. Minimum distance of a building from an interior street or driveway: 35
feet.
E. Minimum distance of a building from any on-site parking lot, garage or
other accessory building: 20 feet.
F. No market-rate, single-family dwelling or multifamily building shall
exceed two stories or 35 feet in height, whichever is less. No affordable
housing multifamily unit structure shall exceed three stories or 40 feet
in height, whichever is less. No accessory community recreation
building or community center shall exceed a height of two stories or 45
feet. Entry gatehouses cannot exceed 18 feet in height. Architectural
features that add to the natural topography of a tract shall not be
included in the height of the dimension.
§ 16.26I.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26I.090
1.01:675
G. Interior roads, sidewalks, and driveways shall comply with Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
H. Coordinated Theme; Green Building Design; Look of Integrated
Development.
1. The overall development within the Overlay Zone should be
designed with a coordinated theme of buildings, signage,
landscaping and streetscape, while taking into consideration the
natural features, environmental constraints and site topography. A
variety of architectural features and different facades are
encouraged to provide visual interest, such as staggering unit
setback, different exterior materials, changing of windows,
shutters, doors, porches, colors and vertical/horizontal
orientations. Buildings shall be designed in accordance with an
architectural theme, including signage, which is coordinated with
site lighting, street furniture, landscaping, architectural project
identity features, and other appurtenances in order to create a
sense of place.
2. Green building design and energy efficiency techniques are
strongly recommended. To the extent feasible, the development
should follow guidelines of the U.S. Green Building Council's
Leadership in Energy and Environment Design (LEED).
3. Although the market-rate units and the affordable units may be
built in different sections of the Overlay Zone, the development
should be designed to integrate the appearance of the units and
other structures in the affordable housing section and the agerestricted
section so that units of all types appear to be part of an
integrated development. Design and aesthetics of all structures
should be compatible with each other, regardless of unit type.
I. The property must be served by public water and sewer.
J. There shall be a landscaped (or wooded) buffer of at least 50 feet in
width maintained around the perimeter of the property, except where
the buffer is located along the property's road frontage, in which case
roadway connections to service the project, utilities and clearing
necessary to accommodate said improvements shall be permissible. The
perimeter buffer shall be increased to 100 feet in width along the
Overlay Zone's western boundary adjacent to the Township public
works (recycling) facility.
K. Conformance to COAH Regulations.
1. The affordable housing units shall conform to all applicable COAH
regulations, including, but not limited to:
a. Affordability, N.J.A.C. 5:97-9,3 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, 26.4 and
26.6;
§ 16.26I.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.26I.090
1.01:676
§ 16.26I.100. Minimum Standards for Single-Family Housing.
[Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
§ 16.26I.110. Minimum Standards for Duplexes, Quads,
Townhouses. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
b. Occupant eligibility, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.7 and 26.16;
c. Equal numbers of low-income units and moderate-income
units, N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.3 and 5:80-26.3(a) (unless COAH shall
approve a different allocation between low- and moderateincome
units requested by the developer);
d. Resale price controls, N.J.A.C. 5:97-9.3 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5
and 26.6;
e. Handicapped adaptability and accessibility, N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14;
f. Bedroom mix, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3(b); and
g. Affirmative marketing, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
2. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, in no
event shall the Township or the Planning Board impose any
procedural or substantive requirement that adds to the burden or
cost of development within the Overlay Zone in violation of the
requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:97-10.1 to 10.5 and, for
purposes of applying such regulations, the market-rate and
affordable units to be constructed within the Overlay Zone shall be
considered a single inclusionary development that is entitled to the
benefits of such regulations.
A. Each lot shall have a minimum area of 6,000 square feet.
B. Each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 55 feet of roadway on a
single road. Where a lot is on a curve of a cul-de-sac, a minimum of 2/3
of the required road frontage shall be required.
C. Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 100 feet.
D. Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 20 feet. (Note: For internal
streets without a ROW, the front yard setback should be increased by 10
feet.)
E. Each lot shall have a minimum rear yard of 30 feet.
F. Each lot shall have a minimum side yard of five feet (each side).
G. Each single-family lot dwelling shall contain a minimum floor area of
1,500 square feet.
A. Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 35 feet from the curb
(regardless of public or private streets).
§ 16.26I.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26I.110
1.01:677
§ 16.26I.120. Minimum Standards for Affordable Multifamily Units.
[Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
§ 16.26I.130. Minimum Standards for Accessory Structures.
[Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
§ 16.26I.140. Parking, Roads and Sidewalks. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-19]
B. Each building shall have a minimum rear yard separation of 40 feet
between the buildings (back to back), and 30 feet (side to back).
C. Each building shall have a minimum side yard separation of 25 feet
(side to side).
A. Minimum lot area of 10 acres.
B. Each lot shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet/125 feet (corner).
C. Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 30 feet.
D. Each lot shall have a minimum rear yard of 25 feet.
E. Each lot shall have a minimum side yard of 30 feet (each side).
A. No accessory building shall exceed the applicable height limit in
Subsection 16.26I.090F.
B. Parking for a clubhouse shall be one space per 200 square feet.
C. Emergency generators shall only be located in the rear yard with a rearyard
setback requirement of 10 feet.
A. Parking shall be provided as required by RSIS.
B. Roads shall be designed as required by RSIS.
C. Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four feet and must be located
along at least one side of each street, between buildings and between
parking areas and buildings unless waived by the Planning Board in
certain instances.
D. The developer is encouraged to provide pedestrian and/or bicycle and/
or off-road paths with crosswalks and signage for identification and
safety purposes. All signs should be designed to complement the theme
of the development. Bikeways shall conform to Section 5:21-4.18(b) of
RSIS.
E. The following planning/design techniques are recommended:
1. On-street parking may be permitted, provided that all RSIS road
width and parking lane standards are met or exceeded.
§ 16.26I.110 RARITAN CODE § 16.26I.140
1.01:678
§ 16.26I.150. Recreation. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
Any included recreation facilities shall be developed suitably to serve the
residents of the dwelling units, but shall be located in an area which will not
be detrimental to owners or residents of properties adjacent to the Overlay
Zone by virtue of noise, light, glare or any other objectionable features
emanating from such facilities. Recreation areas may include fitness trails,
pedestrian trails, bikeways, and other active or passive recreational
features, as proposed by the developer and approved by the Planning Board.
§ 16.26I.160. Waste Disposal. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
Waste materials and garbage must be privately disposed of by a method
approved by the Township Board of Health. Refuse storage areas shall be
so designed as to minimize any detrimental effect on the character of the
development, and shall meet the setback requirements set forth herein for
groups of dwelling units.
§ 16.26I.170. Landscaping/Buffering. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-19]
2. Off-street visitor parking should be fractionalized and logically
spread around the development both to conveniently service each
housing area rather than centralized for the economy. On-street
parking shall be counted only for the visitor share of required
spaces.
3. Parking areas should be set aside attractively for boats, motor
homes and commercial vehicles which shall not be parked on unit
driveways or on access streets.
4. Parking lots must be designed so that parked vehicles are not
required to back out into a public street to exit the lot.
5. Every project shall have at least two points of access to the public
street system or provide a stable secondary emergency route
where two access points are not feasible.
6. Improvements according to the Township standards shall be
provided on all existing public streets for sites having frontage
thereon.
7. Speed-calming devices such as roundabouts, constrictions,
pavement-length limitations, solar speed-control signs and other
strategies shall be provided.
A. All developments shall be provided with professionally designed and
executed landscaping. All areas not utilized for parking areas,
driveways, streets and roads, recreational facilities, patios or terraces
shall be provided with lawns or other suitable ground cover, trees and
shrubs. Continuous evergreen screening shall be provided where
§ 16.26I.140 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26I.170
1.01:679
§ 16.26I.180. Stormwater Management. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-19]
Subject to compliance with the applicable stormwater management plan
requirements, developers should consider designing alternative stormwater
management plans that would reduce the amount of tree removal and
area of disturbance, such as more dispersed, smaller-scale stormwater
management features, rain gardens, reforestation or other alternatives.
To the extent feasible without reducing the number of units permitted
within the Overlay Zone, stormwater management basins shall be shaped to
appear natural and separated from units as far as possible. The basins shall
be surrounded by attractive safety fencing.
§ 16.26I.190. Utility Installations. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
All utilities serving the developments in the Overlay Zone shall be installed
in accordance with the applicable ordinances, regulations and standards of
any federal, state, or local governmental agency, authority or utility unless
otherwise authorized by the regulating entity. Subject to the foregoing, all
such utilities shall be installed underground at a depth and at such location
as will minimize risk or interruption of services.
multifamily or attached units abut the tract boundary line, such
screening to be no less than four feet high when planted. However, if
evergreen screening is not feasible, screening shall be provided by a
solid fence up to six feet in height.
B. The developer is encouraged to provide shade trees along walks,
driveways, parking areas, streets and roads. Screening or buffers
consisting of fencing or landscaping may be required around
recreation, parking, utility and refuse disposal areas, and around other
similar areas, at the discretion of the Planning Board. All landscaping
shall be maintained in good condition and shall be replaced when
necessary by the unit owners or the homeowners' association for the
development.
C. In lieu of the standard buffer-screen plantings, the developer may elect
to incorporate a reforestation-type planting in the buffer areas. The
purpose of the reforestation planting is to protect and restore sensitive
resource areas, such as steep slopes, wetland and wetland buffers, and
to their original condition. Reforestation shall consist of planting of
trees and shrubs and seeding of native meadow plant mixtures.
Reforestation shall also include site preparation, such as removal and
control of invasive species, as well as implementation of post-planting
maintenance practices to ensure the establishment of the new
plantings.
D. Use of canopy trees throughout the site is recommended to shade both
paved surfaces as well as the houses.
§ 16.26I.170 RARITAN CODE § 16.26I.200
1.01:680
§ 16.26I.200. Ownership of Common Areas. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-19]
The common areas and any facilities, amenities or infrastructure located
thereon within any tract utilized for a planned residential development in
the Overlay Zone ("common facilities") that are not accepted for dedication
by the Township shall be conveyed to a corporation, association, or other
legal entity having as its owners or members a majority of the property
owners within the development (the "HOA"), for their use, control,
management and maintenance. Any agreements providing for ownership,
use, control, management or maintenance of the common facilities by the
HOA shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning Board to
ensure that adequate safeguards are included to guarantee that the HOA
and/or individual unit owners are required to maintain, repair and/or
replace (if necessary) the common facilities in perpetuity so as to protect
the Township from liability for the common facilities. In any event, any such
agreement shall give the Township the right to perform maintenance and
assess the cost to the property owners in the event that the property owners
fail to maintain the common facilities in accordance with the agreement
pursuant to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
§ 16.26I.210. Maintenance. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
It shall be the responsibility of the HOA and/or individual unit owners to
maintain all off-street parking, loading and unloading areas, driveways,
aisles and accessways in good condition, free of litter and refuse, potholes,
cracked pavement, ice, snow or other seasonal hazards, etc. All lighting,
bumpers, markings, signs, drainage and landscaping shall be similarly kept
in workable, safe and good condition. If the HOA or any owner fails to
undertake repairs, after proper notification by the Building Inspector, the
Township Committee may authorize repairs to be made at the HOA's or
the unit owner's expense (whichever is applicable) if, in the Committee's
opinion, conditions constitute a hazard to the safety and welfare of the
Township residents and visitors.
§ 16.26I.220. Signage. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
The development may contain an entry sign at each access road. The sign at
the primary entrance to the development may not exceed 32 square feet in
area, and the sign at the secondary entrance to the development shall not
exceed 25 square feet in size. Internal directional signage shall not exceed
three square feet in size.
§ 16.26I.230. Preliminary Subdivision and Site Plan Approval for
PRD Sections. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
A. See preliminary plat, requirements and procedures set forth in the
subdivision and site plan chapters of this Zoning Code.28 Site plans for
28.Editor's Note: See Art. II, Subdivisions and Site Plans.
§ 16.26I.200 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26I.230
1.01:681
§ 16.26I.240. Final Submission and Site Plan Approval of PRD
Sections. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
§ 16.26I.250. Traffic Impact Study. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No.
19-19]
Developers for all planned residential developments shall submit a thorough
and detailed traffic engineering impact analysis to determine the adequacy
of existing streets and intersections in the immediate vicinity of the PRD
and the effect of the additional traffic on the environs and surrounding
areas.
§ 16.26I.260. General Development Plan Study Requirements.
[Adopted 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
A developer may elect to seek approval for a GDP application with respect
to a PRD in the Overlay Zone. In connection with a GDP application, the
following requirements shall apply:
multifamily and attached housing, recreation and commercial areas
shall be submitted at a scale of no less than one inch equals 50 feet.
B. Detailed stormwater and soil erosion and sediment control plans for the
entire project shall be submitted.
C. Changes in the location of roads, units, drainage basin(s) and other
infrastructure may be required from the sketch plat if, in the opinion of
the Planning Board, the detailed engineering for the project indicates
that such changes are necessary.
A. See final plat requirements and procedures set forth in the subdivision
and site plan chapters of this Title 16, Land Development Code.29
B. Site plans shall be submitted at a scale of no less than one inch equals
50 feet.
C. A detailed submission of the organizational documents and bylaws of
the HOA shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its attorney's
review and approval.
A. General Development Plan; Duration.
1. The general development plan shall set forth the permitted number
of dwelling units, the residential density and support facilities, in
its entirety, according to a schedule which sets forth the timing of
the various sections of the development. The planned development
shall be developed in accordance with the general development
plan approved by the Planning Board, notwithstanding any
provision of P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), or any
29.Editor's Note: See Art. II, Subdivisions and Site Plans.
§ 16.26I.230 RARITAN CODE § 16.26I.260
1.01:682
ordinance or regulation adopted pursuant thereto after the
effective date of the approval of the GDP.
2. The term of the general development plan approval shall be
determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set forth in
this section, except that the term of the approval shall not exceed
20 years from the date upon which the developer receives final site
plan or subdivision approval for the first section of the
development. Upon the expiration of the initial term and for good
cause, the Planning Board may grant extensions of the term up to
the maximum term permitted by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49.
3. In making its determination regarding the duration of the approval
of the general development plan, the Planning Board shall consider
the number of dwelling units, prevailing economic conditions, the
timing schedule to be followed in completing the development and
the likelihood of its fulfillment, the developer's capability of
completing the proposed development and the contents of the
general development plan and any conditions which the Planning
Board attaches to the approval thereof.
B. Contents of General Development Plan Applications. A general
development plan application shall include such information as is
reasonably necessary to disclose the following:
1. The location and size of the site and the nature of the landowner's
interest in the land to be developed;
2. A general land use plan indicating the tract area and general
locations of the land uses to be included in the development, the
total amount of adult resident facilities to be provided and the
density of the entire development;
3. A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities (including facilities for pedestrian access)
within the planned development, any proposed improvements to
the existing transportation system outside the planned
development, and a delineation of which streets are intended to be
public and which are to be private;
4. An open space plan showing the proposed land area and general
location of parks and any other land areas to be set aside for
conservation and recreational purposes and a general description
of improvements proposed to be made thereon, including a
statement of the operation and maintenance of parks and
recreational lands;
5. A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed
location of sewage and water lines, any drainage facilities
necessitated by the physical characteristics of the site, proposed
methods for handling solid waste disposal, and a plan for the
operation and maintenance of proposed utilities;
§ 16.26I.260 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26I.260
1.01:683
6. A general stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed
method of controlling and managing stormwater on the site;
7. A housing plan outlining the number of units to be provided;
8. A site service plan indicating those public services which the
developer proposes to provide and which may include, but not be
limited to, water, sewer, cable and solid waste disposal;
9. A community facility plan indicating the impact of the project on
community facilities such as, but not limited to, cultural facilities,
libraries, emergency medical, fire and police protection; and
10. A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned development
whose construction is contemplated over a period of years,
including any terms or conditions which are intended to protect the
interests of the public and of the residents who occupy any section
of the planned development prior to the completion of the
development in its entirety.
C. General Development Plan Approval Procedure.
1. A developer seeking approval of a planned development may
submit a general development plan to the Planning Board prior to
the granting of preliminary approval of the development or a
section of the development by the Planning Board.
2. The Planning Board shall grant or deny the general development
plan within 95 days after submission of a complete application to
the Administrative Officer, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute general development
plan approval of the planned development.
D. General Development Plan; Timing Schedule; Modification. In the event
that the developer seeks to modify the proposed timing schedule, such
modification shall require the approval of the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or not to grant approval of
the modification, take into consideration prevailing economic and
market conditions, anticipated and actual needs for residential units
and nonresidential space within the municipality and the region, and
the availability and capacity of public facilities to accommodate the
proposed development.
E. Modification of General Development Plan; Requirement for Hearing.
1. Except as provided hereunder, the developer shall be required to
gain the prior approval of the Planning Board if, after approval of
the general development plan, the developer wishes to make any
variation in the location of land uses within the planned
development or to increase the density of residential development
§ 16.26I.260 RARITAN CODE § 16.26I.260
1.01:684
§ 16.26I.270. Findings for Planned Developments. [Adopted
8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
Prior to approval of any planned development, the Planning Board shall find
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45 the following facts and conclusions:
§ 16.26I.280. Permanent Deed Restrictions. [Adopted 8-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-19]
or the floor area ratio of nonresidential development in any section
of the planned development.
2. Any variation in the location of land uses or increase in density or
floor area ratio proposed in reaction to a negative decision of or
condition of development approvals imposed by the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to P.L. 1973, c. 185 (N.J.S.A.
13:19-1, et seq.) shall be approved by the Planning Board if the
developer can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board that the variation being proposed is a direct result of such
determination by the Department of Environmental Protection.
A. That the departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to the
zoning standards applicable to the planned development.
B. That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open are reliable and the amount, location and purpose of the common
open space are adequate.
C. That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment are adequate.
D. That the proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established.
E. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
A. In connection with its application for site plan or subdivision approval
for the PRD, the developer of the age-restricted housing units shall
submit to the Planning Board for review and approval a proposed form
of the permanent deed restrictions for the total age-restricted section in
the Overlay Zone and in the deeds for each individual lot within the
development that is subject to such age restrictions, methods of
implementing the age restrictions.
§ 16.26I.260 CODE ADOPTION § 16.26I.280
1.01:685
Chapter 16.28A
I-1 RESTRICTED INDUSTRIAL ZONE
B. Such permanent deed restrictions shall be filed prior to issuance of any
building permit for any age-restricted dwelling in such development
and shall incorporate the following:
1. In general, the age-restricted development shall provide residential
units and support facilities for use by permanent residents 55 years
of age or older, except that the following persons under the age of
55 years shall also be allowed as permanent residents:
a. A spouse or other member of a household under the age of 55
years who resides with another member of a household who is
55 years of age or over, including a person who is the child of a
permitted occupant residing with such permitted occupant,
provided the child is of the age of 19 years or over;
b. A surviving spouse, child or other family member of a deceased
permissible occupant who was residing with the permissible
occupant at the time of his/her death, provided that such
person is 19 years of age or older;
c. In accordance with the Federal Fair Housing Act Amendments
of 1988, P.L. 100-430 (September 13, 1988) and any
amendments thereto, up to 20% of the units may be occupied
by one or more individuals if the oldest person occupying such
unit is between 45 and 55 years old, provided that all other
requirements of this section are met; and
d. One adult under 55 years of age (other than a spouse) will be
admitted as a permanent resident if it is established and
approved by the homeowners' association that the presence of
such person is essential to the physical care of one or more of
the adult occupants. If more than one adult under 55 years of
age is necessary to care for the adult occupant, approval shall
be required from the homeowners' association, and a copy of
its decision shall be submitted to the Raritan Township Clerk.
e. The HOA shall be charged with enforcement of such age
restrictions applicable to the land and structures (whether
owned in fee or rented), pursuant to its bylaws, rules and
regulations, in addition to the restrictions of record, which
shall be approved by the Planning Board Attorney.
§ 16.26I.280 RARITAN CODE § 16.28A.010
1.01:686
§ 16.28A.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.14(a); amended by Ord.
02-9; Ord. 08-3]
It is the purpose of this zone to provide areas suitable for industrial uses
can be adequately serviced by the sanitary sewer system, with appropriate
controls to protect adjacent residential zones.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structures shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I and II set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title and the
following regulations.
§ 16.28A.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.14(b);
amended by Ord. 96-38; Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-3; Ord. 10-8; Ord.
10-13; Ord. 12-5; 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
§ 16.28A.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.14(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
A. Manufacturing, processing, producing or fabricating operations which
meet the performance standards contained in Chapter 16.74, provided
that all operations and activities, except parking, are carried on within
enclosed buildings and that there is no outside storage or outside
repairs of materials and equipment;
B. Business and administrative offices and research facilities;
C. Any form of agriculture of horticulture, including commercial
greenhouses as part of a farm;
D. Commercial indoor recreation facilities;
E. Primarily wholesale uses with limited retail sales;
F. Professional office including surgical center (a facility where
outpatients come for simple surgical procedures, including dialysis).
Off-street parking shall be provided for such surgical center at the same
rate as required for medical office use. An office building to be erected
shall contain at least 16,000 square feet of gross floor area of which
50% or at least 8,000 square feet shall constitute the building footprint.
G. Child-care centers.
H. Solar or photovoltaic energy facility.
A. Off-street parking, loading and unloading;
B. Signs and fences;
C. Facilities required for employees and visitors, such as cafeterias,
recreational and medical facilities;
D. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use;
§ 16.28A.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.28A.030
1.01:687
§ 16.28A.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.14(d); amended
by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.28A.050. Buffer Strips. [Prior code § 15-9.14(e); amended by
Ord. 08-3]
All lots or parts of lots which are improved with a predominantly
nonresidential use and whose side or rear lines are adjacent to a residential
zone shall be screened from such residential zone by landscaped buffer
strips or other such screening along said side or rear lines as may be
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 16.74.120.
§ 16.28A.060. (Reserved)30
§ 16.28A.070. Solar or Photovoltaic Standards. [Amended by Ord.
12-5]
E. Retail and wholesale sales and goods manufactured or produced on
site, provided that the sales area does not exceed 15% of the gross
manufacturing floor area
A. Public and private schools and day nurseries;
B. Public uses;
C. Essential services;
D. Farm stands;
E. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations;
F. Animal hospitals and kennels.
A. Standards.
1. The following bulk requirements shall apply to solar or photovoltaic
energy facilities where they are permitted uses.
a. Minimum lot size shall be 20 contiguous acres.
b. No more than 50% of the lot shall be covered by the solar or
photovoltaic energy facility.
c. The following setbacks shall apply to ground mounted systems:
i. Front yard: 100 feet.
ii. Side yard: 100 feet, or not less than 200 feet where a lot
abuts a residential district or use.
30.Editor’s Note: Former § 16.28A.060, Planned Residential Development Requirements, as
amended, was repealed 8-20-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19.
§ 16.28A.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.28A.070
1.01:688
iii. Rear yard: 75 feet, or not less than 150 feet where a lot
abuts a residential district or use.
d. Maximum height of arrays and inverters: 10 feet.
e. Substations shall be setback a minimum of 150 feet from a
property line. Any noise generated from the site must meet
state noise requirements (less than 65 dB at the property lines)
in compliance with the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection Noise Code. An acoustical test shall
be performed by a qualified acoustical engineer to verify that
there are no negative acoustical impacts along any of the
property lines and the test results shall be submitted for review
and approval by the Township Engineer prior to the issuance of
a Certificate of Occupancy.
f. The applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
approving Board, that the proposed screening at the time of
planting provides a year-round visual screen of the facility
from residential neighboring properties. Additional screening
may be needed to meet this requirement and also address any
negative impact seen from the first and second floor from
residential neighboring properties or the design and location
of the solar or photovoltaic energy facility shall be revised to
mitigate the visual impact upon the neighboring residential
properties. If construction occurs during a non-planting
season, the applicant shall demonstrate sufficient buffering
exists for both the array field and construction staging area. At
the discretion of the Board, a temporary screening may be
required during construction to help mitigate any negative
visual impact.
g. Neighboring residential properties shall be defined for this
purpose as those properties within 200 feet from the property
line of the subject site.
h. The proposal shall comply with the Landscape Buffer
Requirements in Section 16.20.040 of Title 16, with the
following exceptions:
i. Solar or photovoltaic energy facilities shall be considered
an industrial use.
ii. Where the solar or photovoltaic energy facilities abut a
residential use or district, the buffer requirements and
depths as set forth in Table I and II in Section 16.20.040.E
shall be doubled.
iii. Where the solar or photovoltaic energy facilities abut a
public uses or zone, there is a minimum buffer
requirement of 100 feet.
§ 16.28A.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.28A.070
1.01:689
i. Substation and other associated transmission structures shall
be screened with a double row of evergreen plantings with a
minimum height of eight feet.
j. Existing hedgerows or vegetated windbreaks that provide
screening of the subject site from neighboring properties shall
be retained and augmented unless waived by the approving
Board. Wooded areas may not be clear cut to construct or
install the solar or photovoltaic energy facility.
k. All landscaping, as installed, shall conform to and be in
accordance with the plan approved and/or signed by the Board.
The use of native landscape species is strongly encouraged.
Prior to the issuance of a permanent Certificate of Occupancy,
Completion or Compliance (whichever is applicable) and prior
to the release of any performance guarantee, the landscaping
shall be installed and a two year maintenance guarantee in the
form approved by the Department of Community Affairs for
bonds and in an amount acceptable to the Board landscape
architectural expert, shall be posted with the Township. If the
applicant applies for a Certificate of Occupancy during a nonplanting
season, the applicant may obtain a temporary
Certificate of Occupancy without installation of the
landscaping but if and only if the applicant posts a
performance guarantee in the form approved by the
Department of Community Affairs for bonds and in an amount
acceptable to the Township Engineer guaranteeing installation
of the landscaping during the next planting season and further
guaranteeing the subsequent posting of a two year
maintenance guarantee. The applicant shall have a continuing
obligation to maintain all landscaping for its intended purpose
(i.e., for screening if planted for buffering purposes or for
aesthetics if planted for enhancement purposes), which shall
include but not be limited to repairing and/or replanting to the
satisfaction of the Township Planning/Engineering Department
any and all landscaping that becomes damaged and/or dies.
(This continuing maintenance obligation is in addition to, and
notwithstanding, the fact that a maintenance guarantee may or
may not be required in any particular application.) In the event
that Township Zoning Officer determines that utilization of an
outside expert (e.g. Board landscape architectural expert) is
necessary to fulfill the intent of this section, all costs and
expenses of such outside experts shall be reimbursed to the
Township by the applicant.
l. Applicant shall submit an affidavit agreeing that any approval
for the solar or photovoltaic energy facility shall be subject to
site plan approval for any necessary new substations or
modifications to existing substations.
§ 16.28A.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.28A.070
1.01:690
Chapter 16.28B
I-2 MAJOR INDUSTRIAL ZONE
§ 16.28B.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.15(a); amended by Ord.
02-9; Ord. 08-3]
It is the purpose of this zone to provide areas suitable to the use of
industry and related uses with controls necessary to ensure sound industrial
development and when said uses can be adequately serviced by the sanitary
sewer system.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structures shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedule I and II set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title and the
following regulations.
§ 16.28B.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.15(b);
amended by Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.28B.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.15(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
A. Those uses permitted in the I-1 zone;
B. Warehousing, wholesale and distribution facilities;
C. Trucking terminals;
D. Public parks and public recreational facilities and uses;
E. Hotels and motels;
F. Child care centers.
G. Solar or photovoltaic energy facility. [Amended by Ord. 12-5]
A. Off-street parking, loading and unloading;
B. Signs and fences;
C. Facilities required for employees and visitors, such as cafeterias,
recreational and medical facilities;
D. Screened and fenced outdoor storage areas;
E. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use;
F. Retail and wholesale sales of goods manufactured or produced on site,
provided that the sales area does not exceed 15% of the gross
manufacturing floor area.
§ 16.28A.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.28B.040
1.01:691
§ 16.28B.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.15(d); amended
by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.28B.050. Buffer Strips. [Prior code § 15-9.15(e); amended by
Ord. 08-3]
All lots or parts of lots which are improved with a predominantly
nonresidential use and whose side or rear lines are adjacent to a residential
zone shall be screened from such residential zone by landscaped buffer
strips or other such screening along said side or rear lines as may be
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 16.74.120.
§ 16.28B.060. Solar or Photovoltaic Standards. [Amended by Ord.
12-5]
A. Public and private schools and day nurseries;
B. Public uses;
C. Essential services;
D. Farm stands;
E. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations;
F. Animal hospitals and kennels;
G. Helistops;
H. Nursing homes;
I. Assisted living facilities. [Amended by Ord. 10-7]
A. Standards.
1. The following bulk requirements shall apply to solar or photovoltaic
energy facilities where they are permitted uses.
a. Minimum lot size shall be 20 contiguous acres.
b. No more than 50% of the lot shall be covered by the renewable
solar or photovoltaic energy facility.
c. The following setbacks shall apply to ground mounted systems:
i. Front yard: 100 feet.
ii. Side yard: 100 feet, or not less than 200 feet where a lot
abuts a residential district or use.
iii. Rear yard: 75 feet, or not less than 150 feet where a lot
abuts a residential district or use.
d. Maximum height of arrays and inverters: 10 feet.
§ 16.28B.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.28B.060
1.01:692
e. Substations shall be setback a minimum of 150 feet from a
property line. Any noise generated from the site must meet
state noise requirements (less than 65 dB at the property lines)
in compliance with the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection Noise Code. An acoustical test shall
be performed by a qualified acoustical engineer to verify that
there are no negative acoustical impacts along any of the
property lines and the test results shall be submitted for review
and approval by the Township Engineer prior to the issuance of
a Certificate of Occupancy.
f. The applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
approving Board, that the proposed screening at the time of
planting provides a year-round visual screen of the facility
from residential neighboring properties. Additional screening
may be needed to meet this requirement and also address any
negative impact seen from the first and second floor from
residential neighboring properties or the design and location
of the solar or photovoltaic energy facility shall be revised to
mitigate the visual impact upon the neighboring residential
properties. If construction occurs during a non-planting
season, the applicant shall demonstrate sufficient buffering
exists for both the array field and construction staging area. At
the discretion of the Board, a temporary screening may be
required during construction to help mitigate any negative
visual impact.
g. Neighboring residential properties shall be defined for this
purpose as those properties within 200 feet from the property
line of the subject site.
h. The proposal shall comply with the Landscape Buffer
Requirements in Section 16.20.040 of this Title 16, with the
following exceptions:
i. Solar or photovoltaic energy facilities shall be considered
an industrial use.
ii. Where the solar or photovoltaic energy facilities abut a
residential use or district, the buffer requirements and
depths as set forth in Table I and II in Section 16.20.040.E
shall be doubled.
iii. Where the solar or photovoltaic energy facilities abut a
public uses or zone, there is a minimum buffer
requirement of 100 feet.
i. Substations and other associated transmission structures shall
be screened with a double row of evergreen plantings with a
minimum height of eight feet.
§ 16.28B.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.28B.060
1.01:693
Chapter 16.28C
RJR RARITAN JUNCTION REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
j. Existing hedgerows or vegetated windbreaks that provide
screening of the subject site from neighboring properties shall
be retained and augmented unless waived by the approving
Board. Wooded areas may not be clear cut to construct or
install the solar or photovoltaic energy facility.
k. All landscaping, as installed, shall conform to and be in
accordance with the plan approved and/or signed by the Board.
The use of native landscape species is strongly encouraged.
Prior to the issuance of a permanent Certificate of Occupancy,
Completion or Compliance (whichever is applicable) and prior
to the release of any performance guarantee, the landscaping
shall be installed and a two year maintenance guarantee in the
form approved by the Department of Community Affairs for
bonds and in an amount acceptable to the Board landscape
architectural expert, shall be posted with the Township. If the
applicant applies for a Certificate of Occupancy during a nonplanting
season, the applicant may obtain a temporary
Certificate of Occupancy without installation of the
landscaping but if and only if the applicant posts a
performance guarantee in the form approved by the
Department of Community Affairs for bonds and in an amount
acceptable to the Township Engineer guaranteeing installation
of the landscaping during the next planting season and further
guaranteeing the subsequent posting of a two year
maintenance guarantee. The applicant shall have a continuing
obligation to maintain all landscaping for its intended purpose
(i.e., for screening if planted for buffering purposes or for
aesthetics if planted for enhancement purposes), which shall
include but not be limited to repairing and/or replanting to the
satisfaction of the Township Planning/Engineering Department
any and all landscaping that becomes damaged and/or dies.
(This continuing maintenance obligation is in addition to, and
notwithstanding, the fact that a maintenance guarantee may or
may not be required in any particular application.) In the event
that Township Zoning Officer determines that utilization of an
outside expert (e.g. Board landscape architectural expert) is
necessary to fulfill the intent of this section, all costs and
expenses of such outside experts shall be reimbursed to the
Township by the applicant.
l. Applicant shall submit an affidavit agreeing that any approval
for the solar or photovoltaic energy facility shall be subject to
site plan approval for any necessary new substations or
modifications to existing substations.
§ 16.28B.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.28C.010
1.01:694
§ 16.28C.010. Created. [Amended by Ord. 12-1; Ord. 2017-13]
There is created a "RJR Raritan Junction Redevelopment District" within
the Township of Raritan in order to permit the development of a "Raritan
Junction Redevelopment Plan" on the designated "Redevelopment Area"
consisting of approximately 44.61 acres and identified as Block 16.02/Lot
41 on the Township Tax Map attached hereto as Exhibit B. The property
is currently designated as Block 16.02, Lot 41.01, 41.02, 41.03 and Block
16.04, Lot 41.04.
§ 16.28C.020. Purpose. [Amended by Ord. 12-1; Ord. 2017-13]
It is the purpose of this chapter to govern the creation of the development
of a "Raritan Junction Redevelopment Plan" including a mixture of retail
uses, residential multi-family uses that include units affordable to low and
moderate income households, recreational uses and other permitted uses
within a designated "Redevelopment Area" of the Township which is
serviced by adequate public sanitary sewer and public water facilities.
§ 16.28C.030. Principal Permitted Uses. [Amended by Ord. 12-1;
Ord. 2017-13]
§ 16.28C.040. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Amended by Ord. 12-1;
Ord. 2017-13]
A. Discount Clubs and Retail Superstores;
B. Retail Sales of goods and services;
C. Offices, including all types of offices;
D. Restaurants, excluding free-standing fast food restaurants;
E. Banks;
F. Assisted Living Facilities;
G. Public Uses (including amphitheaters and other civic facilities;
H. Indoor Recreational Facilities (including movie theaters);
I. Outdoor Recreational Facilities;
J. Child Care Centers; and
K. Multi-family residential with a set aside for low and moderate income
rental units.
A. Gasoline filling facilities, car washing facilities, vehicle servicing
facilities, a pharmacy, a fast food restaurant, and seasonal sales areas
accessory to Discount Clubs or Retail Superstores;
B. Outdoor seating areas associated with a permitted restaurant;
§ 16.28C.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.28C.040
1.01:695
§ 16.28C.050. Conditional Uses. [Amended by Ord. 12-1; Ord.
2017-13]
Essential Services (see Section 16.68.050G. of Title 16 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan).
§ 16.28C.060. Floor Area and Density Requirements. [Amended by
Ord. 12-1; Ord. 2017-13]
§ 16.28C.070. Open Space and Buffer Requirements. [Amended by
Ord. 12-1; Ord. 2017-13]
The following open space and buffer requirements shall apply to all
privately owned land areas proposed for non-residential development, but
shall not apply to any land areas dedicated to the Township or permitted
multi-family development:
C. Off-street parking, loading and unloading;
D. Signs, lighting and fences;
E. Landscaping features including benches, gazebos and other such
features customarily associated with the permitted principal uses, as
the case may be; and
F. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
G. Recreational uses associated with the residential use, such as tot lots
and playgrounds, walking paths, bike racks etc.
A. The maximum floor area ratio permitted for all non-residential uses is
25% calculated on that land area devoted to the subject building or
buildings.
B. The maximum permitted total units for multi-family housing within the
district is 140 dwelling units of which 20% or 28 dwelling units shall be
deed restricted so as to remain affordable to low and moderate income
households.
C. The market rate units shall be either efficiency units, one-bedroom or
two bedroom units only. There shall be no market rate units with more
than two bedrooms. The affordable units shall comply with the bedroom
allocation requirements pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93 — 7.3(a).
D. The phasing of market rate to affordable units during construction will
meet the construction sequence schedule set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:93 —
5.6(d).
E. Each structure shall have a mix of market rate and affordable units,
intermixed throughout the building structure and floors. The exterior of
the affordable units shall be visually similar in appearance to the
market rate units.
§ 16.28C.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.28C.070
1.01:696
A. Open space buffers for non-residential development shall be provided in
accordance with the following dimensions:
1. A 100-foot open space buffer area shall be provided along the rear
of any existing lot with frontage on Route 31.
2. A fifty-foot open space buffer shall be provided along the frontage
of any County or Township road, except that along 10% of the lot's
frontage along such road, the buffer can be reduced to 35 feet in
order to accommodate site plan design needs and objectives if the
density of screening within the buffer is increased to an equivalent
degree, provided that such a reduction shall not be permitted
where existing residential structures or institutional uses are
located across the road.
3. Other than a roadway bisecting a permitted multifamily residential
development, a twenty-five-foot open space buffer shall be provided
between the edge of any access roadway into the property.
4. A minimum twenty-foot open space buffer or open space area shall
be provided between any improvements and structures on adjacent
lots within the zoning district not separated by a roadway to allow
for landscaping and green space as approved by the Planning
Board, except that no buffer is required on or from lands dedicated
to the Township of Raritan.
5. Comply with F1620-040-F.2-C Recreational Facilities.
B. Open space buffers for non-residential shall not be used for parking,
loading, storage, or any activity or structure that is either part of or
accessory to the proposed use, except that the open space buffers may
contain utility lines, signage, lighting, vehicular access roadways or
driveways, pedestrian and/or bicycle paths, benches, gazebos and
street furniture as approved by the Planning Board provided that:
1. The proposed locations of such uses are necessary for their proper
functioning, and such uses cross the buffer where feasible and
necessary, rather than lie along the length of the buffer;
2. The total width of the buffer is maintained and existing trees are
retained to the extent desirable and possible; and with of the
development of a permitted multifamily residential development.
3. The buffer design standard provisions of Section 16.20.040 E. of
Title 16 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Raritan shall apply within the buffer dimensions required in
accordance with Section 16.28C.070A. of this ordinance
hereinabove and within any other additional buffer as may be
required in accordance with Section 16.20.040 E.
C. Open space buffers for residential development shall be provided in
accordance with the following dimensions:
§ 16.28C.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.28C.070
1.01:697
§ 16.28C.080. Utilities. [Amended by Ord. 12-1; Ord. 2017-13]
§ 16.28C.090. Shared Facilities. [Amended by Ord. 12-1; Ord.
2017-13]
Shared facilities are permitted to enable their most logical and efficient
locations within the "RJR" zoning district, provided that cross-easement
1. A fifty-foot open space buffer shall be provided along the frontage
of County Route 523(A.K.A. Walter Foran Boulevard) and a thirtyfive-
foot front yard setback shall be provided along all other roads.
2. Where a multi-family residential lot contains frontage on three
sides or more, the remaining yard shall be considered a side yard.
The side yard setback shall be 35 feet.
3. A twenty-five-foot wide buffer shall be provided along the common
property line between the district permitted non-residential
development and the district permitted multi-family development.
4. The permitted multi-family development shall be subject to the
buffer design standards outlined within Section 16.020.040. The
buffer required between the existing Costco and the residential
uses shall be 37.5 feet.
5. Open space buffers for non-residential shall not be used for
parking, loading, storage, or any activity or structure that is either
part of or accessory to the proposed use, except that the open
space buffers may contain utility lines storm water management
facilities, signage, lighting, vehicular access roadways or
driveways, pedestrian and/or bicycle paths, benches, gazebos and
street furniture as approved by the Planning Board provided that:
D. A minimum of 4.5 acres of the total "RJR" zoning district area shall be
set aside and dedicated to the Township for public open space and
public uses.
1. The open space requirement shall include some usable land area
for passive and active recreation as well as improved onsite
parking with access to Junction Road.
2. The general arrangement and configuration of the open space area
shall be as illustrated on the November 11, 2011 "Conceptual Site
Plan Exhibit" which was prepared by Menlo Engineering
Associates.
A. All uses must be serviced by sanitary sewer and public water. Applicant
shall submit evidence of sufficient sanitary sewer and potable water
capacity, as per the municipal application checklist requirements before
application can be heard.
B. All new public utilities must be located underground.
§ 16.28C.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.28C.090
1.01:698
agreements are provided for review and approval by the Planning Board
and the Township Attorney for shared vehicular access, pedestrian access,
parking, storm water management facilities, open spaces and any other
shared facilities.
§ 16.28C.100. Parking. [Amended by Ord. 12-1; Ord. 2017-13]
§ 16.28C.110. Building Separation Requirements. [Amended by
Ord. 12-1; Ord. 2017-13]
§ 16.28C.120. Design Guidelines. [Amended by Ord. 12-1; Ord.
2017-13]
A. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 16.70.040 of Title
16 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan.
B. Parking Islands and landscaping to existing Township standards.
Handicapped parking spaces must be provided in accordance with
State of NJ regulations.
C. Parking for the residential use must meet RSIS standards.
A. All buildings on the same lot shall be separated by a minimum distance
of 25 feet, provided that such separation is to be used solely for
pedestrian circulation and/or landscaping. Tot Lots and playground
areas are allowed in these areas.
B. All buildings on the same lot shall be separated by a minimum distance
of 35 feet where any part of such separation is to be used for parking or
vehicular circulation; this will enable a twenty-foot wide travel-way and
7.5 feet on either side for landscaping.
A. The overall architectural design of the development shall be
coordinated regarding color and scale and shall be compatible with the
architecture of the adjacent "Raritan Town Square" development.
B. The signs in the development (both ground and wall signs) shall be
coordinated in color and design and shall be consistent with the
existing signage in the adjacent "Raritan Town Square" development.
Directional signs shall be provided throughout the development to
assist in the flow of traffic to the most efficient entry and exit point.
C. Lighting shall be kept to a minimum and shall follow the requirements
in Section 16.20.040G. of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Raritan.
D. School Bus Pads that meet the standards of the Raritan Township public
school districts need to be provided.
E. The Conceptual Site Plan Exhibit drawings provided are for concept
purposes and not representative of all parts of this chapter.
§ 16.28C.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.28C.120
1.01:699
§ 16.28C.130. Hours of Operation. [Amended by Ord. 12-1; Ord.
2017-13]
All commercial uses shall be closed to the general public from 12:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m. of every day.
§ 16.28C.140. Sequence of Development. [Amended by Ord. 12-1;
Ord. 2017-13]
F. Each structure shall have a mix of market rate and affordable units,
intermixed throughout the building structure and floors. The exterior of
the affordable units shall be visually similar in appearance to the
market rate units.
G. Landscaping for the non-residential development shall follow the
requirements in Section 16.20.040D. of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Raritan.
H. Parking facilities shall be designed so that they are buffered from view
from any public areas within the development and from the passers-by
on exterior roadways.
I. Loading, unloading and other building service areas shall be buffered
from view from residential uses and shall be combined, where possible.
J. Uses shall be interconnected throughout the development and to
adjacent sites in order to provide vehicular and pedestrian access
among the various uses.
K. A discount club use shall have tank capacities for not more than 95,000
gallons of petroleum products.
L. All residential units shall be a maximum of three stories and to center of
gable roof each building shall contain a maximum of 24 units.
M. All other design requirements within Section 16.20.040 and Chapter
16.64 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan
shall apply to any non-residential development.
N. All other design requirements within Chapter 16.64 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan shall apply.
A. The "Raritan Junction Redevelopment Plan" may be planned, submitted
for site plan approval and/or constructed at one time or in a series of
applications over time for different portions of the overall land area.31
B. The application for the multi-family affordable housing component of
the initial development shall be filed by redeveloper on or before
December 31, 2017.
31.Editor's Note: Plan Exhibit on file at the Township Offices.
§ 16.28C.120 RARITAN CODE § 16.28C.140
1.01:700
Chapter 16.28D
SJRR SOUTH JUNCTION ROAD REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 16.28D.010. Created. [Adopted 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-20]
There is created an SJRR South Junction Road Redevelopment District
within the Township of Raritan in order to permit the development of a
designated redevelopment area consisting of approximately 7.7 acres and
identified as Block 27, Lot 22, on the Township Tax Map pursuant to the
South Junction Road Redevelopment Plan.
§ 16.28D.020. Purpose. [Adopted 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-20]
It is the purpose of this chapter to govern the creation of affordable housing
pursuant to the South Junction Road Redevelopment Plan in the SJRR South
Junction Road Redevelopment District of the Township, which is serviced by
adequate public sanitary sewer and public water facilities.
§ 16.28D.030. Permitted Uses. [Adopted 7-16-2019 by Ord. No.
19-20]
The following uses are permitted in the plan area. Uses not identified below
are prohibited.
C. All affordable units shall not be age restricted. No more than 50% of the
affordable units may be available for moderate income households. The
remainder of the affordable units shall be affordable to low income
households.
D. Each individual applicant for tenancy in an affordable unit shall be
reviewed by the applicant and the Township's Administrative Agent,
presently Central Jersey Housing Resources Center, Inc. The applicant
shall provide on a timely basis and upon request to the Township
Planner and Administrative Agent with all the information necessary for
the Township to document affordable housing compliance. There will be
a 30 year deed restriction on the affordable housing units, which will
restrict the use of the 28 units to affordable housing in accordance with
the rules and regulation of the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls,
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., and the substantive rules of the Council on
Affordable Housing, if applicable, as amended and in effect. The form of
this deed restriction shall be reviewed by the Raritan Township Special
Affordable Housing Attorney for conformity to this Resolution and will
be recorded with the Hunterdon County Clerk prior to the start of
construction.
A. Principal permitted uses.
1. 100%-Affordable Housing Development.
a. Two- and three-story townhouse units.
§ 16.28C.140 CODE ADOPTION § 16.28D.030
1.01:701
§ 16.28D.040. Area And Bulk Requirements. [Adopted 7-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-20]
The following area and bulk requirements apply to the plan area:
Maximum dwelling units 100
Maximum number of dwellings per
building
14
Minimum distance from building N/A
Front to building front 80 feet
Front to building side 50 feet
Side to building rear 30 feet
Side to building side 20 feet
The wall containing a window to
another wall containing a window
30 feet
Minimum building depth through
the short axis
30 feet
Maximum building length through
the long axis
180 feet
Maximum height apartment building 3 stories (40 feet)
Maximum height maintenance and
maximum height community center
other building
2 stories (28 feet)
Building setback from the edge of
paving or curbing
15 feet
Porches not exceeding 50 square
feet in floor area setback in the yard
between the front of the building
and parking space
6 feet
Porches not exceeding 150 square
feet in floor area setback in the yard
between the front of the building
and parking space
11 feet
Minimum parking requirements As required by RSIS
b. Multifamily dwelling units.
c. Combination of townhouse and multifamily units.
§ 16.28D.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.28D.050
1.01:702
§ 16.28D.050. Affordable Housing Requirements. [Adopted
7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-20]
Any affordable housing development within the plan area must meet state
standards for affordable housing administration found in the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
§ 16.28D.060. Parking Standards. [Adopted 7-16-2019 by Ord. No.
19-20]
Parking shall comply with the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS), including but not limited to the minimum number of parking spaces
to be provided, the size of parking spaces, drive aisle and/or parking aisle
width, and any other parking and circulation requirements. In the event
of any conflict between RSIS and the requirements of Section 16.20.040
(Design Standards), RSIS shall govern.
§ 16.28D.070. Buffer Requirements. [Adopted 7-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-20]
§ 16.28D.080. Landscaping Requirements. [Adopted 7-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-20]
The landscaping requirements set forth here in this plan shall supersede
any and all landscaping requirements in the underlying Raritan Township
Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to the design standards in
Section 16.20.040. Landscaping must be provided to promote a desirable
and cohesive natural environment for residents and neighboring properties.
Landscaping must also be utilized to screen parking and provide
windbreaks for winter winds and summer cooling for buildings, streets, and
parking, according to the following standards:
A. The perimeter buffer shall be a minimum width of 30 feet. Balcony, deck
and patio encroachments shall be permitted within the perimeter
buffer.
B. The minimum landscaped width shall be 20 feet and suitable for its
function of site enhancement, screening, and control of climatic effects.
The perimeter buffer shall meet the minimum standards of the Type B
buffer in Section 16.20.040E.4.b.ii of the LDC.
C. The landscape buffer design should retain existing vegetation which is
of high quality and appropriate density.
D. Where existing vegetation is unsuitable, it shall be augmented or
replaced by new plantings in accordance with a landscape plan
submitted to and approved by the Planning Board.
E. Trash enclosures are permitted within any buffer and/or setback
required by the plan.
§ 16.28D.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.28D.080
1.01:703
§ 16.28D.090. Mobility Regulations. [Adopted 7-16-2019 by Ord. No.
19-20]
Thoroughfares are an important aspect of public space. Streets and their
surrounding development form our primary sense of place. The design
of the plan area plays a key role in forming this sense of place for the
neighborhood and the nearby central business district.
§ 16.28D.100. Building Design Standards. [Adopted 7-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-20]
A. All landscaping must have a two-year maintenance guarantee. If any
planting material dies within two years of planting, it must be replaced
the following planting season.
B. Tree and shrub replacement. A limit of disturbance line shall be
established during the review of an application for development taking
into account grading, utility placement, and anticipated construction
activities. Within the area encompassed by the limit of disturbance,
there shall be no requirement for the replacement of trees. Within the
area to be disturbed by construction activities, the redeveloper shall
liberally install trees, shrubs, and ground cover in accordance with a
landscape plan submitted to and approved by the Planning Board.
C. Native plants required. In the design of the landscaping plan, no
nonnative or invasive species of plants shall be used.
D. Landscaping should be used to accept and complement buildings and
provide for climate control.
E. Landscaping. The protection of wooded areas, specimen trees, and
existing vegetation suitable for landscaping within the redevelopment
shall be a factor in determining the location of open space, buildings,
underground services, paved areas, playgrounds and parking areas.
A. Streets and automobile circulation.
1. The primary automobile access points should be from driveways on
Walter E. Foran Boulevard.
2. Appropriate traffic control signs must be installed to ensure the
safe flow of traffic into and through the redeveloped area.
3. New developments need to provide more to the traffic network
than just access to their site.
4. Streets, roads, and automobile circulation shall comply with RSIS.
5. Sidewalks shall comply with RSIS.
A. Building design should meet, to the maximum extent practicable, the
requirements of Section 16.20.040 (Design Standards) of the Township
Ordinance. In the event of a conflict between Section 16.20.040 and the
§ 16.28D.080 RARITAN CODE § 16.28D.100
1.01:704
§ 16.28D.110. Lighting. [Adopted 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-20]
Lighting standards for the redevelopment plan are regulated by Section
16.20.040G of the Township Code.
§ 16.28D.120. Signage. [Adopted 7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 19-20]
A comprehensive wayfinding and directional signage package for the
parking areas, pedestrian corridors, and buildings should be provided that
is consistent with the architecture of the buildings. The sign package should
include design elements such as size, materials, style, and illumination.
Signage standards for the redevelopment plan are regulated by Section
16.20.040H, except that signs are permitted to have internal lighting on the
sign.
§ 16.28D.130. Submittal Requirements. [Adopted 7-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-20]
The redeveloper(s) will submit a site plan for all, or a portion of, the Plan
Area. The site plan approval process will occur as per the Township's site
plan review requirements, except that:
plan, the plan shall control. The following sections in Section 16.20.040
(Design Standards) shall not apply to development of the plan area:
1. Subsection B.3.b. Within the plan area, garden apartment
structures should be grouped in clusters with architectural design
consistence in each cluster. Each unit shall only be required to have
one means of access. A minimum of two-foot building offset should
be provided at least every 40 feet.
2. Subsection B.3.c. Recreation facilities shall be set back at least 25
feet from the property line.
3. Subsection C.5.h.
4. Subsection D.4.o. This section is superseded by the landscape
section in this plan.
5. Subsection E. This section is superseded by the buffer section in
this plan.
6. Subsection F.2. The minimum size of a tot lot and/or playground
shall be 1,500 square feet.
7. Subsection S.2.
B. Notwithstanding the above, a tot lot shall be provided which is of a size
that is conducive to serving the projected number of children for the
development.
A. The redeveloper(s) are exempt from the requirement to provide a
wetlands analysis and report and;
§ 16.28D.100 CODE ADOPTION § 16.28D.130
1.01:705
Chapter 16.28E
UBR U.S. BRONZE REDEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
§ 16.28E.010. Created. [Adopted 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-23]
There is created a U.S. Bronze Redevelopment District within the Township
of Raritan in order to permit the development of a designated
redevelopment area, consisting of approximately 21 acres and identified
as Block 40, Lot 4, on the Township Tax Map pursuant to the U.S. Bronze
Redevelopment Plan.
§ 16.28E.020. Purpose. [Adopted 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-23]
It is the purpose of this chapter to govern the development pursuant to the
U.S. Bronze Redevelopment Plan of the UBR U.S. Bronze Redevelopment
District of the Township.
§ 16.28E.030. Permitted Uses. [Adopted 9-3-2019 by Ord. No.
19-23]
The following uses are permitted in the plan area. Uses not identified below
are prohibited.
B. The fire protection systems plan and will-serve letters shall not be
required to be submitted for the preliminary site plan application, but
are required for the final site plan application.
A. Principal permitted uses.
1. Uses permitted in the I-1 Industrial and I-2 Industrial Zone
Districts.
2. Mini-warehouse and self-storage facilities.
3. Indoor recreation facilities.
4. Recreational training facilities.
5. Medical offices.
6. Banks, business and professional offices.
7. Restaurants.
8. Retail and service uses.
9. Theaters.
B. Accessory Uses.
1. Off-street parking, loading and unloading.
2. Signs and fences.
§ 16.28D.130 RARITAN CODE § 16.28E.030
1.01:706
§ 16.28E.040. Area And Bulk Requirements. [Adopted 9-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-23]
The following area and bulk requirements apply to the plan area:
Commercial Industrial
Minimum lot area 100,000 square feet 5 acres (1)
Minimum lot width
(inside)
250 feet 250 feet (1)
Minimum lot width
(corner)
250 feet 250 feet (1)
Principal structure
setbacks
Front 75 feet 100 feet (1)
Rear 50 feet 50 feet
Side (one) 20 feet 50 feet (1)
Side (both) 40 feet 100 feet (1)
Maximum height 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet
(2)
4 stories or 60 feet
Maximum hard surface
coverage
60% 60%
Floor area ratio 75% 100%
3. Facilities required for employees and visitors, such as cafeterias,
recreational and medical facilities.
4. Screened and fenced outdoor storage areas.
5. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
6. Retail and wholesale sales of goods manufactured or produced on
site, provided that the sales area does not exceed 15% of the gross
manufacturing floor area.
7. Public and private parking in association with a principal permitted
use.
C. Preexisting Approvals. Nothing in this redevelopment plan shall negate,
invalidate, supersede or modify any preexisting approvals granted by
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment for any uses or structures
within the plan area. Such uses and structures may remain and
continue to be utilized under this redevelopment plan in accordance
with the preexisting approvals.
§ 16.28E.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.28E.040
1.01:707
Notes:
(1) For an industrial park, individual lots may have the following reduced
standards: two acres minimum in lot area, 200 feet lot width, 35 feet
one side yard, 85 feet combined side yards and 75 feet front yard. Lots
shall front an internal road of the park.
(2) For assisted-living facilities, the maximum height is 3 1/2 stories or 50
feet.
§ 16.28E.050. Additional Zoning Regulations. [Adopted 9-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-23]
Multiple principal uses are permitted on one lot.
§ 16.28E.060. Parking Standards. [Adopted 9-3-2019 by Ord. No.
19-23]
The parking standards for this redevelopment plan will generally follow the
use standards outlined in Chapter 16.70, Off-Street Parking and Loading.
The following include general standards for parking areas within the
redevelopment area:
§ 16.28E.070. Shared Facilities. [Adopted 9-3-2019 by Ord. No.
19-23]
Shared facilities, including vehicular access, pedestrian access, parking,
stormwater management and other facilities, are permitted to enable their
most logical and efficient locations within the redevelopment area, subject
to cross easements being provided for the review and approval of the
Township Attorney.
A. Each off-street parking space shall be measured not less than nine feet
by 18 feet, and parallel curb parking spaces shall be eight feet by 23
feet.
B. In areas which have head-on parking, other than 90°, the width of the
space shall not be less than nine feet measured at right angles to the
parking lines, and these lines shall extend to a point measuring 18 feet
at right angles to the curb or edge of pavement.
C. Aisle Widths. Aisles from which vehicles directly enter or leave parking
spaces shall not be less than 25 feet wide for perpendicular parking, 18
feet wide for sixty-degree-angle parking, and 14 feet wide for thirtyand
forty-five-degree-angle parking.
D. Parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the design
standards for site plan review.
E. Shared parking and other innovative parking arrangements shall be
encouraged.
§ 16.28E.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.28E.080
1.01:708
§ 16.28E.080. Buffer Requirements. [Adopted 9-3-2019 by Ord. No.
19-23]
§ 16.28E.090. Landscaping Requirements. [Adopted 9-3-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-23]
Landscaping must be provided to promote a desirable and cohesive natural
environment for patrons, employees, and passing motorists and recreators.
Landscaping must also be utilized to screen parking and loading areas,
providing windbreaks for winter winds and summer cooling for buildings,
streets, and parking, according to the following standards:
A. All lots or parts of lots which are improved with a predominately
nonresidential use and whose side or rear lines are adjacent to a
residential zone shall be screened from such residential zone by
landscaped buffer strips or such screening along said lines or rear lines.
B. No fences on any lot in any nonresidential district shall exceed a height
of eight feet above ground level.
C. The finished side of a fence must face adjoining properties. Fence posts
that are unfinished and any other structural component of the fence
must be installed facing the subject property rather than the adjoining
property.
D. Fences shall be architecturally coordinated with structures occupying
the same lot and surroundings.
E. All fences and walls shall be within property lines. No fences or wall
shall violate sight easement requirements or street rights-of-way, nor
shall any fence obstruct any stream, drainageway or floodplain.
A. All landscaping must have a two-year maintenance guarantee. If any
planting material dies within two years of planting, it must be replaced
the following planting season.
B. The existing sense and appearance of the semirural, natural scenic
qualities of the Township should be encouraged in site development.
Such techniques as clustering of trees and vegetation and retention of
existing vegetation are encouraged as appropriate.
C. Landscaping should favor native species appropriate to the site.
D. Landscaping should be used to accent and complement buildings and
provide for climate control.
E. Provide for variety and mixture of landscaping.
F. All parking areas shall be screened from adjacent properties.
§ 16.28E.080 CODE ADOPTION § 16.28E.100
1.01:709
§ 16.28E.100. Design Standards. [Adopted 9-3-2019 by Ord. No.
19-23]
Building layout and design should meet, to the maximum extent practicable,
the requirements of Section 16.20.040 (Design Standards) of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan.
§ 16.28E.110. Lighting. [Adopted 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-23]
Lighting standards of the redevelopment plan are regulated by Section
16.20.040G of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan.
§ 16.28E.120. Signage. [Adopted 9-3-2019 by Ord. No. 19-23]
A comprehensive wayfinding and directional signage package for the
parking areas, pedestrian corridors, and buildings should be provided that
is consistent with the architecture of the buildings. The sign package should
include design elements such as size, materials, style, and illumination.
Signage standards for the redevelopment plan are regulated by Section
16.20.040H of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan.
Chapter 16.30A
O-1 PROFESSIONAL OFFICE ZONE
§ 16.30A.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.16(a); amended by Ord.
08-3]
It is the purpose of this zone to provide appropriately located areas for small
professional office building use which can be compatible with adjacent
residential uses.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I and II set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title and the
following regulations.
§ 16.30A.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.16(b);
amended by Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-3]
A. Professional office or studios for the use of the practitioners of
recognized professions, such as medical doctors, dentists, optometrists,
chiropractors, accountants, opticians, lawyers, engineers, architects,
and similar professional occupations;
B. Examination offices for veterinarians;
C. General business offices for real estate and insurance agencies and
similar offices;
D. Offices of governmental and social service organizations and agencies;
§ 16.28E.100 RARITAN CODE § 16.30A.020
1.01:710
§ 16.30A.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.16(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.30A.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.16(d); amended
by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.30A.050. Buffer Strips. [Prior code § 15-9.16(e); amended by
Ord. 08-3]
All lots or parts of lots which are improved with a predominantly
nonresidential use and whose side or rear lines are adjacent to a residential
zone shall be screened from such residential zone by landscaped buffer
strips or other such screening along said side or rear lines as may be
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 16.74.120.
§ 16.30A.060. Apartment Over Shops and Offices. [Prior code
§ 15-9.16(f); amended by Ord. 08-3]
E. Banking and financial offices;
F. Service uses of the following types: barber and beauty shops; tailoring
and dressmaking; radio and television repair; and florists;
G. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations;
H. Child care centers.
A. Public and private parking;
B. Signs and fences;
C. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use;
D. Apartments over shops and offices in accordance with Section
16.30A.060.
A. Public and private schools and day nurseries;
B. Public uses;
C. Essential services;
D. Houses of worship;
E. Day nurseries.
A. A building containing a permitted shop or office on the first floor may be
constructed with a maximum of two apartment units on the second
floor.
B. There shall be provided a lot area of 1,000 square feet in area for every
apartment, in addition to the lot area requirements for the permitted
nonresidential uses, for the applicable zone.
§ 16.30A.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.30A.060
1.01:711
Chapter 16.30B
O-2 BUSINESS OFFICE ZONE
§ 16.30B.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.17(a); amended by Ord.
02-9; Ord. 08-3]
It is the purpose of this zone to reserve appropriate areas for the use of
large business and corporate offices and large light industrial and related
uses when said uses can be adequately serviced by the sanitary sewer
system.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structures shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I and II set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title and the
following regulations.
§ 16.30B.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.17(b);
amended by Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.30B.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.17(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
C. Each apartment shall be self-contained and shall have a gross floor area
of at least 400 square feet.
D. Public sewer and water shall be required.
E. Entrances to apartments shall be from the rear of the building.
F. Parking for tenants shall be provided in the rear of the building.
A. Executive and administrative, general business and professional
offices;
B. Scientific and research laboratories;
C. Commercial indoor recreation facilities;
D. Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including commercial
greenhouses as part of a farm and the sale of farm products;
E. Motels and hotels;
F. Light industrial uses in accordance with Section 16.30B.060;
G. Houses of worship;
H. Child care centers.
A. Off-street parking, loading and unloading;
B. Signs and fences;
§ 16.30A.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.30B.030
1.01:712
§ 16.30B.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.17(d); amended
by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.30B.050. Buffer Strips. [Prior code § 15-9.17(e); amended by
Ord. 08-3]
All lots or parts of lots which are improved with a predominantly
nonresidential use and whose side or rear lines are adjacent to a residential
zone shall be screened from such residential zone by landscaped buffer
strips or other such screening along said side or rear lines as may be
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 16.74.120.
§ 16.30B.060. Light Industrial Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.17(f);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
Light industrial uses as permitted in the I-2 zone, including I-2 zone
accessory uses, are permitted as follows:
C. Facilities required for employees and visitors, such as cafeterias,
recreational and medical facilities;
D. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use;
E. Restaurants within motels and hotels.
A. Public and private schools and day nurseries;
B. Public uses;
C. Essential services;
D. Farm stands;
E. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations;
F. Helistops.
A. Such uses shall be located on lots of 25 acres or greater.
B. Minimum lot frontage, 500 feet.
C. Primary vehicular access shall be directly onto a state highway.
However, the Planning Board may waive this requirement when it is
deemed necessary by the Planning Board for the use to have vehicular
access to a state highway at an existing intersection which provides a
full range of turning movements. Such alternate access to the state
highway may be from a municipal or county road which intersects the
state highway and which is suitably improved to handle the projected
vehicular traffic of the use. The access point on the municipal or county
road shall be within 1,500 feet of the intersection of the municipal or
county road with the state highway.
§ 16.30B.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.30B.060
1.01:713
Chapter 16.32A
P PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL ZONE
§ 16.32A.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.18(a); amended by Ord.
08-3]
It is the purpose of this zone to define areas of the Township owned and
used or intended to be used for public and institutional purposes by the
Township, the county, the state, the federal government and by nonprofit
institutions.
Within this zone, no lot, structure or accessory structure shall be used in
whole or in part unless it complies with Schedules I and II set out in the
Appendix following this Title, other applicable sections of this Title and
following regulations.
§ 16.32A.020. Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.18(b);
amended by Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-3]
D. Structures shall be set back 100 feet from all property lines.
E. Uses shall conform to the height and coverage regulations of the I-2
zone.
F. Outside storage shall be as permitted in the I-2 zone provided that the
storage area is set back 100 feet from all property lines.
G. Industrial parks shall not be permitted.
A. Governmental, public and institutional uses;
B. Public and private parks and play areas;
C. Nonprofit educational institutions;
D. Hospitals, sanitariums, medical or health centers, nursing homes or
similar health facilities;
E. Institutions or homes for the aged;
F. Churches, convents, monasteries or similar religious institutions;
G. Child care centers.
H. Offices for charitable and/or not for profit organizations; [Amended by
Ord. 08-30]
I. Charitable and/or not for profit services; [Amended by Ord. 08-30]
J. Any form of agriculture or horticulture, excluding commercial
greenhouses; [Amended by Ord. 08-30]
K. Farmer's markets; [Amended by Ord. 08-30]
§ 16.30B.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.32A.020
1.01:714
§ 16.32A.030. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.18(c);
amended by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.32A.040. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.18(d); amended
by Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.32A.050. Buffer Strips. [Prior code § 15-9.18(e); amended by
Ord. 08-3]
All lots or parts of lots which are improved with a predominantly
nonresidential use and whose side or rear lines are adjacent to a residential
zone shall be screened from such residential zone by landscaped buffer
strips or other such screening along said side or rear lines as may be
approved by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 16.74.120.
Chapter 16.32B
H HOSPITAL DISTRICT
§ 16.32B.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.18a(a); amended by Ord.
91-35; Ord. 08-3]
It is the purpose of this zoning district to permit medical facilities and
related activities with specified controls as set forth.
Within this zoning district, not lot, structure or accessory structure shall be
used in whole or in part unless it complies with the following regulations
and other applicable sections of this Title.
§ 16.32B.020. Principal Permitted Use. [Prior code § 15-9.18a(b);
amended by Ord. 91-35; Ord. 08-3]
A licensed institution commonly known as a medical center providing
primary and specialized health services and medical or surgical care to
L. Indoor storage of non-hazardous materials. [Amended by Ord. 08-30]
A. Public and private parking;
B. Signs and fences;
C. Facilities required for employees and visitors, such as cafeterias,
recreational and medical facilities;
D. Other uses and structures customarily incidental to a principal
permitted use.
A. Public and private schools and day nurseries;
B. Essential services;
C. Helistops.
§ 16.32A.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.32B.020
1.01:715
persons, inpatients and outpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury,
deformity and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including,
as part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient
facilities, training facilities, examination rooms for the use of practitioners
of recognized health care professionals and administrative offices for
hospital employees.
§ 16.32B.030. Concurrent Principal Permitted Uses. [Prior code
§ 15-9.18a(c); amended by Ord. 91-35; Ord. 06-31; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.32B.040. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.18a(d);
amended by Ord. 91-35; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.32B.050. Conditional Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.18a(e); amended
by Ord. 91-35; Ord. 08-3]
§ 16.32B.060. Area and Bulk Standards. [Prior code § 15-9.18a(f);
amended by Ord. 91-35; Ord. 08-3]
A. Day nurseries, child care facilities, and geriatric facilities;
B. Residential units for doctors, nurses and other health care workers and
hospital personnel;
C. Free standing ambulatory and diagnostic treatment facilities;
D. Health care professional office building;
E. Child care centers.
A. Surface off-street parking; loading and unloading;
B. Multi-level parking structure;
C. Cafeteria and recreational facilities for employees and patients;
D. Gift shop;
E. Signs and fences;
F. Waste treatment facilities as an accessory use only for site generated
waste. No waste generated off-site shall be brought on-site for
treatment;
G. Other uses and structures customarily incident to a principal permitted
use including co-generation facilities.
A. Helistop;
B. Essential services.
A. Permitted uses shall be located on lots meeting the following
requirements:
§ 16.32B.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.32B.060
1.01:716
§ 16.32B.070. Site Plan Approval Required. [Prior code
§ 15-9.18a(g); amended by Ord. 91-35; Ord. 08-3]
Site plan approval by the Municipal Agency shall be required as set forth in
Chapter 16.14.
§ 16.32B.080. Designated Properties. [Prior code § 15-9.18a(h);
amended by Ord. 91-35; Ord. 08-3]
The H - Hospital District shall be as designated on the zoning map.
Size of Facility
(Number of beds)
Minimum Site Area
(acres)
30 or less 5
31 to 50 10
51 to 100 12
Each additional 50 2
B. Such uses shall front on roads with a minimum pavement width of 30
feet. Hospitals shall front on a state or county highway.
C. The maximum height of principal structures shall be not more than 100
feet and the maximum height shall be not more than 40 feet for other
permitted accessory structures.
D. Minimum front, rear and side yards for principal and accessory
structures shall be 100 feet from Route 31 and all other properties
except such may be not less than 75 feet from County Road 600. When
located across from, abutting or adjacent to a residence or residential
zone, the Planning Board may require additional setbacks and yards to
provide adequate buffers and safeguards to protect adjacent uses from
nuisance characteristics.
E. The maximum hard surface coverage in the H - Hospital District shall
be 40%.
F. Off-street parking shall be provided at rates set forth in Section
16.70.020. Where in the opinion of the Municipal Agency a survey of offstreet
parking space utilization is necessary to determine the
appropriate number of parking spaces accessory to permitted uses, the
applicant submitting a request for site plan approval shall cause such
survey to be conducted and the results of such survey shall be
submitted to the Municipal Agency. Where the results of such survey
demonstrate to the Municipal Agency a need for more off-street parking
spaces than required by Section 16.70.020, the Municipal Agency
based upon such utilization survey may require more off-street parking
spaces than would be required by the application of Section 16.70.020.
§ 16.32B.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.32B.080
1.01:717
Properties as designated are rezoned from R-3 Residential and O-1
Professional Office Zone to H - Hospital District.
Chapter 16.64
GENERAL DESIGN AND USE REGULATIONS
§ 16.64.010. Schedule of Controls. [Prior code § 15-9.2a; amended
by Ord. 95-31; Ord. 98-50; Ord. 06-21 Schedule I; Ord. 03-3; Ord.
2017-13; Ord. 2017-14]
Schedule I, entitled "Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements,"
Schedule II, entitled "Minimum Utility Requirements," and Schedule III,
entitled "Cluster Requirements," which are set out in the Appendix
following this Title, are declared to be a part of this Title and shall be
deemed to be the minimum requirements in every instance of their
application, unless otherwise stated.
A. Applicability of Regulations. Except as hereinafter provided:
1. No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be
moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building
be designed, used or intended to be used for any purpose or in any
manner other than as specified among the uses hereinafter listed
as permitted in the zone in which such building or land is located;
2. No building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered
to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the zone in
which such building is located;
3. No building shall be erected, no existing buildings shall be altered,
enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any
building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in
conformity with the yard, lot area and building location regulations
hereinafter designated for the zone in which such building or open
space is located;
4. No yard or other open space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other
building, and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any
other lot;
5. No off-street parking area, loading or unloading area provided to
meet the minimum off-street parking, loading or unloading
requirements for a use or structure on any other lot;
6. No land in a residential zone shall be used to fulfill open space,
parking or similar requirements for uses in nonresidential zones.
§ 16.32B.080 RARITAN CODE § 16.64.010
1.01:718
No access shall be allowed through a residential zone to service a
use in a nonresidential zone.
B. General Use Restrictions for All Zones.
1. Any use not designated as a principal permitted use, a permitted
accessory use or a conditional use is specifically prohibited from
any zone in the Township. All uses shall be conducted within a
building or structure unless otherwise permitted.
2. The following public utility facilities shall be permitted in all zones
on land with sufficient area appropriate for the facility or service to
be provided:
a. Electrical substations, pumping stations and underground
utility lines and underground pipelines constructed or used to
serve a principal permitted use and permitted accessory uses
for which subdivisions or site plan approval has been granted
or which is pre-existing;
b. Electrical or other utility substations to be installed within
existing public and private rights-of-way where a utility line
already exists;
c. Electric line installations of 34.5 kilovolts or less.
C. Prohibited Uses.
1. Explosives manufacturing;
2. Petroleum refining;
3. Bulk storage of refinery products and raw materials in tanks for use
on the premises or for resale, when inventoried in tankage
exceeding the capacity as listed in Section 16.64.100.C;
4. Junkyards, auto wrecking or disassembly yards;
5. Retail, wholesale or auction sales of used motor vehicles, except as
an accessory use as set forth in Section 16.68.060.E;
6. All billboards, signboards or advertising devices not expressly
related to the business being conducted on the premises;
7. Landfills;
8. (Reserved)32
9. Recreational and medical marijuana uses, such as, but not limited
to, marijuana cultivation facilities, marijuana production or
manufacturing facilities, marijuana testing facilities, and retail
32.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C.8, which listed charitable collection bins as a
prohibited use, was repealed 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-30.
§ 16.64.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.64.010
1.01:719
§ 16.64.020. Permitted Modifications — Cluster Residential
Development. [Prior code § 15-9.19; amended by Ord. 87-4; Ord.
91-38; Ord. 98-31]
Any major residential subdivision in zone districts R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5
and R-6 meeting the requirements of this section may apply to the Planning
Board for approval as a cluster subdivision under the provisions of this Title
and in accordance with the following requirements:
marijuana sales and dispensaries. [Added 11-7-2018 by Ord. No.
18-28]
A. Maximum Number of Lots. The maximum number of lots to be
permitted shall be the fewer number of lots resulting from the
following: [Amended 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-1]
1. The maximum number of lots to be permitted shall be no greater
than the number derived by preparation of a sketch plat of the
subject property showing a development with conventional lot
sizes. Such sketch plat shall be prepared at a scale of not less than
one inch equals 100 feet. Such sketch plat and the resulting
number of lots thereon shall be based upon and shall include:
a. Street layout with street right-of-way widths conforming to the
Master Plan and the Development Ordinance.
b. Steep slope analysis of topography shown on such sketch plat
at intervals of at least 10 feet as required by Chapter 16.68.
c. Location of any 100-year floodplains.
d. Location of wetlands and wetland transition areas based upon
a letter of interpretation from NJDEP.
e. Lot areas conforming to the zoning district requirements,
indicating lot area and lot width. A lot circle shall be inscribed
in such lot, the location and diameter of which shall conform to
Zoning Ordinance requirements pertaining to the zoning
district within which the property is located.
f. In addition, such sketch plat shall show all other information
required by the checklist for sketch plats and § 16.18.090,
including, where public sewers are not proposed, the
requirement of § 16.19.090.B.9, which requires at least one
passing permeability test and soil log for each five acres of
such property. The location of all unsatisfactory and abandoned
permeability tests shall be indicated.
g. Where public water supply is not available, a well test report as
required by § 16.18.140 shall be submitted.
§ 16.64.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.64.020
1.01:720
h. If public water supply is proposed, a letter from the water
supplier shall be submitted stating that safe and adequate
service to the anticipated number of units can be supplied.
i. If public sewers are to be provided, a written communication
from RTMU shall be submitted stating that sewage treatment
capacity for the number of units shown on the sketch plat has
been reserved.
j. If public water supply and/or public sewers are proposed, the
route of extension of such to the property and the location of
any required pumping station shall be indicated.
2. Preparation of a sketch plat of the subject property showing a
development with conventional lot size without both utilities
(public sewer and public water).
a. Such sketch plat and the resulting number of lots thereon shall
be based upon and shall include:
i. A steep slope analysis.
ii. Location of any 100-year floodplains.
iii. Location of any wetlands as defined by the United States
Fish and Wildlife Service.
iv. Provisions of § 16.64.090.
b. Such conventional lot sizes without both utilities (public sewer
and public water) shall meet all minimum lot area and
minimum lot width requirements for the district in which
located.
B. Cluster Requirements. See Schedule III set out in the Appendix
following this Title.
C. The land area which would otherwise be required for house lots, but
which is not so used under the permitted lot size reduction provisions of
this section, shall be devoted instead to contiguous common space.
D. Location and Use of Dedicated Lands. The Planning Board shall have
full authority to approve or disapprove the locations and proposed uses
of lands required to be dedicated in accordance with the foregoing and
as guided in its decisions by this subsection and the following:
1. Lands required to be dedicated shall be so located as to meet the
needs of open spaces, parks, playgrounds, rights-of-way protecting
major streams or open drainage ways and buffer areas, or to
provide additional neighborhood area for recreational purposes or
school purposes. The Planning Board shall make certain that not
only Township requirements shall be satisfied, but also that
§ 16.64.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.64.020
1.01:721
§ 16.64.030. Height. [Prior code § 15-9.21; amended by Ord. 97-41]
dedicated area shall be so located as to meet any possible future
needs of the neighborhood or region.
2. The Planning Board shall have full discretion as to the location and
size of the various use need areas and their distribution. It shall not
generally approve areas of less than five acres except when such
site is considered adequate for its specific use, and it shall make
certain that a reasonable portion of required dedicated area shall
be located so as to specifically serve the needs of the development
where located. Areas utilized for stormwater detention facilities
shall not be counted toward fulfilling minimum open space area
requirements for a cluster development. Areas utilized for
stormwater retention facilities shall be counted toward fulfilling
open-space area requirements.
E. Disposition of Dedicated Areas.
1. Dedicated areas shall be deemed free and clear of all mortgages
and encumbrances to the Township if the Township so indicates, as
provided in Subsection D of this section; or
2. Deeded to a property owner's association, cooperative or
condominium corporations, free and clear of any encumbrances,
for their use, control and management for open-space recreational
or agricultural use and to provide appropriate restrictions to assure
the effectuation of the purpose of this Title and to provide for the
maintenance and control of the area. If non-Township ownership is
approved, the maintenance responsibility shall be upon the
property owners within the bounds of the development. Upon
failure to maintain an orderly open space, the Township may and
can perform such maintenance and assess the cost to the
responsible property owner pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
F. Right of Owner. Proposals in accordance with this section shall only be
approved by the Planning Board as above regulated if the lesser
requirements will promote the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare and will enhance property values within the area of
development and Raritan Township. Nothing herein shall be construed
as requiring a developer to elect this means of developing his or her
tract.
A. Permitted Exceptions. Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this
Title shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, flagpoles, and
farm structures. Mechanical appurtenances such as condensers,
elevator penthouses, exhaust fans and similar equipment are exempt
from height limitations, provided that they do not exceed 10% of the
roof area, do not extend more than six feet above the height limitation
for the zone in which the building is located, and are completely
screened or shielded. The provision of this section shall not apply to
§ 16.64.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.64.030
1.01:722
§ 16.64.040. Yard Area. [Prior code § 15-9.22; amended by Ord.
93-24]
prevent the erection above the building height Raritan Township
General Ordinances limit of a parapet wall or cornice for ornament (and
without windows) extending above such height limit not more than six
feet. Front, rear and side yards shall be increased by one foot for each
foot by which such buildings exceed the height limit not more than six
feet. Front, rear and side yards shall be increased by one foot for each
foot by which it is located, and further provided that in no case shall any
building have a height greater than 50 feet unless explicitly permitted
by this Title. [Amended by Ord. 04-22]
B. Noncommercial accessory tower structures may be authorized in all
residential zones, provided:
1. The setback for the central vertical portion of the structure shall be
a minimum of 35 feet from all property lines for structures up to 35
feet and shall increase by one foot of area for every one foot of
increased height; said height not to exceed a maximum of 75 feet.
2. The structure shall be located in the area behind the principal
residential structure as delineated by a line along the rear wall of
the structure and extending to either side of the property.
3. How Measured. Height shall be measured from the mean level of
the ground adjacent to the structure to a point midway between the
highest (ridge line) and lowest (eaves) point of the roof, but not
including chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses and
similar projections. The mean level of the ground surrounding the
structure shall be computed by averaging the grade at the four
corners at the base of the structure or the four most extreme points
on the north, south, east and west sides of a principal structure
where multiple corners exist, or four points 90° apart from a
circular structure.
The base of earth berms surrounding a structure shall be
considered the grade from which height is measured.
A. Generally.
1. Front Yards. The minimum building setback shall be maintained as
required in Schedule I set out in the Appendix following this Title,
except that a structure to be erected on a vacant lot between two
improved lots may follow the average setback of the two improved
lots, but in any case, not less than 25 feet from the street right-ofway
line.
If a vacant lot is between two improved lots upon which structures
are set back greater than the required setback, then the proposed
structure on the vacant lot shall also be set back along the average
§ 16.64.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.64.040
1.01:723
setback line of the two improved lots, but in no event need to set
back more than 100 feet.
2. Within the B-4 highway business zone, the required minimum front
yard of 100 feet shall be devoted to landscaping with grass, flowers
and shrubs and shall not be used for buildings, structures (other
than permitted signs), off-street parking, off-street loading. Such
minimum required front yard devoted to landscaping may be
pierced by vehicular and pedestrian accessways the design and
width of such shall be approved by the Planning Board as part of
the site plan approval process. The property owner shall have a
continuing responsibility to maintain such landscaped areas. Such
continued responsibility for maintenance (including replacement of
plant material which has died) shall be set forth as a note on the
site plan and shall be incorporated into any resolution granting site
plan approval.
Such landscaped strip may also be devoted to trees provided the
number, location and species is approved by the Municipal Agency
as part of the site plan approval process.
B. Side and Rear Yards. In any residential zone, on lots on which a singlefamily
attached or detached residence is the principal use, utility sheds
of less than 180 square feet in gross floor area and under 10 feet in
height, and any unroofed patio or deck which is no higher than three
feet above existing grade, and any residential drive or parking area,
other than a common drive, may be located within five feet of any side
or rear lot line.
C. Front Steps and Overhangs. Residential front steps and roof overhangs
may extend into the required yard setback area in any residential zone
by no more than five feet.
D. Permitted Reductions. In any industrial zone, setback requirements
may be reduced for principal and accessory structures to a minimum of
10 feet where adjacent to a railroad or power company right-of-way.
E. Public Dedications. Where any property owner or his or her
predecessor in title has given up property to the Township either
through condemnation or gift for the purpose of facilitating
improvement to existing Township streets, the area given up shall also
be counted as part of the premises for the purpose of complying with
this section.
Where in the B-4 zoning district land is to be dedicated for public
streets, the area of such public street dedication shall be included as
part of the site area of the development submitted for site plan approval
for the purpose of calculating the permitted hard surface coverage and
floor area ratio. Any hard surface within the street right-of-way of the
street to be dedicated shall not be included as part of the hard surface
for the purpose of calculating the permitted hard surface coverage of
the site area of the development.
§ 16.64.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.64.050
1.01:724
§ 16.64.050. Temporary Uses. [Prior code § 15-9.23; amended in
Supplement 3-00; Ord. 85-1]
It is recognized that it may be in the interests of the Township and in
accordance with the purpose of this Title to permit temporary activities
for limited period of time, which activities may not be permitted by other
provisions of this Title. Such uses shall be permitted if they are of such
nature and are so located that, at the time of application, they will:
§ 16.64.060. Existing Lots of Record. [Prior code § 15-9.24;
amended by Ord. 91-13]
In any zone, a permitted use may be constructed upon an existing lot
of record existing February 12, 1979, which does not meet the minimum
lot area and width requirements for the zone in which located, provided
that the minimum lot area and width requirements for an existing lot of
record under Schedule I set out in the Appendix following this Title are
met, and provided that the owner and/or the owner's predecessor in title or
subsequent owner of the existing lot of record cannot own or have owned
any adjacent land which would, when combined with the existing lot of
record, make it a conforming lot or a more conforming lot.
Any lot made nonconforming after February 12, 1979, as the result of local,
county, state or federal government taking of land may be considered a
conforming lot, provided that the lot has at least 70% of its area and lot
width as required in its zone district.
A. In no way exert a detrimental effect upon the lawful use of land and
activities normally permitted in the zone in question; and
B. Contribute materially to the welfare and well-being of the Township.
Upon favorable findings by the Planning Board, the Board may, direct
the Land Use Enforcement Officer to issue a zoning permit for a period
not to exceed six months. The Planning Board may authorize extensions
of such zoning permits for an additional period of not more than six
months. Such extensions in total time shall not exceed the total period
of construction on the site or when such temporary use is located
within a planned residential development shall not exceed the period of
construction of the planned residential development.
In subdivisions and planned developments designed for residential use,
the Planning Board may permit the use of one unit of each type of
dwelling as a model unit and the use of not more than one such dwelling
as a temporary sales office. The use of the dwellings as model units
and the operation of the sales office shall not extend beyond the date of
the initial sale or occupancy of all of the units. A rental office may be
permitted in an apartment complex at all times.
§ 16.64.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.64.070
1.01:725
§ 16.64.070. Backland Lots. [Prior code § 15-9.25; amended by Ord.
85-13]
In any R-1, R-2 and R-3 zone district, single-family detached dwellings on
lots not abutting on any street as defined in Section 16.64.090.E, shall
be permitted, provided that the lots have physical access to a street as
defined in Section 16.64.090.E, and provided that the tract, of which the
backland lot is a part, cannot be subdivided with the required frontage and
the remaining land cannot be further subdivided.
New backland lots shall not be permitted as part of any major subdivision.
Their use shall be restricted to those tracts where a lack of street frontage
prohibits conventional lot development and where the remaining land as
part of this backlands lots subdivision can not be further subdivided
because of lack of lot area. An existing backland lot may be further
subdivided if all resulting parcels comply with the zoning ordinance and
such further division may be by means of a major subdivision.
Lots permitted under this section shall meet all requirements of the zone
where located, except that the area of the lots shall contain at least twice
the area required in the zone. Access shall be provided by means of a fiftyfoot
parcel of land, which shall be part of the lot, between the main body
of the lot and the street. This access shall be improved to a suitable width
satisfactory to the approving agency and as necessary to ensure access by
emergency vehicles in all seasons. The fifty-foot wide parcel of land shall
not be included as part of the lot area requirement.
§ 16.64.080. General Regulations Applicable to All Zones. [Prior
code § 15-9.26]
In addition to the regulations of this chapter, several other Township
regulations may have to be met before a zoning permit, construction permit,
or certificate of occupancy can be issued.
These include, but are not limited to, the following:
§ 16.64.090. Lot Regulations. [Prior code § 15-9.27; amended by
Ord. 87-4; Ord. 89-34; Ord. 91-9; Ord. 00-3; Ord. 01-9; 4-2-2001]
A. Building code;
B. Floodplain and stormwater management;
C. Land subdivision;
D. Signs;
E. Site plan review;
F. Soil erosion;
G. Health.
§ 16.64.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.64.090
1.01:726
A. Lot Width Measurements.
1. The minimum lot width required shall be measured at the proposed
street right-of-way line and at the setback line, and shall be
maintained for an additional 40 feet toward the rear of the lot on a
line perpendicular to the setback line.
2. At the end of a cul-de-sac:
a. The minimum frontage at the right-of-way line may be less than
the minimum required, but in no case less than 50 feet.
b. The minimum frontage at the setback line may be 65% of the
required frontage.
3. For lots fronting on an outside horizontal curve in a road, the
minimum frontage at the right-of-way line may be reduced to not
less than 75% of the minimum required.
4. In all lots, whether or not of an irregular shape; it must be possible
to inscribe a circle of a diameter equal of the minimum lot width
specified in Schedule I set out in the Appendix following this Title.
B. Sight Triangle. At all street intersections, fences, landscaping, grading
or other obstruction to vision exceeding 30 inches in height above the
established grade of the street at the property line shall not be erected
or maintained on any lot within the triangle formed by the street lot
lines of such lot and a line drawn between points along such street lot
lines 50 feet distant from their point of intersection.
C. All yards facing on a public street shall be considered front yards and
shall conform to the minimum front yard requirements for the
respective zone for both intersecting streets, for both principal and
accessory buildings. Corner lots shall be considered to have two front
yards and two side yards and no rear yard.
Lots within the minimum required distance from the corner of two
streets or the same street shall have the required frontage on both
streets.
D. Where a building lot has frontage on a street which the master plan or
the official map of the Township or County indicates is proposed for
right-of-way widening, the required front yard setback and yard area
shall be measured from such proposed right-of-way.
E. Lots shall abut street. No zoning or construction permit shall be issued
for a new structure or use unless:
1. The lot abuts a street giving physical access to such proposed
building or structure.
2. Such street shall have been duly placed on the official map of the
Township or shall be:
§ 16.64.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.64.090
1.01:727
a. An existing State, County or Township street or highway;
b. A street shown upon a plat approved by the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment; or
c. A street on a plat duly filed in the office of the Hunterdon
County Recording Officer prior to the passage of an ordinance
under the Municipal Land Use Law, 1975, or any prior law
which required prior approval of plats by the Township
Committee or other authorized body.
Before any permit shall be issued, such street shall have been
certified to be suitably improved by Township standards, or
such suitable improvement shall have been assured by means
of a performance guarantee in accordance with standards and
specifications approved by the Township Committee as
adequate in respect to the public health, safety and general
welfare for the special circumstances of the particular street.
F. Parking of Commercial Vehicles in Residential Zones: [Amended
6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 19-15]
1. No more than two total commercial vehicles of a pickup or van-type
may be stored overnight in a residential zone. Commercial vehicles
must be parked off street.
2. Commercial vehicles, not exceeding a gross vehicle weight rating
of 14,000 pounds, may be parked out of doors overnight in any
residential zone.
3. Commercial vehicles individually exceeding a gross weight rating
of 14,000 pounds shall be stored within a structure totally
enclosing the vehicle.
4. No more than one commercial trailer, with an overall length of 20
feet (excluding tongue), may be parked outside overnight in any
residential zone. A commercial trailer would count as one of the
two permissible commercial vehicles. The storage of trailers pulled
by semi or truck tractors, construction equipment and non-school
buses, is prohibited in residential zones.
5. One truck tractor owned by the resident occupant may be housed
on residential lots greater than two acres, but only if stored in an
enclosed building.
G. Recreation vehicles larger than a pickup truck or van-type, boats,
trailers and motor homes shall not be stored out-of-doors on any
residential lot less than 15,000 square feet.
H. Business structures or uses shall not display goods for sale purposes or
coin-operated vending machines of any type in any location which
would infringe upon the required yard areas specified in this Title.
§ 16.64.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.64.090
1.01:728
I. No business or sales shall be conducted from any vehicle parked on a
lot.
J. All yards, open space, off-street parking and required landscaping must
be contained within the zone in which the use is permitted.
K. Any subdivision proposed after the effective date of this amendatory
ordinance concerning property which contains existing or proposed
street rights of way, Freshwater Wetlands and their associated
transition areas as determined and/or verified by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, flood plains, storm water
detention and/or retention facilities, existing easements precluding
structures, bufferyards and State open waters, shall divide such
property in such a manner that each resulting lot created shall have a
minimum required improvable area as specified in Subsection M of this
section. A flood plain shall be defined as extending to the 100-year flood
plain of a river, stream or other tributary and to the stream
encroachment line established in accordance with the Flood Hazard
Area regulations where the 100-year flood plain has not been
delineated.
The above requirements are in addition to net acreage requirements
in the R-6, R-6LM and R-7 zoning districts. [Amended by Ord. 01-9;
Ord. 02-54]
L. Any subdivision proposed after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this subsection shall divide such property in such manner
that each resulting lot created shall have a minimum lot area exclusive
of stormwater detention facilities as specified in Subsection M of this
section. In the case of surface impoundment stormwater detention or
retention facilities, the minimum lot area as required in Subsection M of
this section shall not include the impoundment area extending to an
elevation of one foot above the 100-year storm design elevation. Such
elevation shall be specified on the subdivision plat and the elevation of
one foot above the 100-year storm design elevation shall be indicated
on the subdivision plat.
In the case of non-surface detention facilities, such facilities shall be
enclosed by an easement which easement area shall be excluded from
the minimum lot area as required in Subsection M of this section.
It is the intent of this section that stormwater detention facilities (both
surface impoundment and non-surface detention facilities) shall be
located on one parcel of property.
M. Minimum Required Improvable Area.
Zoning
District Minimum Required Improvable Area
R-1 65,000 square feet
R-1A 50,000 square feet
§ 16.64.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.64.090
1.01:729
Zoning
District Minimum Required Improvable Area
R-2 40,000 square feet
R-3 40,000 square feet
R-3 30,000 square feet (served by sanitary sewer)
R-4 30,000 square feet
R-5 30,000 square feet (15,000 square feet)(1)
R-6 30,000 square feet (15,000 square feet)(1)
R-6LM 2,200 square feet
R-7 2,200 square feet
Notes:
(1) Thirty thousand square feet of the minimum lot area specified on
Schedule I and elsewhere in Title 16, Land Development Code,
is required for a lot to be used for a single family dwelling not
served by public water and sewer and on a lot on which is to be
located a two family dwelling. 15,000 square feet of the minimum
lot area specified on Schedule I and elsewhere in Title 16, Land
Development Code, is required for a lot to be used for single family
dwelling served by public water and sewer. [Amended by Ord.
01-9]
§ 16.64.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.64.090
1.01:730
Within such minimum required improvable area a lot circle having a
diameter at least equal to the required lot width for the district in
which such lot is located shall be able to be inscribed in the area
of such lot exclusive of areas of existing or proposed street rights
of way, Freshwater Wetlands and their associated transition areas
as determined and/or verified by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, flood plains, storm water detention and/
or retention facilities, existing easements precluding structures,
bufferyards and State Open Waters, as set forth in Subsections K and
L of this section.
Any lot which is proposed as part of a cluster development shall
have an are equal to the minimum lot area required in the zoning
district for a cluster development as specified on Schedule III set
out in this chapter which minimum lot area shall be exclusive of
any area of existing or proposed street rights of way, Freshwater
Wetlands and their associated transition areas as determined and/or
verified by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
flood plains, storm water detention and/or retention facilities, existing
easements precluding structures, and Stat Open Waters, as set forth
in Subsections K and L, and having a lot circle at least equal to
the required lot width which shall be able to be inscribed in the
minimum lot area exclusive of existing or proposed street rights of
way, Freshwater Wetlands and their associated transition areas as
determined and/or verified by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, flood plains, storm water detention and/
or retention facilities, existing easement precluding structures,
bufferyards, and State Open Waters, as set forth in Section 16.64.090,
Subsections K and L of this section.
Any lot which is proposed as part of a cluster development shall
have an area equal to the minimum lot area required in the zoning
district for a cluster development as specified on Schedule III of this
chapter which minimum lot area shall be exclusive of any area of
existing or proposed street rights of way, Freshwater Wetlands and
their associated transition areas as determined and/or verified by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Flood Plains,
Storm water detention and/or retention facilities, existing easements
precluding structures, bufferyards, and State Open Waters, as set forth
in Section 16.64.090, Subsections K and L, and having a lot circle at
least equal to the required lot width which shall be able to be inscribed
in the minimum lot area exclusive of existing or proposed street rights
of way, Freshwater Wetlands and their associated transition areas
as determined and/or verified by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Flood Plains, Storm water detention and/
or retention facilities, existing easements precluding structures,
bufferyards, and State Open Waters, as set forth in Section 16.64.090,
Subsections K and L.[Amended by Ord. 02-54]
N. Any subdivision proposed after the effective date of this amendment
concerning property which contains an easement or easements which
§ 16.64.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.64.090
1.01:731
§ 16.64.100. Building and Use Regulations. [Prior code § 15-9.28;
amended by Ord. 90-18; Ord. 95-33]
preclude structures shall divide such property in such manner that each
resulting lot created shall have a minimum lot area exclusive of such
existing easement or easements which preclude structures as follows:
Zoning
Districts
Minimum Lot Area Excluding Easements Which
Preclude Structures
R-1 65,000 square feet
R-2 50,000 square feet
R-3 40,000 square feet
Within such minimum lot excluding an easement or easements which
preclude structures a lot circle having a diameter at least equal to the
required lot width for the district in which such lot is located shall be
able to be inscribed in the area of such lot exclusive of the easement
or easements which preclude structures.
Any lot which is proposed as part of a cluster development shall
have an area equal to the minimum lot area required in the zoning
district for cluster development as specified on Schedule III set out
in the Appendix following this Title which minimum lot area shall
be exclusive of any existing easement or easements which preclude
structures and a lot circle having a diameter at least equal to the
required lot width shall be able to be inscribed in said minimum lot
area exclusive of an existing easement or easements which preclude
structures.
Any existing right-of-way other than street right-of-way which
precludes structures shall be treated the same as an easement which
precludes structures.
A. In all zones, on lots on which the principal use is residential, there shall
not be located more than one single-family detached structure and
permitted accessory structures. The permitted accessory buildings and
structures are:
1. One detached garage housing not more than three vehicles and not
exceeding 1,500 square feet in area; [Amended by Ord. 06-21]
2. On nonfarm residential lots accessory structures housing horses,
livestock, fowl, rabbits not exceeding 2% of the lot upon which
located and not located in the front yard nor within 100 feet of any
property line nor within any riparian buffer as required under
Section 16.14.110; [Amended by Ord. 06-21]
3. On residential lots, accessory buildings and structures not
exceeding a total of 800 square feet may be erected provided such
are used for purposes customarily incidental to the principal
residential use. Such permitted accessory buildings and structures
§ 16.64.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.64.100
1.01:732
shall exclude pools, detached garages (as listed in Section
16.64.100.A.1), solar panel arrays and accessory structures
housing animals (as listed in Section 16.64.100.A.2) in the
calculation thereof; [Amended by Ord. 02-8; 08-36]
4. An accessory structure having a gross floor area greater than 800
square feet may continue on a new lot created by subdivision
provided the gross floor area of such accessory structure shall not
exceed 2% of the area of such new lot.
Such accessory structure shall only be used for a permitted
customary accessory use as specified for such residential zoning
district;
5. As part of an approval of a subdivision which property contains an
accessory structure which will exceed 2% of the lot area on which it
will be located, the Planning Board may condition the timing of the
removal of such accessory structure such that:
a. Such accessory structure may be permitted to remain until a
construction permit is granted for the principal use for the lot
on which such accessory structure is located, or
b. Such accessory structure may be permitted to remain until a
construction permit is issued for 95% of the principal
structures to be developed in such subdivision, or
c. Such accessory structure may be permitted to remain until a
specified time limit as set forth in the Planning Board
resolution granting final approval has occurred;
6. Notwithstanding any other section of these regulations, farm
buildings as accessory buildings for the purposes of housing
livestock, farm equipment, and farm products may be located on
farms of five acres or more provided such farm structures do not
exceed a maximum lot coverage of 2% of the lot area upon which
farm building is erected.
7. Solar Panel Arrays. [Amended by Ord. 08-36]
a. Roof mounted panels shall not extend over the edges of the
roof of the structure on which they are located.
b. Ground mounted arrays:
i. The surface area shall not exceed 2% of the lot area.
ii. Shall count as hard surface coverage.
iii. Shall meet the principal setbacks within the zone.
iv. Shall be located only on lots of 80,000 square feet or more.
§ 16.64.100 CODE ADOPTION § 16.64.100
1.01:733
v. Shall not be located within any front yard or front setback
area.
vi. Shall not be mounted higher than four feet from the
ground (to high point of array).
B. All uses and structures in all zones shall meet the applicable
performance standards of Article IV of this Title.
C. Maximum Petroleum Tank Capacities. The following maximum tank
capacities apply to the storage of petroleum products by category of
land usage. All tanks on a lot may not exceed the maximums listed:
Petroleum Tank Uses. The use and placement of petroleum tanks on
property in residential zoning districts shall be only for purposes of
directly providing a petroleum supply for vehicles of the occupants of
the residential structure which vehicles shall normally be parked on
such residential lot and heating fuel directly to the main structure on
the lot.
1. Residential Uses.
a. Fuels for vehicles used by occupant: 1,100 gallons
underground or 550 gallons above ground. Maximum of 1,100
gallons per lot.
b. Heating fuels: 2,000 gallons underground or 660 gallons above
ground. The above are the maximums permitted on any
residential lot per dwelling unit.
2. Commercial, Office or Governmental Uses.
a. Vehicle fuels for occupant's vehicles: 10,000 gallons
underground or 550 gallons above ground. Maximum of 10,000
gallons per lot.
b. Heating fuels: 15,000 gallons underground or 1,320 gallons or
as otherwise permitted by the Uniform Construction Code and/
or Fire Prevention Code above ground. The above are the
maximums permitted per lot.
3. Commercial Distribution, Industrial or Research Uses.
a. Petroleum products, methane through No. 2 fuel (including
blends, such as gasoline, jet fuel, diesel fuel, wide range
naphthas, etc.): 60,000 gallons.
b. Petroleum products, No. 3 fuel through residium (commonly
referred to as fuel oils): 84,000 gallons.
§ 16.64.100 RARITAN CODE § 16.64.100
1.01:734
§ 16.64.110. Preservation of Natural Features. [Prior code
§ 15-9.29]
Notes:
a. Tanks and all ancillary equipment, whether installed above
or below ground, must meet minimum setback
requirements for principal structures.
b. Tanks shall be installed in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code, National Fire Prevention Code, all
other applicable regulatory requirements and the
requirements of this Title.
D. In all zones, on lots where the principal use is non-residential, roof
mounted solar panel arrays shall be permitted as an accessory
structure, provided that the panels shall not extend over the edges of
the roof on which they are located. [Amended by Ord. 09-27]
E. In all zones, on lots where the principal use is non-residential, sheds are
permitted as an accessory structure not to exceed 250 square feet in
size, provided that it is used for purposes customarily incidental to the
principal use. No accessory building shall exceed the maximum
accessory structure height as per Schedule I. No accessory building
shall be permitted in any front yard. No accessory building shall be
closer than 15 feet to the principal building on the lot. Accessory
buildings built in any side or rear yard shall conform to the minimum
yard dimensions set in the Schedule I. Any pre-existing non-conforming
shed erected prior to the establishment of this ordinance shall be
considered grandfathered. [Amended by Ord. 10-15]
A. Riparian Buffers. [Amended by Ord. 06-21]
1. To preserve the existing environmental and natural features of the
Township, no structure shall be built within 100 feet and no
disturbance of soil or vegetation shall occur within 75 feet of the
top of the bank of an existing stream carrying water on an average
of six months of a year, and/or shown on a United State Department
of the Interior Geological Survey quadrangle.
2. Category One Waters and Special Water Resource Protection
Areas. The standards of Section 16.84 shall apply.
B. No persons, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or otherwise
remove topsoil for sale or other use other than on the premises from
which taken, except in connection with the construction or alteration of
a building on such premises and excavating or grading incidental
thereto, or except as hereinafter specified.
C. No structure or paving other than sidewalk shall be constructed over an
on-site sanitary disposal field, and no animals shall be permitted to
graze or be penned over a disposal field or within 50 feet of the top of
§ 16.64.100 CODE ADOPTION § 16.64.110
1.01:735
§ 16.64.120. Fences. [Prior code § 15-9.30; amended by Ord. 95-33]
the bank of a stream described in Subsection A of this section. It is
the intent of this subsection to prevent damage to sanitary disposal
fields and to prevent pollution of streams by the disturbance of stream
corridors by large numbers of animals or by an animal or animals
penned in a small area near a stream or prevent pollution from animal
wastes.
A. Fences shall be considered as accessory uses to a principal permitted
use and are permitted in all zones in accordance with the below-listed
requirements and, where applicable, the design standards for site plan
review.
B. Location. All fences and walls shall be within property lines. No fence or
wall shall violate sight easement requirements as established in Section
16.64.090.B of this chapter or street rights-of-way, nor shall any fence
obstruct any stream, drainageway or floodplain.
C. Residential Uses. No fence on any lot in any residential district or on a
lot in any other district on which residential buildings are erected shall
exceed four feet in height above ground level when located at a
distance closer to any street line than the front setback line prescribed
for such district, nor shall any such fence exceed seven feet in height
above ground level when located at a distance equal to or greater than
the front setback line prescribed for the district.
Notwithstanding the above, a fence of the chain link type having a
height not exceeding 10 feet may be erected around a tennis court
accessory to a single-family residence. Such tennis court must be
located in the rear yard of such lot and shall be for private use only. The
fence must be placed directly around the perimeter of the tennis court
and must be located not closer to any property line than the required
setback for an accessory structure.
D. Nonresidential Uses. No fence on any lot in any nonresidential district
shall exceed a height of eight feet above ground level. When site plan
review is required, however, the approving agency shall have the right
to waive this requirement when justified for safety or security reasons
or for special screening purposes.
E. Materials. No fence shall be erected of barbed wire, electrically
charged, topped with broken glass or metal spikes or constructed of
any material which in any manner may be dangerous to persons or
animals, except that this provision shall not apply to duly constituted
farms on five acres or more.
F. Design. Fences shall be architecturally coordinated with structures
occupying the same lot and surroundings.
G. Maintenance. Every fence and wall shall be maintained in a safe, sound,
vertical condition and shall withstand wind and weather and shall be
§ 16.64.110 RARITAN CODE § 16.64.120
1.01:736
§ 16.64.130. Steep Slope Provisions. [Prior code § 15-9.31; amended
by Ord. 89-34]
subject to inspection of the Raritan Township Construction Department.
If it is determined by the Department that any fence or retaining wall
or portion thereof is not being maintained in a safe, sound and vertical
condition, the Department shall notify the owner of the lot in writing of
its findings and order such fence or retaining wall or portion thereof to
be repaired or removed within 15 days from the date of such written
notice to the owner.
H. Agricultural Fences. [Amended by Ord. 13-3]
1. Agricultural fencing for wildlife control. "Commercial farms" within
the meaning of the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq., may
install agricultural fencing for wildlife control, provided such
installation comports with the adopted Agricultural Management
Practice ("AMP") issued by the State Agricultural Development
Committee ("SADC") at N.J.A.C. 2:76-2A.9. Such fencing shall have
a maximum height of eight feet and shall be installed around the
tillable, cropland, pasture, hay or grazing land so as to minimize
the impact on neighboring properties.
2. For livestock or horses. "Commercial farms" within the meaning of
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq., may install
agricultural fencing for livestock or horses, including but not
limited to split rail, PVC, tape, wire mesh and/or electric fencing.
Such fencing shall have a maximum height of six feet.
3. Noncommercial farms. Farms that do not qualify as a "commercial
farm" within the meaning of the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1
et seq., may not install wildlife control fencing, but are permitted to
install fences for livestock and horses, except that the maximum
height shall be six feet.
4. Prior to construction of fencing pursuant to this subsection, a
"commercial farm" must submit a survey or sketch reflecting the
proposed fencing and its location on the property to the Zoning
Officer for a written administrative review and approval. No zoning
permit or zoning permit fee shall be required.
A. Subdivisions. The applicable provisions of this Title relating to
minimum lot sizes and dwelling unit density for residential development
shall be modified in areas of slopes greater than 12%.
1. Determination of Modification.
a. This modification shall be determined by multiplying the net
land area (total area outside of rights-of-way) in various slope
categories by the following factors:
§ 16.64.120 CODE ADOPTION § 16.64.130
1.01:737
Slope
(percent) Factor
30 or greater 0
20 to 29 0.2
13 to 19 0.5
b. Slope calculations shall be based on elevation intervals of 10
feet.
2. The maximum number of dwelling units allowed on tract shall be
completed as follows:
(Land with 30% slopes x 0)
+ (Land with 20% to 29% slopes x 0.2)
+ (Land with 13% to 19% slopes x 0.5)
= total land available for development (TLD).
TLD
Minimum lot area
required per dwelling
unit (Schedule I set out
in the Appendix
following this title)
= Total number of dwelling units
permitted on tract
3. The concentration of development on lesser slopes is encouraged,
and the Planning Board may authorize development on lots smaller
than permitted in the zone district in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter for cluster residential development
(Section 16.64.020), where applicable provided that the total
number of dwelling units does not exceed the maximum allowed
after application of the above modification formula.
4. Subdivision plats shall be designed so that the larger lots resulting
from the application of this section shall be located in the steep
slope areas.
To calculate the amount of area by which lots in steep slope areas
shall be increased in size, the total land available for development
(TLD) calculated in Subsection (A)(2) of this section shall be
subtracted from the net land area (total area outside of right-ofway)
calculated in Subsection A.1.a. of this section. The difference
resulting from the subtraction shall be the area by which lots in
steep slope areas shall be increased in size. Lots shall be increased
in size in relation to the amount of area of steep slope on such lot
and steepness of such slope so that the largest increases occur on
those lots evidencing the largest amounts of areas of steep slope
and the greatest steepness of slope.
§ 16.64.130 RARITAN CODE § 16.64.130
1.01:738
§ 16.64.140. Hours of Operation. [Amended by Ord. 08-16]
Chapter 16.66
LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING
§ 16.66.010. Regulations Applicable to R-5, R-6LM and R-7
Districts. [Amended by Ord. 87-30; Ord. 90-28; Ord. 96-6]
The following regulations shall apply to all low and moderate income
housing units in the R-5 district, R-6LM district and R-7 district.
5. In areas with slopes of 13% to 19.99%, no more than 30% of such
areas shall be developed and/or regarded or stripped of vegetation.
[Amended by Ord. 01-41]
6. In areas with slopes of 20% to 29.99%, no more than 15% of such
areas shall be developed and/or regarded or stripped of vegetation.
[Amended by Ord. 01-41]
7. In areas with slopes of 30% or more, no development, grading or
removal of vegetation shall be permitted. [Amended by Ord.
01-41]
B. Site Plans. The maximum hard surface coverage permitted in Schedule
I set out in the Appendix following this Title shall be modified in areas of
slopes greater than 12%, as follows:
Percentage of
Slope Maximum Hard Surface Coverage
20 or greater No development permitted
13 to 19 50% of that permitted zone
0 to 12 As permitted in zone
A. In the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, O-1, O-2, OR and CR zoning districts the hours
of operation shall be limited to 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. where such a use
is adjacent to a residential zoning district ("adjacent to" shall include
uses located across a public street from a residential zone).
B. In the B-5 and PCOS Zones, the hours of operation shall be controlled
by the limitations listed in those specific zoning districts.
A. Fifty percent of all low and moderate income units shall be priced so as
to be eligible for rent or purchase by low income households and 50%
shall be eligible for rent or purchase by moderate income households. If
a fraction results from the above 50% calculation, the number of
moderate income units may exceed the number of low income units by
one.
B. Bedroom Distribution.
§ 16.64.130 CODE ADOPTION § 16.66.010
1.01:739
Chapter 16.68
1. At a minimum, 35% of all low and moderate income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
2. At a minimum, 15% of all low and moderate income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
3. No more than 20% of all low and moderate income units may be
efficiency units.
At least one-half of all two bedroom and one-half of all three bedroom units
shall be for low income households.
The above shall not apply to age restricted housing units.
C. Construction Sequencing. Low and moderate income housing units
shall be built in accordance with the following schedule:
Minimum Percentage of Low
and Moderate Income Units
Completed
Percentage of Market Housing
Units Completed
0 25
10 25+1 unit
50 50
75 75
100 90
— 100
D. Low and moderate income units shall be subject to all Raritan Township
non-zoning affordable housing ordinances and regulations in effect or
as may be adopted or amended.
E. Low and moderate income housing units shall be designated on the site
plan and shall have compatible exteriors to non-low and moderate
income housing units and shall be located so that such low and
moderate income housing units will have comparable access to that of
non-low and moderate income housing units to all common elements
within the development.
F. Low and moderate income housing units shall be evenly dispersed
throughout the entire development in as uniform a fashion as is
practical, such that an inclusionary development shall integrate the low
and moderate income units with market units. No more than 50% of the
units in any single, multi-unit structure shall be reserved for low or
moderate income households, unless this requirement is specifically
waived by the Planning Board/Board of Adjustment as a condition of
site plan approval. Such waiver shall nonetheless further the
integration of low/moderate units with market units in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5.93-5.6(e).
§ 16.66.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.66.010
1.01:740
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 16.68.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-9.32(a)]
Recognizing that certain uses, activities, and structures are necessary to
serve the needs and convenience of the Township; and at the same time,
recognizing that such uses may be or become inimical to the public health,
safety and general welfare if located without proper consideration being
given to existing conditions and the character of the surrounding area, such
uses are designated as conditional uses and are enumerated in Chapter
16.68 and Schedule IV set out in the Appendix following this title33 for the
zones in which they are permitted and are required to meet the following
special review procedures.
§ 16.68.020. Applications. [Prior code § 15-9.32(b)]
Applications for conditional uses shall include all forms, exhibits, checklists,
plans and information as required for sketch or preliminary site plan
applications as set forth in the site plan review regulations of the Township
Code and any additional information necessary to show compliance with
this chapter.
§ 16.68.030. Review and Public Hearing. [Prior code § 15-9.32(c)]
The Planning Board shall review and process the application in accordance
with procedures established for sketch or preliminary site plans as set forth
in the site plan review regulations of the Township Code and shall provide
for a public hearing and notice in accordance with Chapter 16.08.
§ 16.68.040. Action. [Prior code § 15-9.32(d)]
The Planning Board shall review and grant or deny the application for a
conditional use and the attendant site plan within 95 days of the filing of a
complete application with the Administrative Officer or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant.
§ 16.68.050. General Standards for Conditional Uses. [Prior code
§ 15-9.33]
The following general standards shall apply to all conditional uses:
A. The use shall be a conditional use as set forth in Schedule IV set out in
the Appendix following this Title and shall conform to all applicable
regulations and standards governing the zone in which it is permitted,
except as may be modified by this chapter.
B. All design standards and requirements of Chapter 16.18 and site plan
review standards, Chapter 16.20 shall apply as appropriate.
33.Editor's Note: Schedule IV on file at the Township offices.
§ 16.66.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.68.050
1.01:741
§ 16.68.060. Specific Standards. [Prior code 15-9.34; amended by
Ord. 94-5; Ord. 95-33; Ord. 95-41; Ord. 98-31; Ord. 98-47; Ord.
01-28; Ord. 02-47; Ord. 02-58]
C. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall, be provided as required in
Chapter 16.70 and the design standards for site plan review and ingress
and egress shall be so designed as to cause minimum interference with
traffic or abutting streets.
D. All applicable performance standards as set forth in Chapter 16.74 shall
be met and documented as to compliance.
E. All applicable provisions of Articles IV and V of this Title, and other
appropriate chapters of the Township Code shall be met.
F. The use shall be so designed, located and proposed to be operated that
the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the public shall be
protected.
A. Hospitals and Nursing Homes.
1. Such uses shall be located on lots meeting the following
requirements:
Size of Facility
(Number of Beds)
Minimum Site Area
(Acres)
30 or less 5
31 to 50 10
51 to 100 12
Each additional 50 2
2. They shall front on roads with a minimum pavement width of 30
feet. Hospitals shall front on a state or county highway.
3. The maximum height of such structures shall be not more than five
stories or 75 feet for hospitals, or two stories or 30 feet for nursing
homes.
4. Minimum front, rear and side yards for principal and accessory
structures shall be 100 feet for hospitals and 50 feet for nursing
homes, except when across from, abutting or adjacent to a
residence or residential zone. Then the Planning Board may require
additional setbacks and yards to provide adequate buffers and
safeguards to protect adjacent uses from nuisance characteristics.
5. Public sewer is required.
B. Clubs, Lodges and Fraternal Organizations.
1. Such uses shall be on lots of not less than five acres.
§ 16.68.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.68.060
1.01:742
2. The minimum width of the lot shall be 200 feet.
3. Eating and drinking facilities shall be accessible only from within
the main structure, except for loading and unloading areas, kitchen
and emergency exits.
4. Minimum front, rear and side yards shall be 50 feet except if across
from, adjacent to or abutting a residence or residential zone. Then
the Planning Board may require additional setbacks to provide
adequate buffers and to protect adjacent uses from nuisance
characteristics. This requirement shall apply to any structure,
principal or accessory, or improvement such as a tennis court,
swimming pool or similar use.
5. The maximum height of such structures shall not be more than 2 1/
2 stories nor more than 35 feet.
6. Parking shall be provided in the rear or side of the building.
7. The discharge of firearms shall be prohibited.
C. Riding Academies and Boarding Stables.
1. The minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
2. The use shall be located on its own lot.
3. Buildings used for the quartering of horses shall not be located
closer than 100 feet from any property line. Other buildings shall
not be located closer than 50 feet from any property line.
4. Horses quartered on the lot shall be limited to a maximum of one
per acre.
D. Animal Hospitals and Commercial Kennels.
1. Such uses shall be on minimum lots of 10 acres.
2. Structures housing animals and exercise areas for animals shall be
at least 300 feet from any residences and adjacent or abutting lots
or 300 feet from any required front, side or rear yard setback lines
of adjacent or abutting lots when these lots are vacant.
3. Minimum front and side yards shall be at least 50 feet each, except
if abutting a residence or a residential zone. Then the Planning
Board may require additional setbacks to provide adequate buffers
and to protect adjacent uses for nuisance characteristics.
4. The maximum height of such uses shall be two and one-half (2 1/2)
stories or 35 feet.
E. New Motor Vehicle Agencies.
1. Such uses shall have a minimum lot area of five usable acres per
lot.
§ 16.68.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.68.060
1.01:743
2. Used cars, machinery or equipment shall not be sold, except as an
accessory use to a new car, machinery or equipment dealer
operating for such purpose from a principal or main building which
shall contain not less than 10,000 square feet of usable floor area.
3. Said uses may be located on separate lots within Raritan Township
pursuant to the provisions contained in this section.
4. The area devoted to outside display of new and used cars,
machinery or equipment shall not exceed the area of the principal
or main building, or 50% of the total lot area, whichever is greater.
All driveways, customer parking areas, display areas and vehicle
storage areas shall be paved with asphalt or similar surfaces. Farm
machinery and construction equipment agencies shall have all
driveways and customer parking areas paved with asphalt or
similar surfaces. Outdoor farm or construction equipment display,
service and temporary storage areas shall be paved, graveled or
mowed turfed surfaces as approved by the Planning Board. Cars,
machinery and construction equipment shall be kept at least 20
feet from the right-of-way and property lines, and shall be neatly
arranged in specified areas.
5. Display lighting shall be shielded and shall be so located and
maintained as not to constitute a hazard or nuisance to the
traveling public or to neighbors. In particular, so-called "stringlights"
shall not be permitted.
6. Where the use is situated adjacent to residentially used property,
adequate screening shall be provided along the property line as
provided by the Planning Board in individual cases.
7. Repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully enclosed
building, and no motor vehicle parts or inoperative motor vehicles
shall be stored outside. Farm and construction equipment agencies
may temporarily store inoperative vehicles outside when being
repaired in the agency's service facility, provided that the storage
area is screened and located as approved by the Planning Board.
F. Shopping Centers.
1. Such uses shall have a minimum lot area of 10 acres with primary
access to a state highway and secondary access to arterial or
connector streets as defined by the Township Master Plan.
2. Existing and proposed roads shall be capable of handling the traffic
in terms of access, capacity and safety.
3. All structures shall be set back at least 100 feet from all perimeter
tract lines and street rights-of-way, except if abutting a residential
district, the minimum setback shall be 200 feet from the zone line.
§ 16.68.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.68.060
1.01:744
4. No structure may be built higher than 45 feet, except that office
buildings may be constructed to a height of 60 feet, provided that
they are set back from the perimeter lot lines 200 feet plus one foot
for each foot in excess of 45 feet.
5. Parking shall be provided at the ratio of 4.5 vehicles per 1,000
square feet of gross building area for commercial usage and as
required by Chapter 16.70.
6. No more than 30% of the total tract area shall be occupied by
structures.
7. Permitted uses may include retail and service establishments,
office structures, movie theaters, auto service centers, commercial
recreation facilities, motels and restaurants located within the
main shopping center structures.
8. Shopping centers may be in multi-ownership, except that the
applicant must present evidence that the entire tract is under the
control and management of a single corporation or condominium
association.
9. Design of the shopping center shall be in keeping with a high level
of center design. If construction is undertaken in stages, each stage
must relate to each other functionally, architecturally and
aesthetically.
10. Such uses shall have at least 500 feet of continuous frontage on a
road with a pavement width of at least 36 feet or upgraded to 36
feet.
11. Public water and sewer shall be required.
G. Public and Private Schools, Child Care Centers, Houses of Worship,
Public Uses and Essential Services.
1. Public and private schools and child care centers in the R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-7, R-8 and R-9 zoning districts, shall be
permitted upon compliance with the following standards:
a. Consideration shall be given to minimize any adverse nuisance
characteristics resulting from recreation uses or utilization of
buildings for recreation, social or cultural activities.
b. For enrollments of one to 25 pupils, there shall be a minimum
lot area of 50,000 square feet for the first six pupils plus 3,500
square feet per pupil for the seventh succeeding pupils up to
and including the 25 pupil. For enrollments of more than 26
pupils, there shall be a minimum lot area of two acres for the
first 26 pupils plus 2,000 feet per pupil for the 27 and
succeeding pupil up to and including the 600 pupil plus 1,000
square feet of lot area for each pupil beyond 600.
§ 16.68.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.68.060
1.01:745
c. Any property so used shall front on an arterial or collector
street.
d. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as
required in this chapter. All parking areas shall be located at
least 25 feet from a street or property line, and at least 10 feet
from a building. Design for ingress and egress shall be
sufficient to ensure maximum safety of pupils and other
persons on the site.
e. Outdoor areas located near or adjacent to hazardous areas
determined by the Planning Board to be unsafe (such as, but
not limited to, streets, roads, driveways, parking lots, railroad
tracks, swimming pools, rivers, streams, steep grades, cliffs,
open pits, high-voltage boosters or propane gas tanks) shall be
fenced or otherwise protected by a natural or manmade barrier
or enclosure as required by the Planning Board.
f. All buildings shall be located at least 50 feet from a street, and
at least 25 feet from a side property line and 40 feet from a
rear property line.
2. Minimum lot areas for houses of worship shall be evaluated on an
individual basis and shall include consideration of geographic area
served, size of congregation, use of building for accessory functions
and potential impact on surrounding uses. Minimum lot size shall
be 50,000 square feet, with 150 feet of frontage.
3. Public uses shall include all facilities of the Township of Raritan, or
franchise thereof, County of Hunterdon, state of New Jersey, and
federal government or official agencies of these jurisdictions. These
facilities shall be encouraged to locate facilities in areas suitable
for these uses and to develop suitable site design standards to
minimize any adverse impact on adjacent surroundings by reason
of nuisance characteristics (noise, glare and pollution) or by traffic
or aesthetic considerations.
4. Essential services not specifically set forth in Section 16.64.010.B
shall require a conditional use permit.
Essential services shall be permitted in all zones on land with
sufficient area appropriate for the facility or service to be provided.
Consideration for existing or future adjacent abutting or
surrounding development shall be a key determinant in the
Planning Board's establishment of reasonable development
standards.
H. Farm Stands.
1. A farm stand is only permitted as an accessory use to a permitted
agricultural use. Sale of farm products shall be limited to seasonal
products of which at least 50% shall be grown on the premises and/
§ 16.68.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.68.060
1.01:746
or other farm parcel owned or cultivated by the farm stand
operator.
2. Farm stand structures shall not exceed 1,000 square feet in total
floor area.
3. The location of farm stands with relation to the public right-of-way
shall give due consideration to the safety of vehicles entering and
leaving the farmstand area.
I. Home Occupations.
1. A home occupation shall be carried on entirely within the principal
building by the inhabitants thereof and shall not exceed 25% of the
total gross floor area of the principal building.
2. No home occupation shall require exterior structural alterations of
an existing structure. The exterior design of new structures shall
reflect the principal residential use of the structure.
3. No home occupation shall permit the employment of more than two
employees who are not permanent residents of the principal
structure.
4. No commodity shall be sold on the premises in connection with
such use, and no display of products shall be visible from the street.
5. Only one home occupation shall be conducted upon the premises.
6. The minimum lot size shall be 80,000 square feet.
J. Home Business. Home businesses shall be permitted upon compliance
with the following standards:
1. The property shall meet existing lot requirements of Schedule I set
out in the Appendix following this Title.
2. A separate parking area for the business shall be provided in
accordance with Chapter 16.70.
3. A ground sign shall be limited to 25 square feet in area.
4. The business shall constitute either entirely, or partly, the means of
livelihood of the members of the household occupying the dwelling.
K. Camps.
1. Camps shall have a minimum lot area of 25 acres, and the physical
characteristics of the lot (topography, vegetation and water area)
shall be appropriate for the proposed use.
2. All camp structures and campsites shall be set back at least 200
feet from all lot lines.
3. The discharge of firearms shall be prohibited.
§ 16.68.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.68.060
1.01:747
4. Indoor showers and toilet facilities shall be provided.
L. Agricultural Research Facilities.
1. The minimum lot size shall be 150 acres.
2. All structures shall be set back at least 300 feet from all lot lines.
3. Not more than 5% of the lot shall be occupied by structures.
4. Such uses shall be permitted only in conjunction with an existing
agricultural use.
M. Helistops.
1. The helistop shall be set back at least 100 feet from any sidewalk,
street or other public area. The landing area shall not be closer
than 800 feet to any residential zone.
2. The minimum length of the landing area shall be 1 1/2 times the
length of the largest helicopter using facility. The width shall be
equal to the length of the landing area or sufficient to create a
minimum area of 1,500 square feet, whichever is greater.
3. The minimum obstruction clearance plane shall be a slope no
greater than eight to one computed on the ratio of eight horizontal
to one vertical measured from the perimeter of the landing area.
4. The minimum angle between approach and departure paths shall
be 135° measured from the perimeter of the landing area.
5. Fencing or other protection sufficient to provide for public safety
must be erected.
6. The helistop shall be provided with such fire protection equipment
as may be deemed necessary by the Planning Board, after
consultation with the Township Fire Department.
N. Group Homes.
1. The proposed area to be used for the intended purpose shall be at
least twice the minimum lot size for the zone.
2. The driveways or means of ingress and egress shall be adequate in
width to provide for two vehicles to pass each other and comply
with the standards for driveways in effect in the Township.
3. An improved parking area shall be provided at a standard of one
space for each staff person and one additional parking space for
each three persons for which a permit was secured.
4. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55-D-66.2, no more than 15 persons,
other than resident staff, shall be permitted to live in the residence.
§ 16.68.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.68.060
1.01:748
5. A buffer shall be supplied in accordance with Section 16.74.120,
where appropriate.
O. Gasoline Filling Stations and Public and Repair Garages.
1. Repair of motor vehicles shall be performed in a fully enclosed
building. No motor vehicle shall be offered for sale on the site, and
no motor vehicle parts or partially dismantled motor vehicles shall
be stored outside.
2. No vehicle parking shall be permitted on the site other than that for
customers and employees of the establishment.
3. Accessory goods for sale at gasoline filling stations may be
displayed out of doors on the pump island(s) and the building island
only. Such limited outdoor display may be on the above islands only
if contained within a suitable metal stand or rack. Tires shall be
stored only inside the principal building. Vending machines, if any,
shall be located within the principal building.
4. Any outdoor storage of waste materials shall be to the rear of the
principal building and fenced of a height of not less than six feet.
Such area shall not exceed 100 square feet and shall not be closer
than 20 feet to any right-of-way or lot line.
5. Floor drains shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer system. A
separate grease separation unit shall be installed.
6. Tanks and ancillary equipment including fuel pumps and
dispensers shall not be located within any freshwater wetlands and
their associated transition areas as determined and/or verified by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Floodplains, within 50 feet of any State Open Waters, 100 feet of
the top of the bank of an existing stream carrying water on an
average of six months of a year, and/or shown on a United States
Department of the Interior Geological Survey quadrangle, or within
300 feet of any Category One Waterway or tributary of a Category
One Waterway. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
P. Repealed. [Amended by Ord. 01-28]
Q. Accessory Apartments. [Amended by Ord. 08-18]
1. There shall be no more than one accessory apartment unit per
principal residential structure.
2. An accessory unit shall have a total floor area of at least 400 square
feet.
3. An accessory apartment shall be no larger than 1,000 square feet
and have no more than two bedrooms.
§ 16.68.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.68.060
1.01:749
4. Detached garages may not be converted in accordance with the
definition of "accessory apartment" and any application to create
an apartment in a detached garage or other detached structure
shall require a d(1) Variance.
5. Adequate provisions shall be made for water supply and disposal of
sewage. The on-site sewage disposal plan and well water
sufficiency and potability must be approved by the County Health
Department and/or the RTMUA.
6. Structures converted to include accessory units shall have 1 1/2
parking spaces per unit (a total of three parking spaces per
residential structure). Parking spaces shall be paved with suitable
materials; material used for new paving shall be consistent with the
original driveway.
7. The minimum lot size shall be a minimum of the lot size otherwise
required for the zone in which it is located. [Amended by Ord.
08-18]
R. Occupational, Vocational and Academic Training Center for
Handicapped Person.
1. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as
required in this chapter for the appropriate activity. Design of
ingress and egress shall be sufficient to ensure maximum safety of
pupils and persons on the site.
2. Such use shall comply with the area and bulk standards pertaining
to the B-3 zoning district.
3. As part of the site utilization, consideration shall be given to
minimize any adverse operational characteristics resulting from
outdoor activities, such as recreation uses or utilization of buildings
for educational activities.
4. Such services shall be provided by a nonprofit organization which
services may also include the training of unemployed persons
provided all applicable provisions and standards of this chapter are
complied with.
5. The Planning Board review of the activities proposed on the site
shall find that such activities are directly related and necessary to
the occupational, vocational and educational services of such
training center.
S. ECHO Unit.
1. An ECHO unit shall only be located upon a lot upon which a singlefamily
dwelling is located and only one ECHO unit shall be
permitted per lot.
§ 16.68.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.68.060
1.01:750
2. The minimum lot size upon which an ECHO unit is to be located
shall be as follows:
Lot Served by Septic System
a. R-1 district 261,360 square feet
b. R-1A district 80,000 square feet
c. R-2 district 75,000 square feet
d. R-3 district 50,000 square feet
e. R-4 district 40,000 square feet
f. R-6 district 40,000 square feet
The minimum lot size for a lot served by and connected to the
sanitary sewer system upon which an ECHO unit is to be located
shall be 40,000 square feet in the R-3 and R-6 zoning districts only.
An ECHO unit to be located on a lot in the R-1, R-1A, and R-4
districts to be served by sanitary sewer shall meet the minimum
lot size for a lot served by a septic system.
3. The ECHO housing unit shall comply with the required setbacks
applying to the principal structure and in addition shall not be
located closer than the principal structure to any front lot line and
most preferably shall be located to the rear of the rear line of the
principal structure. Such ECHO unit may be attached to the
principal residential dwelling on the premises. If such unit is not
attached to the principal dwelling on the premises it shall be
separated from such dwelling by at least 30 feet.
4. The ECHO housing unit shall be positioned on the lot in such a way
as to minimize its visibility from other nearby and abutting lots. The
Municipal Agency may require screening to accomplish this
condition.
5. The ECHO unit is to contain a bathroom, kitchen, living and
sleeping facilities.
6. If the ECHO unit is to be occupied by only one occupant who is a
relative by blood, marriage or adoption of the owner/occupant of
the primary residence on the site, a second occupant can only be a
care giver to the ECHO unit resident. Such care giver must vacate
the ECHO unit when the ECHO unit occupant related to the owner/
occupant of the primary residence vacates the ECHO housing unit.
7. Proof of approval by the Board of Health of well and septic systems
must be submitted to the Municipal Agency.
8. The applicant shall be responsible for preparing the site for
installation of the ECHO unit.
§ 16.68.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.68.060
1.01:751
9. The exterior of the ECHO housing unit shall be covered with
material and color that compliments the facade of the primary
residence on the lot.
10. The ECHO unit shall be a unit which is self-contained, barrier free,
energy efficient, capable of being moved to another site but which
is to be located on a foundation. An ECHO unit shall comply with
the definition of "dwelling."
11. The ECHO unit shall be removed from the premises upon the death
of permanent change of address of the original occupants. This
removal shall take place within 90 days of the earlier of the events.
To facilitate this requirement, the unit shall be part of an ECHO
housing unit program sponsored by the Township or other
governmental unit or agency or the Municipal Agency shall be
satisfied that adequate provisions have been made guaranteeing
the removal of the ECHO unit at the term of the subject occupancy.
The lot shall be restored by the owner of the premises to the status
prior to the installation of the unit.
T. Low Intensity Highway Oriented Conditional Uses - NJSH-12. Within
the area designated as low intensity highway oriented conditional uses -
NJSH-12 in the R-3 zoning district as shown on the map entitled "Low
Intensity Highway Oriented Conditional Uses - NJSH-12," dated July 16,
1998, which map is made a part of this chapter by reference, the
following uses may be permitted as conditional uses subject to the
specific standards as set forth.
1. The uses permitted in the area designated for low intensity
highway oriented conditional uses - NJSH-12 shall be as follows:
a. Nursing home, assisted living facility;
b. Retail uses, medical offices and/or medical clinics which in
total gross floor area of the building or buildings housing such
retail uses, medical offices or medical clinics shall not exceed
16,000 square feet;
c. Customary accessory uses to Subsection T.1.a. or T.1.b.
2. Such uses shall be served by sanitary sewers and evidence of a
capacity reservation shall be submitted with an application for
development.
3. If water supply from a well or wells is to be used as a source, a well
test report indicating that an adequate supply for consumption is
available, without adversely affecting other existing wells in the
area, shall be submitted. Such report shall be prepared and signed
by a geologist or hydro geologist.
In addition, a report shall be submitted by the applicant proving
an adequacy of water for fire fighting. The adequacy of water for
§ 16.68.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.68.060
1.01:752
fire fighting shall be approved by the Township Fire Marshal and
Fire Chief either prior to or as a condition of any development plan
approval.
4. No building proposed to be used as an assisted living facility and/or
nursing home, retail use, medical offices or medical clinics or
loading area accessory thereto, shall be located within 100 feet of
an adjacent property used for residential purposes, which property
exists on the Tax Map of the Township, last revised 1-1-1998, and
no parking area, access and/or drive shall be located within 50 feet
of an adjacent property used for residential purposes which
property exists on the Tax Map of the Township last revised
1-1-1998, nor shall any parking area or loading area be located
within 100 feet of Route 12.
5. Buffer Strips. All lots or parts of lots which are to be developed with
uses permitted as conditional uses in the area designated as low
intensity highway oriented conditional uses - NJSH-12, whose side
or rear lot lines abut a residential use or are adjacent to a
residential zone shall be screened from said residential use or zone
by landscaped buffer strips or other such screening as may be
approved by the Planning Board. A buffer composed of natural
material shall preferably be provided. Such buffer shall be of
sufficient depth to form a year-round screen. The natural buffer
may be required to be supplemented with evergreens where
necessary to form a year-round screen. Where a natural buffer is
considered by the Planning Board as impracticable or
inappropriate a landscaped buffer may be provided and shall
consist of a minimum of two staggered rows of evergreens at least
six feet in height at time of planting. The Planning Board may allow
a fence to supplement the evergreens.
6. A nursing home and/or assisted living facility shall be located on
lots meeting the following requirements:
Size of Facility
(Number of Beds)
Minimum Site Area
(Acres)
30 or less 5
31 to 50 10
51 to 100 12
Each additional 50 2
7. A nursing home and/or assisted living facility, retail use, medical
office or medical clinic shall not have access from any residential
street, but shall have direct access from a collector or major
collector street, county road or state highway.
8. The maximum height of structures shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories. In
no such case shall such 2 1/2 stories exceed a height of 35 feet.
§ 16.68.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.68.060
1.01:753
9. The minimum front, rear, and side yards for principal and accessory
structures to be used for nursing home, assisted living facility retail
use, medical offices or medical clinic use shall be as follows:
a. Front yard: 100 feet;
b. Side yard (each): 50 feet;
c. Rear yard: 100 feet.
10. Signs shall be limited to one ground sign not exceeding 32 square
feet in area per lot and a wall sign or signs which in total area shall
not exceed 5% of the building facade which contains the main
entrance to the building or 100 square feet whichever is lessor.
11. Low and Moderate Income Units Required. Nursing home and
assisted living facilities shall be required to provide units
affordable to low and moderate income persons and households at
the rate of at least 10% of the number of bedrooms to be
constructed.
12. Off-street parking shall be provided for a nursing home at the rate
of one space per each bed and for an assisted living facility at the
rate of 1/2 of one space for each unit.
13. Off-street parking and off-street loading shall be provided at the
rate required by the Land Development Code of the Township for
retail, medical office and medical clinic uses.
14. The maximum hard surface coverage for any site containing a use
or uses set forth as permitted conditional uses in the area
designated as low intensity highway oriented conditional uses -
NJSH-12 shall not exceed 30%.
15. No lot in the area designated as low intensity highway oriented
conditional use - NJSH-12, to be used for retail use and/or medical
office and/or medical clinic shall be located within 1,500 feet of a
lot in the area designated as low intensity conditional uses -
NJSH-12 used for retail use and/or medical office and/or medical
clinic.
U. Seasonal Sales Areas.
1. The seasonal sales shall be accessory to a use already conducted on
the site.
2. The sales shall not exceed a period of six months per calendar year.
3. No additional signage is permitted.
4. The area shall be designated on an approved site plan.
5. If the seasonal sales area is to be located on area designed and
approved for use as parking, the Planning Board may determine at
§ 16.68.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.68.060
1.01:754
any time that the area shall be converted back to its primary use
as a parking area if the parking demand of the property requires it.
[Amended by Ord. 2017-14]
V. School Bus Depots.
1. Minimum lot size of 10 acres.
2. All vehicles must be parked on permanently paved and marked
areas.
3. Any work conducted on vehicles must be done indoors.
4. Safe and efficient access and routing to and from the facility must
be provided.
5. No motor vehicle parts or partially dismantled motor vehicles shall
be stored outside.
6. Any outdoor storage of waste materials shall be to the rear of the
principal building and fenced at a height of not less than six feet.
Such area shall not exceed 100 square feet and shall not be closer
than 20 feet to any right of way line or lot line. No outdoor storage
of tires shall take place.
7. Floor drains shall not be directly connected to the sanitary sewer
system. A separate grease and oil separation unit shall be installed.
8. No unregistered or immobilized vehicles may be stored, parked or
otherwise maintained on the site for a period greater than six
months.
9. No passengers may be picked up or dropped off at the site.
W. Assisted Living Facilities. [Amended by Ord. 10-7]
1. Such facilities shall be located on property within 1,500 feet of the
Hospital Zone.
2. Such facilities shall have area and bulk requirements as follows:
a. Minimum lot area shall be 10 acres.
b. Minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
c. Minimum front yard setback shall be 75 feet.
d. Minimum side yard setback shall be 20 feet - (50 feet for both).
e. Minimum rear yard setback shall be 20 feet.
f. Maximum building height shall be 50 feet or three stories.
g. Maximum hard surface coverage shall be 55%.
§ 16.68.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.68.060
1.01:755
Chapter 16.70
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 16.70.010. Required. [Prior code § 15-9.35; amended by Ord.
06-11]
In all zones, in connection with every business, institution, recreational,
residential, manufacturing, research laboratory, public building, hospital,
3. If a lot does not abut a street, the Planning Board may determine
which lines are the front yard, side yard and rear yard provided
that there is adequate access for fire fighting equipment,
ambulances and other emergency vehicles necessary to protect the
health and safety and that will protect any future street layout
shown on the official map or on a general circulation plan element
of the municipal Master Plan (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36).
4. Maximum density shall be 12 units per acre.
5. Permitted number of beds shall meet the following requirements:
Size of Facility
(Number of Beds)
Minimum Site Area
(acres)
50 to 100 10
100 to 150 12
Each additional 50 2
6. Affordable housing obligations in place at the time of adoption of
this Subsection 16.68.060W (Ordinance No. 10-7) may be satisfied
by the payment of the required fee, by the deed restriction of units
or beds or a combination of payments and deed restriction of units
or beds. The number of units or beds so deed restricted will be
dependent upon eligible and required Medicaid units at the time of
completion of any said project. It is specifically the intent of this
Subsection W to require compliance with the regulations in effect
at the time of adoption of this Subsection W, in terms of number of
units required, unless this Subsection W (Ordinance No. 10-7) is
specifically amended to change this subsection.
7. Separate parking garages and/or parking beneath the structures
shall be permitted, subject to height limitations.
8. Public water and sewer shall be required.
9. A landscaped buffer as required in the performance standards
section of the Land Development Code shall be provided along the
perimeter of each site where deemed necessary and appropriate by
the Board.
§ 16.68.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.70.010
1.01:756
house of worship, or any other use, these shall be provided at the time any
building or structure is erected, enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street
parking spaces and loading and unloading areas in accordance with Section
16.20.040 and with the design standards for site plan review. Such facilities
shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The
standards in Section 16.70.020 shall not apply to single-family houses.
§ 16.70.020. Standards for Off-Street Parking Areas. [Prior code
§ 15-9.36; amended by Ord. 87-27; Ord. 06-11]
A. Size. Each off-street parking space shall measure not less than nine feet
by 18 feet, exclusive of access drives and aisles, except that parallel
curb parking spaces shall be eight feet by 23 feet. In areas which have
head-on parking other than 90°, the width of the space shall be not less
than nine feet measured at right angles to the parking lines, and these
lines shall extend to a point measuring 18 feet at right angles to the
curb or edge of the pavement. Except in the case of single-family
dwellings, no parking areas provided hereunder shall be established for
less than four spaces. The approving authority may alter the size of
parking spaces in length and width and the aisle width to allow for the
overhang of curbing, small cars, etc., where such adjustments are
appropriate to the intended use and traffic volume.
B. Access Aisles and Driveways.
1. Different Zone. No access drive, driveway, pathway or any other
means of egress or ingress shall be located in any residential zone
to provide access to uses other than those permitted in such
residential zone.
2. Aisle Widths. Aisles from which vehicles directly enter or leave
parking spaces shall not be less than:
a. Twenty-five feet wide for perpendicular parking;
b. Eighteen feet wide for 60° angle parking.
c. Fourteen feet wide for 30° and 45° angle parking.
C. General Standards for Parking Areas.
1. Design. Parking areas and access to parking areas shall be planned
and designed in accordance with accepted engineering parking
design principals such as those contained in Transportation and
Land Development, Institute of Transportation Engineers, 2nd
Edition, except as modified by requirements contained herein and
the design standards for site plan review of the site plan
regulations in Section 16.20.040.
2. Review. All plans shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer and
his or her recommendations shall be forwarded to the Planning
§ 16.70.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.70.020
1.01:757
Board for its review pursuant to the regulations and procedures
governing site plan review.
3. Landscaping and Drainage. Parking areas shall be landscaped in
accordance with the design standards for site plan review to
minimize nuisance characteristics to adjacent properties and for
aesthetic reasons. They shall be drained and paved in accordance
with good engineering and construction practices as required by
the Township Engineer and Township specifications.
4. Markings and Access. Parking spaces, driveways and aisles shall be
clearly marked and delineated. For safety, fire-fighting purposes,
and efficiency direct through vehicular and pedestrian access for
emergency services and for the general public between adjacent
parking areas shall be provided.
D. Joint Provision of and Sharing of Parking Facilities. Any two or more
nonresidential uses may collectively provide the required off-street
parking spaces, provided that the total of such parking facilities shall
equal the sum of the spaces required for each participating use. Where
the Planning Board determines that the proposed location and
operation of the facilities and uses is such that the parking facilities
may be shared, then the parking may be provided in an amount to be
determined by the Planning Board based on the planned peak usage of
that use or structure which requires the highest number of spaces as
required by this chapter (i.e. if there is a development of two retail uses
that have peak usage times that differ substantially enough to
permitted shared parking then parking need only be required for that
peak parking period.)
E. Location of Parking Facilities.
1. Separate Lot. Parking facilities shall be located on the same lot as
the principal structure, except if space for the required off-street
parking is not available on the same lot, off-street parking may be
provided within 1,400 feet of the entrance of the use or structure,
provided that a legal agreement ensuring that the parking will be
available shall be approved by the Planning Board Attorney.
2. Parking in Rear. Whenever parking is provided in the rear of any
nonresidential structure or use, suitable rear entrance to the
structure or use shall be provided.
3. Parking Adjacent to Residence Zone. Where a nonresidential zone
abuts a residence zone, no parking spaces shall be located closer
than 25 feet from the residence zone line, and no driveway shall be
located closer than 15 feet to the residence zone line. For
additional site plan standards related to buffering from residential
and other properties see Section 16.20.040.
§ 16.70.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.70.030
1.01:758
§ 16.70.030. Off-Street Loading and Unloading. [Prior code
§ 15-9.37; amended by Ord. 06-11]
All nonresidential uses shall have provisions for off-street loading and
unloading in accordance with Section 16.20.040. Such plans shall be
reviewed by the Township Engineer, and his or her recommendations shall
be forwarded to the Planning Board for its review under the design
standards for site plan review.
§ 16.70.040. Minimum Required Off-Street Parking. [Amended by
Ord. 06-11; Ord. 06-21]
It is the intent to require that all uses provide for adequate off-street
parking for employees, clients and visitors. The following standards are
expected to meet this objective. In the event that evidence is presented
that a particular use or establishment will require more off-street parking
spaces than are required by this Title, the Planning Board may require that
additional off-street spaces be provided.
A. In the event that the number of required parking spaces results in a
fraction of a space, one more parking space shall be provided.
B. Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided as required by the New
Jersey Administrative Code.
C. In the event of a mixed use, the required off-street parking shall be the
sum of the required off-street parking for each use. A mixed use is two
or more independent and/or distinct uses in the same or separate
structures, not the separate portions of any individual use. (i.e. a
manufacturing use will also contain warehousing and office space, but
the parking calculation shall be based on the gross floor area using the
manufacturing standard).
D. If an applicant can demonstrate, or the Planning Board determines, that
a particular use does not require all the required off-street parking at
the time of approval, the Planning Board may authorize up to 25% of
the required off-street parking to be landscaped and maintained as a
parking reserve or banked parking. Such parking reserve shall be
converted into parking (paved and in full conformance with this Title) at
such time as the Planning Board determines that the need exists. The
area to be reserved shall be fully designed at the time of site plan
approval. Any area reserved shall be counted as hard surface for the
purposes of storm water management computations and for
calculations in relation to hard surface coverage restrictions.
E. Vehicle Storage. Recognizing the difference between areas used for the
long-term storage of vehicles either for sale, for rent, for repair, or
other use the following standards shall supplement those standards
found elsewhere in this section and those standards for parking lot
design, landscaping and lighting.
§ 16.70.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.70.040
1.01:759
1. Stacking of cars two deep is permitted. Parking spaces may
measure 8.5 feet by 36 feet.
2. No storage of vehicles shall be permitted along access aisles. All
access aisles shall be kept free and clear to permit emergency
vehicle access.
3. Any vehicle storage area used for the storage of new and/or used
vehicles shall provide an area for the loading and unloading of
vehicles from car transport trailers.
4. All storage of vehicles shall take place on paved surfaces in marked
spaces.
5. Any storage area shall be appropriately screened from adjacent
properties and from any public roadway. See Section 16.20.040 for
additional screening, fencing and/or buffer requirements.
6. Storage areas should be delineated on the site plans and shall be
separate and apart from parking and display areas.
7. Lighting for storage, display and parking are different. See Section
16.20.040 for lighting guidelines.
F. Required Spaces by Use. In cases of uses not specifically mentioned in
the following schedule, the Planning Board shall determine the number
of spaces required, through review of testimony from the applicant,
review of recognized parking standards, review of similar standards
contained herein, and through field investigations of similar uses.
Uses
Minimum Number of Required
Spaces
1. Assembly hall 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet or 1 for
every 3 seats (1)
2. Athletic Club 6 spaces per 1,000 square feet
3. Auditorium Same as assembly hall
4. Auto Dealer 1 space per employee plus 3 per 1,000
square feet of showroom space plus 4
per service bay. This does not include
any area designated as vehicle storage
or display.
4. Bank 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
5. Bowling alley 5.5 per lane
6. Car wash 1 space per employee, plus 1 per selfservice
station, plus 10 stacking spaces
7. Carpet Store 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
§ 16.70.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.70.040
1.01:760
Uses
Minimum Number of Required
Spaces
8. Child Care/Day Care 0.25 spaces per student, plus 1 drop-off
space per 6 students, to be adjusted
based on arrival patterns
9. Club, lodge or fraternal
organization
20 spaces plus 5 spaces per 1,000
square feet of floor space
10. College 1 space for every 2 students
11. Community center Same as assembly hall
12. Convenience Store 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
13. Farm Stands 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet, or 8
spaces whichever is greater
14. Funeral Home or
Mortuary
10 spaces plus 20 spaces per 1,000
square feet
15. Furniture Store 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
16. Gas Station 1 space per employee
17. Gas Station &
Convenience Store
1 space per employee plus 4 per 1,000
square feet of store
18. Golf Course 12 spaces per hole
19. Grade School 2 spaces per classroom
20. High School or prep
school
0.25 spaces per student over driving
age, plus 1 per employee
21. Hospital 5 spaces per bed
22. House of Worship 1 space for every 3 seats, or 1 for every
3 feet of seating spaces where benches
are used
23. Manufacturing 1 space per employee on maximum shift
or 1 per 800 square feet whichever is
greater (2)
24. Miniature Golf or
Driving Range
1 space per 3 persons of facility capacity
plus 1 per employee
25. Motel or Hotel 1.25 spaces per room
26. Museum 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet
27. Nursing Home 1 space per bed
28. Office, general 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
29. Office, home occupation 4 spaces plus 5 spaces per 1,000 square
feet
30. Office, medical 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
§ 16.70.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.70.040
1.01:761
Uses
Minimum Number of Required
Spaces
31. Research of laboratory
use
1 space per employee plus 10% visitor
space
32. Residences, including
single family, multifamily,
age restricted,
and assisted living
The standards of N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14 small
govern
33. Restaurant, Fast Food 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet
34. Restaurant, Sit Down 1 space for every 2 seats or 16 spaces
per 1,000 square feet whichever is
greater (1)
35. Retail Store 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
36. Supermarket 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
37. Theater 1 space for every 3 seats
38. Vehicle repair 4 spaces per service bay plus 1 per
employee
39.Warehouse 1 space per 2,000 square feet or 1 per
employee whichever is greater
40. Wholesale 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet
41. Industrial Park/Flex
Space
2 spaces per 1,000 square feet or 1.5
per employee whichever is greater
42. Mini-warehouses 1 space per 6,000 square feet
43. Discount Club 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Notes:
(1) Notwithstanding the above an eating and drinking establishment
containing a seating capacity of less than 50 seats may be
established in a retail development containing a gross floor area of
not less than 15,000 square feet meeting the following conditions:
a. Seventy-five percent of the gross floor area of such retail
development shall be devoted to retail stores and shops and
service establishments (not including restaurants, eating and
drinking places and office use); and
b. Such retail development shall provide off-street parking in the
amount of at least one space per each 250 square feet of gross
floor area; and
§ 16.70.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.70.040
1.01:762
Chapter 16.71
CO-LOCATION, REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT OF WIRELESS
ANTENNAS ON EXISTING FACILITIES
§ 16.71.010. Purpose. [Adopted 5-21-2019 by Ord. No. 19-08]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide requirements for eligible facilities
requests for modifications to existing towers or base stations that do not
constitute a substantial change.
§ 16.71.020. Application; Review; Remedies. [Adopted 5-21-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-08]
c. All eating and drinking establishments within such retail
development shall not exceed the rate of one seat for each
150 square feet of gross floor area; but in no case shall the
seating capacity of all eating and drinking establishments in
one retail development exceed 250 seats when the required offstreet
parking for such is based upon one off-street parking
space per each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
(2) Missing.
A. Application. All applicants shall submit the information necessary for
the Township to consider whether an application is an eligible facilities
request, as set forth in Section 16.71.030. The applicant will not be
required to demonstrate a need or business case for the proposed
modification.
B. Type of Review. Upon receipt of an application for an eligible facilities
request pursuant to this chapter, the Township Engineer shall review
such application to determine whether the application so qualifies.
C. Time Frame for Review. Within 60 days of the date on which an
applicant submits an application seeking approval under this chapter,
the Township Engineer shall approve the application with or without
conditions unless the Township Engineer determines that the
application is not covered by this chapter, in which case the Township
Engineer shall deny the application.
D. Tolling of the Time Frame for Review. The sixty-day review period
begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled only by
mutual agreement by the Township of Raritan and the applicant, or in
cases where the Township Engineer determines that the application is
incomplete.
1. To toll the time frame for incompleteness, the Township Engineer
must provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of
receipt of the application, specifically delineating all missing
documents or information required in the application.
§ 16.70.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.71.020
1.01:763
§ 16.71.030. Eligible Facilities Request Application Requirements.
[Adopted 5-21-2019 by Ord. No. 19-08]
An eligible facilities request application shall include the following:
2. The time frame for review begins running again when the applicant
makes a supplemental submission in response to the Township
Engineer's notice of incompleteness.
3. Following a supplemental submission, the Township Engineer will
notify the applicant within 10 days that the supplemental
submission did not provide the information identified in the original
notice delineating missing information. The time frame is tolled in
the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the
procedures identified in this section. Second or subsequent notices
of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or
information that were not delineated in the original notice of
incompleteness.
E. Not a Covered Request. If the Township Engineer determines that the
applicant's request for collocation is a "substantial change" to
collocation on an existing structure, as defined in this Title, the
presumptively reasonable time frame, as prescribed by the Federal
Communications Commission's shot clock order, will begin to run from
the issuance of the Township Engineer's decision that the application is
not a covered request. To the extent such information is necessary, the
Township Engineer may request additional information from the
applicant to evaluate the application. When the Township Engineer
determines that such an application constitutes a substantial change,
applicable portions of this chapter and the Raritan Township
Ordinances must be complied with, including but not limited to the
requirement for site plan review and application for variances.
F. Failure to Act. In the event the Township Engineer fails to approve or
deny a request seeking approval under this chapter within the time
frame for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be
deemed granted. The deemed grant does not become effective until the
applicant notifies the Township of Raritan in writing after the review
period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the application has
been deemed granted.
G. Remedies. Applicants and the Township of Raritan or its agents may
bring claims related to this chapter to any court of competent
jurisdiction.
A. The applicant's certification that they have the legal authority to
collocate/modify a support structure which may include approvals from
the jurisdiction authorizing the initial placement of transmission
equipment on the tower or other structure.
B. The identity of the owner of the parcel.
§ 16.71.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.71.030
1.01:764
Chapter 16.72
SIGNS
§ 16.72.010. Intent. [Prior code § 15-9.39]
It is the intent of these regulations to:
C. Detailed site information. Except where the facility will be located
entirely within an existing structure or an existing building, detailed
site plan information shall show:
1. Existing and proposed improvements. The location and dimensions
of the existing facility and the maximum height above ground of the
facility (also identified in height above sea level).
2. Elevation. The benchmarks and datum used for elevations.
3. Design. The design of the facility, including the specific type of
support structure and the design, type, location, size, height and
configuration of the applicant's existing and proposed antennas
and other equipment. The method(s) by which the antennas will be
attached to the mounting structure shall be depicted. (Note shall
be placed on all plans that the antennas, fasteners, frames, cables,
brackets and miscellaneous equipment shall be painted as directed
by the Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer.)
4. Structural analysis.
5. Setbacks. All existing setbacks.
6. Location of accessways. The location of all existing accessways and
the location and design of all proposed accessways.
7. Any existing/proposed landscaping, screening and buffering.
8. A Knox-Box® and/or knox padlock for emergency services shall be
shown on the plans and provided.
9. Latest TIA inspection report.
D. All applications for cellular towers, including collocation and eligible
facilities requests, shall comply with any and all general applicable
building, structural, electrical, and safety codes, as well as any others
deemed by the Township Engineer to be related to health and safety.
E. As-built plans for all approved plans shall be provided post
construction.
A. Control the size, location, character and other pertinent features of all
exterior on premises signs (street graphics);
B. Promote signs (street graphics) which are:
§ 16.71.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.72.010
1.01:765
§ 16.72.020. Permit Procedures. [Prior code § 15-9.40; amended by
Ord. 98-50]
1. Compatible with surroundings and expressive of the identity of
individual proprietors and of the character of the community,
2. Orderly, readable and appropriate to the activity to which they
pertain,
3. Nondistracting to motorists so as not to contribute to traffic
accidents,
4. Safe from hazard,
5. Aesthetically pleasing.
A. Permits Required. No signs shall be erected, structurally altered, or
moved without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this
section. A permit shall not be required for the following signs provided
that they meet the requirements of Section 16.72.040, and provided
that each meets the stated additional requirements.
1. Signs of a public, noncommercial nature, including safety signs,
"no trespassing" signs, signs indicating scenic or historic points of
interest, and signs for philanthropic, fraternal or religious
organizations;
2. Memorial signs and tablets: nonilluminated memorial signs or
tablets indicating the name of a building or date of erection, not
exceeding two square feet in surface area which are part of the
building construction or are attached as wall signs;
3. Nameplates and identification signs less than two square feet and
nonilluminated or shielded (illuminated not to exceed 75 watts)
nameplate;
4. Seasonal Decorations. Seasonal decorations shall be permitted for
display purposes on public or private property provided that such
decorations are safely maintained. When on municipal property,
approval of the Township Committee is required;
5. Grave markers;
6. Private "no-trespassing" and "no-hunting" signs placed on private
property shall be permitted, provided that each sign does not
exceed one square foot;
7. (Reserved)34
8. Garage sale signs, when in accordance with Section
16.72.050.A.1.f.;
34.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A.7, regarding temporary signs, grand opening banners
and celebration bunting, was repealed 3-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04.
§ 16.72.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.72.020
1.01:766
§ 16.72.030. Prohibited Signs. [Prior code § 15-9.41; amended by
Ord. 92-4]
No sign shall be constructed, reconstructed, erected or maintained which:
9. Directional signs pursuant to Section 16.72.070.C.6.;
10. Directory signs erected as part of a municipally sponsored
program, location and size approved by the Municipal Planner;
11. Political signs.
B. Permit Applications. A sign permit may be obtained upon application to
the Construction Official and, where applicable, the advertiser shall
obtain a permit from the New Jersey Department of Transportation,
outdoor advertising section for graphics adjacent to interstate and
federal aid primary highways. The advertiser shall be responsible for
obtaining the permit.
C. Information to be Submitted as Part of Sign Application.
1. Completed sign application form, including authorization signature
of owner;
2. Drawings, information, specifications, etc., as set forth on the sign
application form;
3. Application fee.
A. Bears or contains statements, words or pictures of an obscene, indecent
or immoral character which will offend public morals or decency;
B. Purports to be, or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic sign
or signal, or which bears the words "stop," "go slow," "caution,"
"danger," "warning," or similar words other than those contained in the
name of the business;
C. By reason of its size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner
of illumination may be confused with or construed as a traffic control
device, or which hides from view any traffic or street sign or signal;
D. Advertises or publicizes an activity, business, product, real estate or
service not conducted on the premises upon which such sign is
maintained,
E. Is in any way animated, except time and temperature devices; emits
smoke, visible vapor, particles, sound or odor;
F. Is located in a public right-of-way or approved sight easement (if sign is
taller than 30 inches), except those owned and operated by a duly
constituted governmental agency as a traffic control or warning sign;
§ 16.72.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.72.030
1.01:767
§ 16.72.040. General Sign Requirements. [Prior code § 15-9.42]
G. Consists of banners, pennants (except banners or pennants permitted
in Section 16.72.070.D, ribbons, streamers, strings of light bulbs
(except seasonal decorations) and spinners;
H. Is portable or temporary, except as permitted in Section 16.72.070.D, is
fixed on a movable stand; is self-supporting without being permanently
embedded in the ground; is supported by other objects; is mounted on
wheels or a movable vehicle or is made easily movable in any other
manner;
I. Is located (painted, affixed, etc.,) on a water tower, storage tank,
smokestack, utility pole or other similar structure;
J. Is located (painted, stapled, affixed, etc.,) on trees, rocks or other
natural features, or on fences, dividing walls or other accessory
structures unless it is a directional sign;
K. Is placed above the eaves of a building or structure or on a flat roof;
[Amended by Ord. 04-20]
L. Projecting signs, except as utilized as residential nameplate and
identification signs pursuant to Section 16.72.050.A.1.a.
A. Conformance with Construction Code. All signs shall conform to the
requirement of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
B. Maintenance. All signs, including official signs, together with all their
supports, braces, hooks, guys and anchors, shall be of substantial and
sturdy construction, shall be kept in good repair, and shall be painted or
cleaned as often as necessary to maintain a clean, neat, legible, safe
and orderly appearance. All lighting elements shall be kept in good
working order when lighting is provided.
The area surrounding ground signs shall be kept neat, clean and
landscaped. The owner of the property, or his designee, upon which
the ground sign is located shall be responsible for maintaining the
condition of the area.
C. Obstruction to Doors, Windows or Fire Escapes. No sign shall be
erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent ingress or egress
from any door, window or fire escape. No sign, other than warning
signs, shall be attached to a fire escape or standpipe.
D. Obstruction of Architectural Features. No sign shall be erected,
relocated or maintained in such a manner as to cover or intrude upon
any architectural features of a building, such as windows, columns,
moldings, railings or any major decoration or structural feature.
E. Graphics Not to Constitute Traffic Hazards. In order to secure and
maintain reasonable traffic safety, no sign shall be erected or
maintained in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision or
§ 16.72.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.72.040
1.01:768
distract the attention of the driver of any vehicle by reason of the
position, shape, color, reflection, illumination, etc., thereof.
F. Lighting of Signs. Indirect or interior lighting may be used to illuminate
any sign, provided that the source of light shall concentrate the
illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the
street or adjacent property.
G. Unsafe Signs. Whenever a sign shall become structurally unsafe or
endanger the safety of the building or the public, the Construction
Official shall order such sign to be made safe or removed. Such order
shall be complied with within 10 days of the receipt thereof by the
person owning or using the sign or by the owner of the building or
premises on which such unsafe sign is affixed or erected.
H. Nonconforming Sign. Any lawful nonconforming permanent sign which
existed on the date of this code may be continued and, except as
provided in Subsection I of this section, may be restored whenever it is
damaged in any manner whatsoever.
I. Removal of Damaged Signs. Any sign damaged, destroyed or
deteriorated in any manner whatsoever to the extent of more than 75%
of its replacement value shall be removed or alternatively
reconstructed in accordance with the provisions of this revision and
thereafter utilized only in such a manner as to conform to all provision
of this Township Code.
J. Removal of Derelict Signs. Any location where business goods are no
longer sold or produced or where services are no longer provided shall
have 90 days to entirely remove any remaining or derelict on-premises
signs following notification by the Township and at the expense of the
owner of such property. Where due written notification has been given
by the Township and compliance has not been made within the required
ninety-day period, the Township may cause removal of such sign, with
the cost for such removal to be attached to the property.
K. Measurement of Gross Advertising Area of a Sign. The entire square
footage of the space within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the
extreme limits of such sign, and in no case passing through or between
any adjacent elements of the same. However, such perimeter shall not
include any structural or framing elements lying outside the limits of
such sign and not forming an integral part of the display.
Cutout letters or numbers supported independently on a wall shall
be measured by the smallest rectangle which encompasses the entire
letter. Ground, hanging and window signs which have no background
shall be measured by the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of
the lettering, illustration or total display, exclusive of any supporting
members used solely for such purpose. Ground signs consisting of
opaque or translucent backgrounds and having cutout letters mounted
on them shall be measured by the outside dimensions of the
background.
§ 16.72.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.72.040
1.01:769
§ 16.72.050. Permitted Signs by Zone District. [Prior code
§ 15-9.42; amended by Ord. 87-27]
Ground signs carrying the same message on two sides shall be
considered a single sign, provided that the two sides are parallel and of
the same size.
Ground signs with four sides are permitted, provided that parallel sides
carry the same message. Two sides may contain a message, and the
opposite two sides may contain a logo. The total square footage of all
four sides shall not be greater than twice the permitted square footage
of a single ground sign, and each side may not be greater than that
permitted for a single ground sign.
L. All street graphics shall, in addition to complying with this revision,
comply with all appropriate county, state and federal regulations.
Should any County, State or Federal Regulations be applicable, said
regulations shall apply in lieu of this revision to the extent that such
regulations are more restrictive.
A. Residential Zones.
1. Single-Family Attached and Detached Dwellings.
a. Nameplate and Identification Sign. A sign of any type
indicating the name or address of the occupant may be
permitted, provided that the sign shall be no larger than two
square feet. A permitted home occupation may be included
with the name of the occupant. Only one sign per dwelling unit
is permitted in addition to a mailbox identification sign.
b. Multifamily Developments. One ground sign, not to exceed 32
square feet, may be erected at the primary entrance to an
apartment complex.
c. Farms. In addition to a nameplate and identification sign
meeting the requirements of Subsection A.1.a. of this
subsection, one additional sign (ground sign) not to exceed 15
square feet may be erected at the entrance of an active farm.
The existence of a farm stand shall not permit any additional
signs over that for a farm, except that the permitted 15 square
feet of sign area may be a wall or roof sign rather than a
ground sign.
d. Planned Residential Developments. Ground signs not to exceed
32 square feet each may be placed at the primary entrances to
PRD's in locations approved by the Planning Board. A sign plan
for the entire development shall be submitted in accordance
with the criteria set forth in Subsection C.4. of this section.
Commercial uses within a PRD shall be regulated pursuant to
Section 16.72.070.B.
§ 16.72.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.72.050
1.01:770
e. Residential Subdivisions. One ground sign of a permanent
nature and not exceeding 32 square feet may be erected at the
primary entrance to a residential subdivision having a
homeowners' association and where the association or
developer shall maintain the sign.
f. Temporary Garage Sale Signs. One temporary garage sale sign
is permitted if it does not exceed eight square feet and is
displayed only during the time the sale is being conducted. No
off-premises garage sale signs are permitted.
B. Public Zone and Uses. Signs of schools, churches, colleges, libraries
and other institutions and for parks and public uses of a similar nature
may be erected and maintained, provided that:
1. The size of any ground sign shall not exceed 32 square feet, and
that not more than one such sign is placed on a property unless
such property fronts upon more than one street, in which instance
a sign may be erected on each frontage. Sixteen square feet of the
gross advertising of one ground sign may be devoted to changeable
copy and may be a separate sign attached in an aesthetically
pleasing manner to the same ground sign structure.
2. Signs affixed to the facade of the principal structure shall be
permitted, provided that the signs shall not exceed 5% of the prime
building facade.
These requirements shall also apply to public uses established in
residential zones. The Planning Board may permit ground signs of
up to 100 square feet if, in the Planning Board's judgement, a sign
of greater size is required to safely and conveniently indicate the
location of a public use and the sign will not have an effect upon
surrounding uses.
C. Office, Industrial and Commercial Zones for Single-Tenanted and
Single-Structure Developments.
1. Wall signs. The total gross advertising area of all wall signs on any
one property shall not be greater than 5% of the area of the
building facade fronting on the street. On corner lots, the area of
the facade which fronts on the more heavily traveled or higher
classification road shall be utilized. The maximum area of all wall
and roof signs shall not exceed 100 square feet. [Amended by
Ord. 04-20]
2. Ground Signs. One ground sign, excluding directional signs, shall
be permitted on a single lot. Adjacent lots in common ownership
shall be considered one lot pursuant to Section 16.64.060. The total
advertising area shall not exceed 65 square feet in the professional
office zone and 100 square feet in the other nonresidential zones
under this category. The Planning Board may permit a total sign
area of 100 square feet in the professional office zone for nonoffice
§ 16.72.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.72.050
1.01:771
uses if the Planning Board finds that such additional area is
appropriate to the site and necessary for reasonable visibility of the
business or activity.
3. Window Signs. See Section 16.72.060.D, for specific regulations.
4. Design. All signs erected on a single lot shall be coordinated as to
color, materials, construction, lighting, general quality and
appearance, and shall be compatible with the architecture of the
main buildings.
D. Office, Industrial and Commercial Zones for Multi-Use, Multi-
Structures and Multi-Tenanted Structures and Developments. Within
the office, industrial and commercial zones of the Township, multi-use,
multi-structure and multi-tenanted structures and developments
require sign regulations which will ensure that all signs and graphics
erected within the development will enhance each other and will not
detract from the overall unified appearance of the complex.
1. Each such development shall submit a sign coordination plan to the
Planning Board for approval. The sign coordination plan shall
include details as to how all future signs on the property will be
coordinated. Coordination shall be evaluated on the basis of a
consistent sign design theme throughout a particular project. The
design theme shall include one or more of the following:
a. Style of lettering and color scheme;
b. Construction materials and lighting;
c. Uniform location;
d. Size and shape.
2. Wall Signs.
a. Conventional (Non-enclosed) Developments. One wall sign
shall be permitted for each tenant. Tenants occupying corner
locations may display one wall sign on each of two facades,
with a maximum of two signs per corner location. The total
gross advertising area of each tenant on the ground floor shall
not exceed 5% of the facade containing the main entrance to
the tenant's portion of the building.
b. Enclosed malls or similar structures, where the primary
entrances to the individual tenants of the building are internal,
shall not be permitted to have an external wall sign erected on
the facade of the building (except the prime tenants) unless the
tenant has a private customer or client entrance to the
exterior. Said sign shall be a wall sign and shall be placed
immediately adjacent to the private external entrance and shall
not exceed six square feet. Prime tenants shall be permitted a
wall sign pursuant to Subsection D.2.a. of this section, except
§ 16.72.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.72.050
1.01:772
§ 16.72.060. Sign Type Regulations. [Prior code § 15-9.44]
that the Planning Board may permit a 7% gross advertising
area for individual prime tenant wall signs if such additional
area shall assist in developing a harmonious and integrated
sign plan in accordance with Section 16.72.010. [Amended by
Ord. 04-20; Ord. 04-23]
3. Ground Signs. One ground sign (excluding directional signs) shall
be permitted on any single lot. However, the Planning Board may
permit one additional ground sign if the property has vehicular
access to more than one public street. Adjacent lots in common
ownership shall be considered one lot pursuant to Section
16.64.060. The total advertising area shall not exceed 100 square
feet. Shopping centers containing eight or more tenants on the
ground floor, enclosed malls, industrial parks or office parks may
have one ground sign with a total advertising area not exceeding
150 square feet.
4. Canopy Signs. Signs hanging from overhangs above the entrance to
a tenant may be permitted, provided that each sign does not exceed
two square feet. Such signs shall only be permitted where wall
signs are not easily visible to pedestrians such as in covered
walkway situations.
Notwithstanding the above or Section 16.72.060.C, wall signs
otherwise permitted by this section may be affixed to a covered
walkway rather than a wall provided:
a. Such sign location affixed to a covered walkway is approved by
the Planning Board as part of a sign coordination plan and a
uniformity of sign locations results;
b. The area of such sign affixed to a covered walkway does not
exceed in size the area of a wall sign otherwise permitted for
such development.
5. Window Signs. See Section 16.72.060.D for specific regulations.
A. Ground Signs. An activity may display one or more ground signs of the
area indicated under the appropriate requirements as set forth in
Sections 16.72.040 and 16.72.050, and as set forth in the following:
1. The maximum height of the ground sign shall not exceed 25 square
feet. However, ground signs in industrial, office and neighborhood
business zones shall not exceed 10 feet in height, and shall not
exceed six feet in height in residential zones. The Planning Board
may permit a sign height of up to 20 feet, where it finds that such
height is appropriate to the site and is necessary for reasonable
visibility of the activity on the premises.
§ 16.72.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.72.060
1.01:773
The height of the ground sign shall be measured from the base
of the sign to the extreme top of the sign, including framing and
structural members. Where the grade from the edge of the existing
pavement (of the street from which vehicles primarily view the
sign) to the base of the sign differs by three feet or more, height
of the sign shall be measured from the grade at the edge of the
pavement to the extreme top of the sign, including framing and
structural members.
2. No portion of a ground sign (excluding directional signs) shall be
located closer than the following distances to street rights-of-way,
provided that the ground sign (including directional signs) is not
located within a dedicated sight easement (unless less than 30
inches high) or a sight distance as set forth in other sections of the
Land Development Code.
Area of Sign
(square feet)
Minimum Distance
(feet)
Less than 26 5
26 to 75 10
75 to 100 15
More than 100 20
3. Ground signs shall be a minimum of 75 feet from any other ground
sign (excluding directional signs) on the same or adjacent
properties.
4. The Planning Board shall have the authority to waive the strict
application of Subsection A.2. or A.3. of this section if, because of
local site conditions, strict adherence would cause undue
inconvenience to the public or constitute a hazard.
5. Ground signs shall be located so as to safely guide the motorist to
the vehicular entrance to the activity. Any ground sign which
proves to be confusing to the motorist in this respect shall be
relocated to a more appropriate location as required by the
Planning Board where physically possible.
6. The location or relocation of a ground sign (except directional
signs) shall be approved by the Planning Board after submission of
a site plan which accurately shows the proposed sign and its
relationship to paved and landscaped areas, parking, access drives
and buildings within 200 feet of the sign.
B. Wall Signs. An activity may display one or more wall signs of the total
area indicated under the appropriate requirements as set forth in
Sections 16.72.040 and 16.72.050, and as set forth in the following:
1. Wall Signs.
§ 16.72.060 RARITAN CODE § 16.72.060
1.01:774
§ 16.72.070. Special Signs and Sign Regulations. [Prior code
§ 15-9.45; amended by Ord. 92-4]
a. Wall signs shall only be located within the signable area of the
facade of a structure. The signable area of the facade of a
structure is that portion of the facade up to eaves or second
floor windows, whichever is lower, which is free of windows
and doors or major architectural detail.
b. Wall signs are not permitted for activities located on the
second or higher floors. (See Subsection D of this section.)
c. The width of a wall sign or roof sign may not exceed the width
of the building or section of a building occupied by tenant or
activity. [Amended by Ord. 04-20]
C. Canopy Signs. Canopy signs are only permitted pursuant to Section
16.72.050.D.4. and in accordance with the following:
1. The minimum clearance to the lowest portion of a canopy sign shall
be seven feet.
2. Canopy signs shall only list the name of the activity.
3. Canopy signs may not extend out from under the overhang or
ceiling to which it is attached.
D. Window Signs. Window signs of a permanent or temporary nature are
permitted as follows:
1. Maximum sign area, 25% of window area;
2. Only for commercial and office uses;
3. On any floor of a building;
4. Signs within the interior of a structure designed to be seen and
read from the exterior shall be considered as part of any maximum
window sign area.
A. Organization Sign Display. Organization sign displays are permitted in
lieu of the placement of many scattered prohibited organization signs
along the many thoroughfares of the community. Organization sign
displays shall be located as approved by the Planning Board in
accordance with the following regulations:
1. Location, at or near the major entrances to the municipality or at a
prominent and visible location on public, institutional or other
nonresidential property;
2. Maximum size, 100 square feet;
3. Sign type, ground sign only;
§ 16.72.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.72.070
1.01:775
4. The display shall be landscaped and may be lighted;
5. The design of the display shall be approved by the Planning Board
in accordance with Section 16.72.050.D.1.;
6. The Planning Board may reject the location of an organization sign
display if the location has poor visibility or will create a hazardous
situation for vehicular traffic.
B. Signs for Commercial Uses Within a PRD. Signs for commercial uses
within a PRD shall be regulated by Section 16.72.050.D, except that
only one ground sign shall be permitted which does not exceed 32
square feet and a maximum of 10 feet in height.
C. On-Premises Directional Signs. On-premises directional signs are onpremises
signs designed to direct motorists and pedestrians within a
site and governed by the following regulations in addition to Sections
16.72.030 and 16.72.040.
1. Directional signs shall be approved during site plan review
procedures by the Planning Board and in accordance with Section
16.72.050.D.1. Changes and additions to the approved plan for
directional signs may be approved by the Municipal Planner.
2. Entrance and exit signs may contain the name of the activity, but
shall not advertise the activities in any way.
3. Directional signs may contain a logo used throughout the project.
4. Entrance and exit signs shall not exceed three square feet.
However, the square footage may be increased to 16 square feet if
the Planning Board finds that the scale of the project or volume of
traffic attracted by the activity warrants enlarged signs for safety.
5. Sign messages shall be clear and concise.
6. Directional signs of three square feet or less shall not require sign
permits.
7. Directional signs which are found by the Planning Board to be
confusing or inappropriately placed shall be removed or relocated
as required by the Planning Board.
D. Grand Opening Banners, Celebration Bunting and Temporary Signs.
1. Grand Opening Banners. Grand opening banners are permitted if
attached to the building in which the new activity has been
established. Grand opening banners may be in place for four weeks
from the date of opening of the activity.
2. Celebration Bunting. Celebration bunting is permitted on state
holidays and days of public celebration. Bunting shall be removed
within seven days of the date of celebration.
§ 16.72.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.72.070
1.01:776
3. Temporary signs are permitted as notification of special events on
the premises of public, fraternal, charitable or religious
organizations only in accordance with Subsection D.3.a below;
temporary real estate signs only in accordance with Subsection
D.3.b below; pennants, banners (other than grand opening
banners) and temporary signs on the premises of commercial
establishments only in accordance with Subsection D.3.c below;
temporary signs advertising the future construction or location of a
use upon a site only in accordance with Subsection D.3.d below;
and temporary signs for commercial establishments during periods
of long-term public roadway construction projects in accordance
with Subsection E below. [Amended by Ord. 03-31; Ord. 00-35;
3-19-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04]
a. Temporary public or organization signs shall be removed
within five days after the event shall have taken place. No
permit shall be required for such temporary sign, provided that
there is only one such sign per premises, the sign does not
exceed 32 square feet, and provided that the sign shall not
remain in place more than four weeks. Only two events may be
advertised by a temporary sign per calendar year. A temporary
sign is not permitted on a premises that has a changeable copy
sign erected upon it.
b. Temporary signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises
upon which they are located may be permitted, provided that:
i. The size of any such sale or rental sign shall not exceed
eight square feet.
ii. Not more than one sign is placed upon any property.
iii. Such signs shall be promptly removed when premises are
sold or rented.
c. Pennants; Banners; Sandwich Boards; Temporary Ground
Signs; Feather Signs.
i. Pennants, a banner (other than a grand opening banner),
sandwich boards, and/or a temporary ground sign are
permitted accessory to a commercial establishment in the
I-1, I-2, O-1, O-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, and B-5 zoning
districts for a total of eight weeks in any calendar year for
notification only of special events, special promotional
purposes, temporary sales, grand openings, etc., provided
that such pennants, banner, sandwich boards or temporary
ground sign do not cause a danger to the general public in
accordance with Section 16.72.040.G or otherwise impede
sight triangles or foot traffic during business hours.
ii. The total area of a banner and/or temporary ground sign
shall not exceed 16 square feet in area. The height of a
§ 16.72.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.72.070
1.01:777
ground sign shall not exceed five feet. Sandwich boards
and temporary ground signs carrying the same message
on two sides shall be considered a single sign, provided
that the two sides are of the same size. The total square
footage shall be determined by adding together both sides
of the sign and dividing by two.
iii. Feather Signs.
(A) Notwithstanding the foregoing, feather signs: (defined
for purposes of this subsection as temporary
advertising signs made of lightweight cloth that are
supported by a lightweight freestanding pole or
frame), are permitted accessory to a commercial
establishment in the I-1, I-2, O-1, O-2, B-1, B-2, B-3,
B-4, and B-5 zoning districts for a total of eight weeks
in any calendar year for notification of special events,
special promotional purposes, temporary sales, grand
openings etc., provided that said proposed feather
sign:
[i] Shall be limited to:
[A] One feather sign per lot; or
[B] Where there are multiple tenants on one lot,
one feather sign for every 75 linear feet of
road frontage;
[ii] Shall be placed in a manner so as to ensure
pedestrian safety;
[iii] Shall not be more than 12 feet in height, or
greater than 36 inches in width;
[iv] Shall not block any windows or doors;
[v] Shall be secured in a manner that prevents
displacement from the wind which shall be shown
on a catalogue sheet setting forth how the feather
sign is anchored; and
[vi] Shall be placed no closer than 20 feet to an
adjacent property line.
(B) No feather sign shall be permitted to become tattered
or tom.
iv. Any display of such pennant, feather sign and/or banner
and/or temporary ground sign for a period from one day to
seven consecutive days shall constitute a total display
period of one week.
§ 16.72.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.72.070
1.01:778
Chapter 16.74
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 16.74.010. General Application. [Prior code § 15-9.47]
As a condition of approval and the continuance of any use, occupancy of
any structure and operation of any process or equipment, the applicant
shall supply evidence, satisfactory to the Planning Board or its designated
v. An application for a sign permits shall be filed and
approved for such pennants, banner, feather sign,
sandwich board or temporary ground sign from the
Township Zoning Officer before such display is permitted.
However, pursuant to Section 16.72.020A.7, no permit
shall be required for temporary garage sale signs that
comply with Section 16.72.050A.1.f.
d. Temporary signs advertising the future construction or
location of a use may be permitted upon a site, provided that:
i. The sign does not exceed 32 square feet in area.
ii. The sign is not erected until preliminary subdivision or site
plan approval has been granted.
iii. The sign is removed upon issuance of any certificate of
occupancy for the structure or use.
4. Developments with four or more homes for sale may be advertised
on a sign not to exceed 32 square feet. One such sign shall be
permitted on each frontage if the development fronts on more than
one street. All development signs shall be removed when 95% of
the lots has been initially sold or initially rented.
E. Commercial uses located in any area of roadway construction that is
undertaken by a public agency and that is scheduled to exceed or has
exceeded a period of one year from the start date of construction to the
completion date of construction as estimated by the Federal, State,
County, or Local Agency that has primary jurisdiction over said roadway
and/or project, may place upon their premises temporary signage not to
exceed 16 square feet in area and not to exceed five feet in height for
the duration of the construction project. The area of construction shall
be that area delineated on the construction drawings showing the limits
of construction for the Federal, State, County, or Local Agency that has
primary jurisdiction over said roadway. Said temporary signs must be
removed upon the completion of the construction project in that area in
front of the specific commercial enterprise. Said temporary signs shall
be in addition to any temporary signs permitted elsewhere is this
section or direction signs placed by the governmental agency
undertaking the roadway construction. [Amended by Ord. 03-31]
§ 16.72.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.74.010
1.01:779
representative, that the proposed use, structure, process or equipment will
conform fully to all of the applicable performance standards. As evidence
of compliance, the board may require certification of tests by appropriate
government agencies or by recognized testing laboratories, any cost thereof
to be borne by the applicant. The Planning Board may require that specific
types of equipment, machinery or devices be installed or that specific
operating procedures or methods be followed if the government agencies or
testing laboratories examining the proposed operation shall determine that
the use of such specific types of machinery, equipment, devices, procedures
or methods is required in order to assure compliance with the applicable
performance standards. Permits and certificates required by other
government agencies shall be submitted to the Planning Board as proof of
compliance with applicable codes.
§ 16.74.020. Conditional Permit. [Prior code § 15-9.48]
In the event that a determination cannot be made at the time of application
that a proposed use, process or piece of equipment will meet the standards
established in this chapter, the Planning Board may issue a conditional
permit. The conditional permit would be based on submission of evidence
that the proposed use, process or equipment will meet the standards
established herein after completion or installation and operation.
Within 30 days after a conditional certificate of occupancy is granted, a
final permit shall be applied for and satisfactory evidence submitted that all
standards established by this chapter have been met.
§ 16.74.030. Regulations of Nuisance Elements. [Prior code
§ 15-9.49]
A. Definition. A "nuisance element" is any air pollution, wastes, radiation,
noise, vibration, glare or heat which exceeds the performance
standards of this chapter.
B. Nuisance Determination Location. The determination of the existence
of nuisance elements shall be made at the following locations:
Nuisance
CharacteristiAcsll R Zones B-1, O-1, P, B-2, O-2, I-1, I-2
Smoke VS VS VS VS
Solid
particles
VS VS VS VS
Odors SL PL ZL ZL
Liquid
wastes
BW PL PL PL
Solid BW SL SL SL
Radiation VS VS VS VS
Noise SL PL ZL PL
§ 16.74.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.74.030
1.01:780
§ 16.74.040. Air Pollution. [Prior code § 15-9.50]
Nuisance
CharacteristiAcsll R Zones B-1, O-1, P, B-2, O-2, I-1, I-2
Vibration BW PL PL PL
Glare BW PL PL ZL
Heat* VS/PL VS/PL VS/PL VS/PL
Notes:
* Measurement shall be made at the vent or smokestack for heated
air and at the property line for heated liquid or solid discharge.
Code:
VS: Vent or smokestack
PL: Property line
ZL: Zone line
BW: Building wall
SL: Required setback line
C. Continued Compliance. Continued compliance with the performance
standards stated herein shall be a requirement for the continued
occupancy of any structure or the operation of any process or
equipment.
A. General. No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in
quantities which are injurious to human, plant or animal life or to
property or which will interfere unreasonably with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property anywhere in the Township. All provisions
of the New Jersey Administrative Code Subchapters 4 and 6 of the Title
7, Chapter 7, shall be complied with.
B. Smoke. In any nonresidential zone, no smoke, the shade of which is
darker than No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, shall be emitted into
the open air from any fuel-burning equipment, provided that smoke
emitted during the cleaning of a fire box or the building of a new fire,
the permitted for a period aggregating no more than three minutes in
any 15 consecutive minutes.
In any R zone, no visible smoke shall be emitted into the open air.
C. Solid Particles.
1. In any R zone, no discharge of solid particles through a stack, duct
or vent shall be permitted that is 50% of the allowable emission in
pounds per hour established by Subchapter 4 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code.
§ 16.74.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.74.040
1.01:781
§ 16.74.050. Wastes. [Prior code § 15-9.51]
2. In any remaining zone, the allowable discharge shall be 75% of the
allowable omission permitted by the code.
3. No open burning shall be permitted in any zone.
4. All incinerators shall be approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
D. Odors. In any zone, no odorous material may be emitted into the
atmosphere in quantities sufficient to be detected without instruments.
A. Liquid Wastes. No liquid waste shall be discharged into any
watercourse in the Township, except as herein provided. If the
applicant proposes to construct facilities for the treatment of waste, he
or she shall supply:
1. A statement by the New Jersey Department of Health that such
proposed facilities are in compliance with applicable state laws and
regulations;
2. Approval by the appropriate officials of the installation of such
facilities.
No liquid waste shall be discharged into the public sewage collection and
disposal system unless the appropriate Municipal or Authority Officials
shall have first investigated the character and volume of such waste and
shall have certified that it will accept the discharge of such waste material
into the system. The applicant shall comply with any requirements of
such Officials, including the pretreating of such wastes, the installation of
processing methods, separation or screening of wastes, control of pH and
other methods of improving such wastes prior to discharge, as a condition
of approval of such facilities.
B. Solid Wastes. Each use shall:
1. Assume full responsibility for adequate and regular collection,
storage and removal of all refuse except if the Township assumes
the responsibility;
2. Comply with all applicable provisions of the Air Pollution Control
Code;
3. Comply with all provisions of the State Sanitary Code, Chapter 8,
Refuse Disposal, Public Health Council of the State Department of
Health;
4. Permit no accumulation on the property of any solid waste, junk or
other objectionable materials;
§ 16.74.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.74.050
1.01:782
§ 16.74.060. Radiation. [Prior code § 19-9.52]
All use of materials, equipment or facilities which are or may be sources
of radiation shall comply with all controls, standards and requirements
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and any codes, rules or
regulations promulgated under such act, as well as the Radiation Protection
Act, Chapter 116, P.L. 1958, as amended, whichever shall be more stringent.
§ 16.74.070. Noise. [Prior code § 19-9.53]
The purpose of this section is to ensure that the environmental character
of the area surrounding the proposed use, with respect to noise, shall not
be altered. The standards established herein shall be interpreted in any
specific case with this objective in mind.
Measurements, if required under this chapter, shall be made at the locations
noted in Section 16.74.030.B. Measurements shall be made by a competent
acoustical engineer using equipment meeting the United States of America
Standards Institute Standard Section 1.4. 1961, or the latest revision
thereof and Section 2.22 or the latest revisions. All measurements shall be
made in at least eight frequency bands.
Ambient noise levels shall be made during the hours the proposed use will
be in operation and for periods of at least one hour and on three separate
occasions.
The permitted noise level of the proposed use, measured at the measuring
line, shall not exceed the ambient noise levels in each frequency band.
Ambient levels may be increased by five decibels if the noise is continuous
and operates only from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Pure tones shall be at least five decibels below the active band level at the
measurement line.
§ 16.74.080. Vibration. [Prior code § 19-9.54]
In any zone, no vibrations discernible without instruments at the measuring
point shall be permitted.
§ 16.74.090. Glare. [Prior code § 15-9.55]
Glare is the sensation produced by brightness within the visual field that
are sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adjusted
and which cause annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance and
visibility. "Direct glare" is glare resulting from insufficiently shielded light
sources in the field of view. Reflected glare results from specular reflections
of high brightness in polished or glossy surfaces in the field of view.
5. Not engage in any sanitary landfill operation on the property
except as may be permitted by other Township codes and
ordinances.
§ 16.74.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.74.090
1.01:783
No direct glare shall be permitted except as may be caused by lights placed
on standards not exceeding the maximum height of structures allowed in
the zone and shielded so as to restrict the maximum apex angle of the cone
of illumination at ground level to 10 footcandles.
Total direct and indirect glare, measured at the locations noted in Section
16.74.030.B shall not exceed one footcandle except for lights used to
illuminate entrances and exits of roadways and driveways.
§ 16.74.100. Heat. [Prior code § 15-9.56]
Heat is thermal energy of radiative, conductive or convective nature. In any
zone, any use or process shall not produce a temperature rise discernible
at the measuring point or discharge water into any watercourse which shall
produce a temperature increase of greater than 3° in that watercourse.
§ 16.74.110. Fire and Explosion Hazards. [Prior code § 15-9.57]
If it appears that any proposed use, structure, process or resulting product
or material may constitute a fire or explosion hazard, the Planning Board
may require the applicant to supply proof of:
§ 16.74.120. Buffers. [Amended by Ord. 02-36]
Where buffers are required, they should follow the guidelines found for
bufferyards found in the site plan standards, Section 16.20.040.E.
§ 16.74.130. Outside Storage. [Prior code § 15-9.59]
No open or outside storage of manufacturing or other materials, junk, scrap,
raw materials, parts of waste products of any kind shall be permitted,
except that refuse for collection may be stored in suitable covered
containers in side or rear yards in a location convenient to the source
of wastes and to the refuse collector. Such refuse storage areas shall
be effectively screened by opaque fencing and/or landscaping providing
an immediate screen. Permitted uses in the I-2 zone may have outdoor
storage pursuant to Chapter 16.28B as permitted by the Planning Board in
designated areas.
Chapter 16.76
NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
A. Approval of the use, structure, process or resulting product or material
from the State Department of Labor and Industry, indicating that
adequate safeguards against fire and explosion have been taken or
installed;
B. Approval from the appropriate Township Fire Company that the
applicant has complied with all applicable Township fire prevention
regulations.
§ 16.74.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.76.010
1.01:784
§ 16.76.010. Continuation of Use. [Amended by Ord. 05-37]
A use, building or structure lawfully in existence on the date of the passage
of an ordinance, which shall be made nonconforming by such ordinance or
any applicable amendment thereto, may be continued except as otherwise
provided below.
§ 16.76.020. Regulation of Nonconforming Uses. [Amended by Ord.
05-37]
No nonconforming structure or use shall be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered, except when changed to
a conforming use or when required to do so by law as follows:
§ 16.76.030. Termination of Nonconforming Uses. [Amended by
Ord. 05-37]
A nonconforming use or structure shall be considered abandoned and such
nonconforming use or structure shall not thereafter be renewed if: the
nonconforming use or structure is changed to a conforming use or structure
for any period of time, or by the total destruction of the use or structure, or
upon a finding of an intent to abandon by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 16.76.040. Nonconforming Lots. [Amended by Ord. 05-37]
Any vacant lot legally existing at the time the ordinance causing such
nonconformity was enacted, made nonconforming by the passage of such
ordinance or any applicable amendment thereto, may be utilized for a
permitted use, provided that it meets the requirements for existing lots of
record set forth in Section 16.64.060 and Schedule I set out in the Appendix
following this Title. Permitted uses may be expanded on a developed
A. Restoration and Reconstruction. Any nonconforming use or structure
damaged by fire, casualty or act of God resulting in a partial destruction
thereof may be repaired and reconstructed and used as before,
provided that the nonconforming use or structure shall not be extended
or enlarged beyond what existed prior to such damage.
B. Repairs. Normal maintenance repair and incidental alteration of a
nonconforming use or structure is permitted, provided that it does not
extend or expand the nonconforming use or structure beyond what
existed prior to the alteration or repair.
A building or other structure containing residential nonconforming uses
or located on a nonconforming lot may be altered in any way to improve
interior livability. However, no structural alterations shall be made
which would increase the number of dwelling units, increase the floor
area, or expand the building footprint.
C. Expansion. The expansion of a pre-existing nonconforming use or
structure may be permitted only upon an application for a variance to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 16.76.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.76.040
1.01:785
nonconforming lot, whether or not the lot meets the requirements of an
existing lot of record, provided that all yard, setback, hard surface
coverage, parking, floor area ratio and height requirements of this Title are
met.
Chapter 16.78
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 16.78.010. Land Use Enforcement and Zoning Permit Officers.
[Prior code § 15-9.65; amended by Ord. 85-22]
§ 16.78.020. Zoning Permits. [Prior code § 15-9.66; amended by
Ord. 86-4]
A. The Land Use Enforcement Officer shall have the responsibility to
enforce the zoning ordinance.
B. The Township Planner shall have the responsibility to issue zoning
permits in the capacity as Zoning Permit Officer. The Township Planner
is hereby designated as Deputy Land Use Enforcement Officer and shall
have the same duties and responsibilities concerning the enforcement
of the zoning ordinance as the Land Use Enforcement Officer.
A. Purpose. To ensure compliance with the provisions of this Title, no
person shall erect, alter or convert any structure or building or part
thereof, nor alter the use of any land, subsequent to February 12, 1979,
until the proper zoning permit has been issued by the Zoning Permit
Officer.
B. Issuance. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Permit Officer to issue the
proper zoning permit when he or she is satisfied that the structure,
parking area or other use requiring a permit conforms to all
requirements of this Title.
C. Existing Permitted Uses. Upon written request from the owner, tenant,
occupant or purchaser under contract, the Zoning Permit Officer, after
inspection, shall issue a zoning permit for a use legally existing on
February 12, 1979, certifying the extent and type of use and whether
any such existing use conforms to the provisions of this Title.
D. Change of Use or Tenant. No owner, tenant or other person shall use or
occupy any nonresidential, building, structure or land, the use or
tenancy of which shall be changed, without first procuring a certificate
of occupancy.
A rental facility providing storage units for warehousing of goods where
such individual storage units do not exceed an area of 200 square feet
may change tenancy without the necessity of obtaining a certificate of
occupancy.
§ 16.76.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.78.020
1.01:786
§ 16.78.030. Construction Permits. [Prior code § 15-9.67]
E. Denial. When the Zoning Permit Officer is not satisfied that the
applicant's proposal will meet the requirements of this Title, he or she
shall refuse to issue a permit and shall so notify the applicant in writing,
giving the reasons for denial. The applicant may appeal to the Board of
Adjustment for a reversal of modification of the Official's decision.
F. If it shall appear, at any time, to the Zoning Permit Officer that the
application or accompanying plan is in any respect false or misleading,
or that work is being done upon the premises differing materially from
that called for in the application filed with him or her under existing
laws or ordinances, he or she may forthwith revoke the permit,
whereupon it shall be the duty of the person holding the same to
surrender it and all copies thereof to the Planning and Zoning Permit
Officer.
G. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Township's Construction Code
Department shall accept zoning permit waivers in lieu of a zoning
permit, for generators, central air conditioning units and propane tanks
if: [Added 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-31]
1. Said facilities are replacing existing devices; and
2. Are installed in the same location as the preexisting devices.
A. No construction permit shall be issued until the application for the
construction permit has been reviewed by the Zoning Permit Officer for
compliance with this Title and until a zoning permit has been issued.
B. If a variance is granted not involving subdivision or site plan approval, a
construction permit shall be secured and construction begun within
three months after the date when the variance was finally granted, and
construction shall be completed within 12 months of said date. For good
cause, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may, upon written application
stating the reasons therefor, extend either the three month or twelvemonth
periods.
C. Failure to Obtain Permit or Commence Work Within Time Period.
Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary
construction permit or permits within such three-month period, or,
having obtained the same, should he fail to commence work thereunder
within such three-month period, it shall be conclusively presumed that
the appellant or applicant has waived, withdrawn and abandoned his or
her appeal or his or her application; and all permissions, permits and
variances to him or her granted shall be deemed automatically
rescinded by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
D. Failure to Complete Construction Should the appellant or applicant
commence construction or alteration within such three-month period,
but should he or she fail to complete such construction or alteration
within the twelve-month period, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may,
§ 16.78.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.78.030
1.01:787
§ 16.78.040. Certificate of Occupancy. [Prior code § 15-9.68]
§ 16.78.050. Variance Fees. [Prior code § 15-9.69; amended in
Supplement 3-00; Ord. 87-10; Ord. 87-27; Ord. 90-20; Ord. 91-10;
Ord. 92-6; Ord. 00-32; Ord. 06-14; Ord. 06-33]
upon 10 days' notice in writing, rescind or revoke the granted variance,
or the issuance of the permit or permits, or other action authorized to
the appellant or applicant. If the Zoning Board of Adjustment further
finds that conditions have so altered or changed in the interval since the
granting of the variance, permit or action, such revocation or rescission
of the action is justified.
A. New Uses. No structure or land shall be occupied or used until such
time as a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Construction Official.
Such certificate shall be issued upon application by the owner,
prospective applicant or purchaser only after the Land Use
Enforcement Officer determines that the facts represented on the
application are correct and that the building, structure or use is in
conformance with the provisions of this Title and all other applicable
chapters.
B. Scope of Certificate of Occupancy. The certificate of occupancy shall
contain sufficient information as to the extent and kind of use, such that
any future investigation of the premises would disclose the extent to
which the use was altered. It shall also indicate whether such use is a
permitted or nonconforming use and the extent to which the use does
not conform to the provisions of this Title.
A. Variance application fees shall be paid at the time of application to the
appropriate Board, as follows, to defray the cost of processing the
application and publishing final notice decision:
For appeals under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a and
55D-70b
$250
For application under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c $300
For application under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d $1,000
For application under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76 $250
In addition to the above, there shall be the following additional fees:
An additional fee equal to the original variance filing fee shall be paid
for each additional meeting or part thereof at which the application
is processed (not applicable to applications involving owner occupied
single-family dwellings).
Applicants requesting a single applicant special meeting which is
agreed to by the Municipal Agency shall pay an additional fee of
$1,000 per single applicant special meeting.
§ 16.78.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.78.050
1.01:788
No additional hearings shall commence unless the applicable
additional fee(s) outlined above are paid.
B. Cost of Taking Testimony. The cost of taking testimony stenographically
and of transcribing the same shall be borne and paid for by the
appellant or applicant, and the Board may require such deposit to be
made for such purposes as shall be reasonable in the circumstances.
C. Fees and Escrow Schedule.
1. General Conditions. The applicant shall, at the time of filing an
application for development, pay the following fees to the Township
by check or money order. The nonrefundable application fees as set
forth in Sections 16.18.050 and 16.20.050, are to cover the
administrative costs incurred by the Township in processing
applications. The escrow accounts are for the services required in
connection with the application and installation of improvements,
such as, the cost for professional services by the Township
Engineer, Planning Board Attorney, Board of Adjustment Attorney,
Township Planner and Township Attorney, to review and make
recommendations on the application for development and
inspection of improvements as they are installed and finally
completed.
2. Escrow Fees — General Provisions.
a. In addition to the nonrefundable application fees, as specified
in Sections 16.18.050 and 16.20.050, the applicant shall be
required to establish one or more escrow accounts with the
Township to cover professional and expert review and
consultation services, including testimony, associated with a
review and processing of the application. These escrow fees
shall be required for all applications with the exception that no
such escrow fees will be required for an application involving a
single "c" variance for a shed of 100 square feet or less on
residentially zone and occupied property.
b. At the time of submission of an application for development to
the Administrative Officer, the applicant shall be required to
make a deposit to the escrow account as hereinafter provided
and to execute an escrow agreement. The escrow agreement
shall be in a form approved by the Township Attorney. The
amounts specified for the escrow fee are estimates, which shall
be paid prior to certification of an application as complete. In
the event that more than the amounts specified for escrow is
required to pay the reasonable costs incurred, the applicant
shall, prior to being permitted to take the next step in the
approval procedure or, in any event prior to obtaining building
permits or occupancy permits for any element of the project,
whichever is the next case, pay all additional sums required.
§ 16.78.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.78.050
1.01:789
c. Following the approval of a preliminary major subdivision or
preliminary site plan and prior to commencement of any
construction on the applicant's property, the applicant shall be
required to make a further deposit to a separate inspection
escrow account to provide sufficient funds in escrow to pay for
the inspection fees and any additional professional review
services required.
3. Subdivision and Variance Escrow Accounts.
a. The following escrow amounts shall apply to subdivision
review.
i. Sketch plat of a major subdivision: $100 per lot.
ii. Minor subdivision: $500 per lot.
iii. Minor subdivision involving boundary line adjustment
only: $200 per lot.
iv. Major subdivision preliminary plat: $500 per lot.
v. Major subdivision, final plat: $100 per lot.
b. The following escrow amounts shall apply to variance
applications which do not include or are not associated with
applications for subdivisions of land or site plan review:
i. Appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a): $400.
ii. Appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(b): $400.
iii. Appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c): $600.
iv. Appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d): including
applications bifurcated under provision of 40:55D-76b:
$1500.
v. Request under N.J.S.A. 40:55-76 a. (1) and a. (2) of the
Municipal Land Use Law: $600.
If the above involve also a subdivision or site plan, such
escrow fee shall be in addition to such subdivision or site
plan escrow fee. [Amended by Ord. 05-9]
vi. Conditional Use: $300. [Amended by Ord. 06-14]
vii. Bifurcated Application, Escrow: A request for a variance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) which application is
bifurcated under the provision of 40:55D-76b, shall submit
the following escrow: $750 or $350 per acre for the first 10
acres and $100 per acre for each acre or portion thereof in
excess of 10 acres of the site for which the bifurcated
40:55D-70(d) variance is requested, whichever is greater.
§ 16.78.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.78.050
1.01:790
4. Site Plan Review Escrow Accounts. The site plan escrow shall be:
a. Minor site plan: $1,000.
b. Preliminary site plan: initial deposit shall be equal to two times
the required application fee.
c. Final site plan: initial deposit shall be $300. Except as provided
in Subsection C.14., Informal Review of a Development; and
Subsection C.15., Pre-application Meeting, the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment or Township Engineer or Township
Planner shall not review, act upon, or consider any plan until
such time as the initial fees and escrows are paid in full.
d. Sketch site plan: $500.
5. The obligor shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Engineer providing inspection of
improvements. The obligor shall pay to the Township a deposit for
the inspection fees in an amount not to exceed, except for
extraordinary circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of the cost
of improvements, which cost shall be determined as follows:
The cost of the installation of improvements shall be estimated by
the Township Engineer based on documented construction costs
of public improvements prevailing in the general area of the
municipality. The developer may appeal the Township Engineer's
estimate to the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall decide
the appeal within 45 days of receipt of the appeal in writing by the
Municipal Clerk. After the developer posts a guarantee with the
Township based on the cost of the installation of improvements as
determined by the Governing Body, he or she may institute legal
action within one year of the posting in order to preserve the right
to a judicial determination as to the fairness and reasonableness of
the amount of the guarantee.
For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated fees
are less than $10,000, fees may, at the option of the developer,
be paid in two installments. The initial amount deposited by a
developer shall be 50% of the reasonably anticipated fees. When
the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated
fees because the amount deposited by the developer has been
reduced by the amount paid to the engineer for inspection, the
developer shall deposit the remaining 50% of the anticipated
inspection fees. For those developments for which the reasonably
anticipated fees are $10,000 or greater, fees may, at the option
of the developer, be paid in four installments. The initial amount
deposited by a developer shall be 25% of the reasonably
anticipated fees. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the
reasonably anticipated fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the engineer for
inspection, the developer shall make additional deposits of 25% of
§ 16.78.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.78.050
1.01:791
the reasonably anticipated fees. The engineer shall not perform any
inspection if sufficient funds to pay for those inspections are not on
deposit.
6. The payment of the required escrow amounts shall not relieve an
applicant of the responsibility for payment of required inspection
fees as provided in the development ordinance.
7. The Township Finance Officer shall monthly advise the
Administrative Officer of the balance of all escrow accounts and
whether additional funds are required as provided hereinafter. In
the event additional funds are required, it shall be the obligation of
the Administrative Officer to notify the applicant of the additional
escrow amounts required, and in the event there is a refusal or
failure to make the payments required, the Administrative Officer
shall notify the approving authority. In the event the additional fees
are not paid, the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or Township
professionals and consultants shall take no further action on the
application until such time as the additional fees have been paid.
8. Replenishment of Escrow Balance. The escrow associated with
each application shall be replenished whenever the original escrow
is reduced by charges against the account to 35% or less of the
original amount. The Administrative Officer shall notify the
applicant of the requirement to replenish the escrow, and the
applicant shall be requested to deposit an amount to bring the
balance up to 50% of the original escrow amount. No further
building permits or certificate of occupancies shall be issued, and
no further consideration, review, processing, or inspection shall be
performed until the additional escrow has been paid.
9. Accounting of Fees. In the event any applicant desires an account
of the expense or fees paid by him or her for professional review, he
or she shall request such in a letter directed to the Administrative
Officer. The applicant shall be responsible for any costs incurred by
the Township in having its professional and administrative staff
prepare an accounting of the fees expended.
10. Use and Return of Escrow Balance.
a. The Township Engineer, Township Planner, or Approving
Agency Attorney and any other professional engaged by the
Board as experts in connection with the application shall
submit vouchers for all fees for consultation examination,
review or testimony, to the Approving Agency for approval
after which the bill shall be forwarded to the Township and
shall be paid from the escrow account.
b. If any money deposited in the escrow account is unexpended
upon completion of the project and the satisfactory completion
of the maintenance period, if any, or phased section in the case
of a sectionalized application, the amount shall be returned to
§ 16.78.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.78.050
1.01:792
the applicant or, at the developer's request, applied to the next
phase.
11. Whenever an amount of money in excess of $5,000 shall be
deposited by an applicant with the Township for professional
services employed by the Township to review applications for
development, the money, until repaid or applied to the purposes for
which it is deposited, including the applicant's portion of the
interest earned thereon, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, shall continue to be the property of the applicant and shall
be held in trust by the Township. Money deposited shall be held in
escrow. The Township shall deposit it in a banking institution or
savings and loan association in this state insured by an agency of
the federal government, or in any other fund or depository
approved for such deposits by the state, in an account bearing
interest at the minimum rate currently paid by the institution or
depository on time or savings deposits. The Township shall notify
the applicant in writing of the name and address of the institution
or depository in which the deposit is made and the amount of the
deposit. The Township shall not be required to refund an amount of
interest paid on a deposit which does not exceed $100 for the year.
If the amount of interest exceeds $100, that entire amount shall
belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him by the
Township annually or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied to
the purposes for which it was deposited, as the case may be; except
that the Township may retain for administrative expenses a sum
equivalent to no more than 33 1/3% of that entire amount which
shall be in lieu of all other administrative and custodial expenses.
12. Special Cases. When the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
decides that a traffic engineering review of a development is
necessary, then such funds for such traffic engineering study,
consultation, review and/or testimony shall be in addition to the
escrow fees above specified. Other specialist which are necessary
to review and make recommendations on a development including
but not limited to geologist, hydrologist, landscape architect,
architect shall be treated in the same manner as the traffic
engineer.
13. Requests for Rezoning. The initial required escrow amount
concerning a request for rezoning, being a requested change of
zoning map designations shall be $4,000. [Amended by Ord.
06-14 § 13]
14. Informal Review of a Development. When an applicant submits an
application for informal review, it shall be the applicant's option to
request professional review of the development by executing an
escrow agreement to cover the necessary and reasonable costs
incurred by the Approving Agency.
The following escrows shall apply:
§ 16.78.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.78.050
1.01:793
Informal Subdivision Review Escrow amount: $50 per new lot to be
created.
Informal Site Plan Escrow amount: $50 per dwelling unit for
residential uses or per acre in a tract for commercial, industrial, or
other nonresidential uses.
No informal review of conditional uses, variances, appeals or
directions to issue permits under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76 is permitted.
15. Pre-application Meeting. A property owner or applicant may
request a meeting with Township professionals prior to submitting
a formal application for development. The fees for such
consultation or review shall be chargeable to the applicant's
escrow account following his or her submission of a formal
application and required escrow fees.
16. Conformity with Statutes and Prior Ordinances. With the adoption
of the Municipal Land Use Law, L.1975 c.291, specifically, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1, Deposits with Municipality; Escrow; Interest,
effective August 28, 1985, all amounts paid by applicants for review
and inspections by professional consultants of the Township are to
be deposited with the Township in escrow for the satisfaction of
payment of the professional fees, and to be maintained in escrow in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1, and any
excess amounts remaining in the account upon full completion of
the project, as evidenced by a resolution of release by the Township
Committee based upon a recommendation of the Township
Engineer and Chief Financial Officer, shall be returned to the
applicant. If the outstanding professional fees exceed the
remaining escrow amount, the applicant shall pay all such fees
prior to consideration by the Township Committee of any resolution
of final approval or release of the cash deposits, bonds or other
sureties posted by the applicant.
Any funds paid by an applicant for professional review or
inspections prior to August 28, 1985, and in accordance with the
existing ordinances of Raritan Township, were paid as flat-rate
fees for those services based upon the flat-rate fee schedule in
effect, and without relation to the actual costs, more or less, of the
services provided.
17. When receiving direct monetary assistance from the Township of
Raritan pursuant to the affordable housing assistance program any
charitable, philanthropic, fraternal and religious non-profit
organizations holding a tax exempt status under the Federal
Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 U.S.C. 501(c) or (d)) shall be
exempt from paying site plan, subdivision, variance, and escrow
fees as required elsewhere under Title 16 of this code.
§ 16.78.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.78.060
1.01:794
§ 16.78.060. Violations - Complaints. [Prior code § 15-9.70;
amended by Ord. 06-3]
Chapter 16.80
SOIL EROSION-GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 16.80.010. Purpose. [Prior code § 15-10.1]
The purpose of this Chapter 16.80 and Chapter 16.82 shall be control soil
erosion and sedimentation and related environmental damage by requiring
adequate provisions for surface water retention and drainage and for the
protection of exposed soil surfaces in order to reduce the danger from
stormwater runoff, to retard non-point pollution from sediment and to
conserve and protect the land, water, air and other environmental
resources. Chapter 16.80 and Chapter 16.82 are deemed essential and
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
Raritan Township and the surrounding communities by accomplishing the
following purposes:
A. Complaints. Any municipal resident, municipal property owner, citizen
of the State of New Jersey or any interested party may sign a complaint
for a violation of the Raritan Township zoning ordinance.
B. Abatement.
1. Any municipal resident, municipal property owner, citizen of the
State of New Jersey, or any interested party, may sign a complaint
for a violation of the Raritan Township zoning ordinance with the
Municipal Court Clerk.
2. The Land Use Enforcement Officer may sign a complaint for
violation of the Raritan Township zoning ordinance with the
Municipal Court Clerk where he or she believes it to be
appropriate. Such violations, upon conviction shall be subject to
the provisions of Chapter 1.08.010.
A. Maintaining the useful life of reservoirs by preventing sedimentation;
B. Preventing dangers to life and property from flooding resulting from
excessive water runoff and clogging of drainage structures;
C. Preserving the recreational use of water bodies for swimming and
fishing by preventing stagnation;
D. Enhancing the recycling of waste water by maintaining sufficient flows
in streams to maintain oxygen levels;
E. Preventing toxic materials, nitrates and pesticides from entering public
water supplies;
§ 16.78.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.80.010
1.01:795
§ 16.80.020. Violations - Penalties. [Prior code § 15-10.16]
If any person shall violate any of the provisions of Chapter 16.80 or Chapter
16.82, any standard promulgated pursuant to the provisions of these
Chapters, or shall fail to comply with the provisions of a certified plan, the
Township may institute a civil action in the Superior Court for injunctive
relief to prohibit and prevent such violation or violations and the Court
may proceed in a summary manner. Any person who shall violate any of
these provisions, any standard promulgated pursuant to Chapter 16.80 or
Chapter 16.82, or who shall fail to comply with the provisions of a certified
plan shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $3,000 to be collected in
a summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1, et seq. The Superior Court, County Court and Municipal Court
shall have jurisdiction to enforce the penalty enforcement law. If the
violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it continues shall
constitute an additional separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 16.82
SOIL EROSION-STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES
§ 16.82.010. Application and Review Procedures. [Prior code
§ 15-10.2; amended by Ord. 86-15]
The following application and review procedures shall be complied with
prior to causing a soil disturbance within the Township:
F. Reducing public expenditures for repair of public facilities resulting
from soil erosion and sedimentation;
G. Conserving the taxable value of property enhancing the environmental
characters of the Township.
A. No application is required for the following:
1. Soil disturbance of 5,000 square feet or less, except as provided in
Subsection B of this section;
2. Agriculture, horticulture or residential landscaping uses.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, any
project causing a soil disturbance may be reviewed by the Township
Engineer for the applicability of this Title if, in the opinion of the
Township Engineer, Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, there
exists a danger of soil erosion or sedimentation caused by the project or
land use.
C. Any project where the soil disturbance will be in excess of 5,000 square
feet of surface area, but not part of a subdivision or site plan application
except as described in Subsection C.1. of this section, shall submit to
the Hunterdon County Soil Conservation district a soil erosion and
§ 16.80.010 RARITAN CODE § 16.82.010
1.01:796
§ 16.82.020. Plan Amendments. [Prior code § 15-10.3]
Minor amendments to a soil erosion and sediment control plan may be
approved by the Township Engineer who shall notify the Planning Board or
the Board of Adjustment where applicable of the nature and reason for the
change. Major amendments shall be resubmitted to the original approving
agency.
§ 16.82.030. Plan Details. [Prior code § 15-10.4]
The applicant shall submit a separate soil erosion and sediment control plan
for each noncontiguous site. Plan preparation shall be by a professional
engineer licensed in the state of New Jersey or other qualified individual.
The plan shall indicate or contain the following information:
sediment control plan which plan shall be reviewed and approved or
rejected by them.
A soil erosion and sediment control plan for single-family residential
development on a lot not part of a major subdivision or site plan
application will not be required unless more than 5,000 square feet of
surface area is disturbed and one of the following conditions also exist:
1. Such disturbance is within 100 feet of the top of a bank of a stream
or drainage way;
2. The slope of the area being disturbed is greater than 10%.
D. Any subdivision or site plan application where the soil disturbance will
be in excess of 5,000 square feet of surface area shall submit a soil
erosion and sediment control plan to the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment where applicable, along with all other required information
and plans. The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall, as part of
the site plan or subdivision review, approve as part of the soil erosion
and sediment control plan with or without conditions or disapprove said
plan with the reasons for such disapproval.
A. Location and description of existing natural and manmade features on
soil types and characteristics pursuant to the Hunterdon County Soil
Survey;
B. Location and description of proposed changes to the site, including
contours and spot elevations showing before and after conditions;
C. Measures for soil erosion and sediment control which shall meet or
exceed the standards set forth in the Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control promulgated by the State Soil Conservation
Committee. Such Publication shall be on file at the offices of the
Hunterdon County Soil Conservation District and the Raritan Township
Planning Board.
§ 16.82.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.82.030
1.01:797
§ 16.82.040. Approval Procedures. [Prior code § 15-10.5]
Plans shall be reviewed and certified by the Township Engineer when in
conformance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
Such review and certification shall be made within a period of 30 days of
submission of a complete development or construction application unless,
by mutual written agreement between the Township and the applicant,
this period is extended for an additional 30 days. Failure of the approving
agency to make a decision within such period or such extensions thereof
shall constitute certification of the plan. A major revision of the plan shall
constitute a new submission.
The applicant shall be provided with a written notice of the decision by
the approving agency. Such decision shall be included in the resolution of
approval for the proposed project. This notice shall state that the plan is
approved, approved subject to attached conditions, or denied with reasons
attached.
A copy of such resolution or notice, including the name of the applicant,
site location by street and address and tax map block and lot numbers, and
proposed land use shall be sent to the Hunterdon County Soil Conservation
District. The approving agency shall also make available such other
information as may be required by the district.
§ 16.82.050. General Standards. [Prior code § 15-10.6]
In the preparation of soil erosion and sediment control plans, the following
general principles of design shall be adhered to:
D. The Township Engineer, Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, where
applicable, may waive specific plan detail requirements which in the
judgment of the Engineer and Board are not necessary to fulfill the
intent and purpose of this Title.
A. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one time
during development and, when feasible, natural vegetation shall be
retained and protected.
B. Temporary plant cover or mulching shall be used to protect critical
erosion areas during development.
C. Temporary diversions and outlets shall be constructed or installed to
accommodate the increased runoff caused by the changed soil and
surface conditions during and after development or disturbance.
D. Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps shall be
installed to remove sediment from runoff waters.
E. Existing water runoff shall be minimized and retained on site whenever
possible to facilitate groundwater recharge.
§ 16.82.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.82.050
1.01:798
§ 16.82.060. Detailed Standards. [Prior code § 15-10.7]
The detailed plans, specifications and standards in any soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be dictated by the characteristics of the
site to be developed and the nature of the development. All such plans shall
utilize the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
as promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee.
§ 16.82.070. Plan Implementation. [Prior code § 15-10.8]
§ 16.82.080. Inspection of Projects. [Prior code § 15-10.9]
F. Permanent final plant covers, such as turf, groundcover, shrubs and
trees, shall be installed as quickly as possible as scheduled on the plans
or as directed by the Township Engineer.
G. Permanent improvements, such as roads, catch basins, curbs, and all
other such installations, shall be constructed without delay in
accordance with the approved plans and as directed by the Township
Engineer.
H. Clean up and restoration shall include removal of all temporary erosion
control installations, cleaning of drainage facilities and systems if and
where directed by the Township Engineer, and repairing any erosion
damage incurred during the course of construction resulting from
construction operations.
A. Timing. The Planning Board, the Board of Adjustment or the Township
Engineer shall require the construction or installation of improvements
or such other measures necessary to prevent soil erosion and
sedimentation prior to any site development work or the start of
construction.
B. Bonding. The Planning Board, the Board of Adjustment of the Township
Engineer may provide for the posting of performance guarantees prior
to and during the construction, and maintenance bonds in the same
manner as provided in the Township subdivision ordinance.
C. Maintenance. All permanent soil erosion and sediment control
measures installed pursuant to this Title shall be adequately maintained
at all times. Temporary measures shall be maintained as needed or until
the soil disturbance is permanently stabilized as determined by the
Township Engineer. Upon request, the Township Engineer shall certify
the date on which measures called for in the certified plan were
completed.
A. Inspection of projects to determine execution in accordance with the
certified plan shall be carried out by the Township Engineer. The
applicant shall maintain a certified plan on site during all construction
activity.
§ 16.82.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.82.080
1.01:799
§ 16.82.090. Notice in Writing. [Prior code § 15-10.10]
The Township Engineer shall inform the applicant in writing of observed
deviation from the certified plan and request immediate compliance with
the plan.
§ 16.82.100. Stop Construction Order. [Prior code § 15-10.11]
§ 16.82.110. Certificate of Occupancy. [Prior code § 15-10.12]
The Construction Official shall not issue any permanent certificates of
occupancy for any project unless there has been compliance with the
provisions of the certified plan for permanent measures. Temporary
certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless necessary control
measures have been installed and remaining controls have been
guaranteed.
§ 16.82.120. Notice of Compliance. [Prior code § 15-10.13]
The Township Engineer shall provide the Hunterdon County Soil
Conservation District and the Construction Official or Land Use
Enforcement Officer with a report of compliance upon completion of the
project.
§ 16.82.130. Fees. [Prior code § 15-10.14]
All applicants for certification of soil erosion and sediment control plans
shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the respective approving agency,
as follows:
Subdivisions and site plans - fee included in development and site plan
review fee. No additional fee required.
Grading permits - $50
Others - no fee
§ 16.82.140. Appeals. [Prior code § 15-10.15]
Any person, aggrieved by the decision of the Township Engineer, the Board
of Adjustment, or the Planning Board shall have the right to file an appeal
with the Township Committee setting forth in writing the complaint of
B. The Township Engineer shall determine at each inspection whether or
not the provisions of the certified plan are being followed by the
applicant.
A. The Township Engineer may issue a stop construction order if the
applicant fails to comply with the provisions of the certified plan.
B. When a stop construction order is issued, no further construction
activity shall take place until the applicant is in compliance with all
provisions of the certified plan.
§ 16.82.080 RARITAN CODE § 16.82.140
1.01:800
the aggrieved party. A copy shall be filed with the person or agency from
whose decision the appeal is being taken stating specifically the reasons the
appellant believes the action of the Construction Official was improper. The
Township Committee shall establish a hearing date within 30 days of the
receipt of the complaint and conduct a hearing. The Township Committee
shall affirm, modify or reserve the aforesaid decision.
Chapter 16.84
STORM WATER CONTROL
§ 16.84.010. Applicability. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
§ 16.84.020. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Construction
for the purposes of supporting common farmsite activities, including but
not limited to: the production, harvesting, storage, grading, packaging,
processing, and the wholesale and retail marketing of crops, plants,
animals, and other related commodities and the use and application of
techniques and methods of soil preparation and management, fertilization,
weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm waste, irrigation, drainage
and water management, and grazing.
AGRICULTURE OR HORTICULTURE OR AGRICULTURAL OR
HORTICULTURAL USE — The use of the land for common farmsite
activities including but not limited to production, harvesting, storage,
grading, packaging, processing and the wholesale and retail marketing
of crops, plants, animals and other related commodities and the use and
application of techniques and methods of soil preparation and management,
A. This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for the
following major developments that require preliminary or final site plan
or subdivision review:
1. Non-residential major developments; and
2. Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted
by the Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) at N.J.A.C.
5:21. The provisions of both this chapter and the RSIS are to be
applied and reviewed concurrently for any residential major
development.
3. In the case of agricultural or horticultural development that meets
the definition of "major development" under N.J.A.C. 7:8, a farm
conservation plan that addresses the protection of soil and water
resources shall be development and implemented. Such a plan shall
be approved by the Hunterdon County Soil Conservation District.
B. This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Raritan.
§ 16.82.140 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.020
1.01:801
fertilization, weed, disease and pest control, disposal of farm waste,
irrigation, drainage, and water management, and grazing.
CATEGORY 1 (C1) WATERS — Waters of the State, including unnamed
waterways that appear on Soil Survey and USGS Topographic Quadrangle
within the same HUC 14 watershed, designated in N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.15 (c)
through (h) for purposes of implementing the anti-degradation policies set
forth at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.1.5(d) for protection from measurable changes in
water quality characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic setting,
other characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
or exceptional fisheries resource(s).
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density caused by subjecting
soil to greater-than-normal loading. Compaction can also decrease soil
infiltration and permeability rates.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Hunterdon County Planning Board, as
designated by the County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinance(s).
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center, such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet, as designated by
the State Planning Commission.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a State permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DISTURBANCE — Any activity including the clearing, excavating, storing,
grading, filling or transportation of soil or any other activity that causes soil
to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
§ 16.84.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.020
1.01:802
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody
or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; well head protection areas; and ground water recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are those identified by the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Non-game Species Program, or by the Department
pursuant to the Highlands Act at N.J.S.A. 13:20-32k. and 13:20-34a(4).
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
GROUND WATER — A body of water below the surface of the land in a zone
of saturation where the spaces between the soil or geological materials are
fully saturated with water.
HIGHLANDS ACT — The Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act, P.L.
2004, c.120, codified at N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et. seq. as amended.
HUC-14 — A watershed as defined by the United States Geological Survey
with a 14-digit identifier; a subwatershed.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water relative to
natural conditions in the area.
INFILTRATION — Is the process by which water from precipitation seeps
into the soil to a level below the normal root soil of plant species.
KARST TERRAIN — An area where Karst topography, with its characteristic
surface and subterranean features, is developed as a result of the
dissolution of limestone, dolomite, or other soluble rock. Characteristic
physiographic features present in karst terrains include but are not limited
to sinkholes, sinking streams, caves, blind valleys, large springs and
subterranean drainage. See also limestone area.
LIMESTONE AREA — An area of Hunterdon County underlain by carbonate
sedimentary rock consisting chiefly of calcium carbonate. Limestone is
commonly used as a general term for the class of rocks that consist of at
least 80% calcium or magnesium carbonate. See also Karst terrain.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — Methods incorporating design
measures to replicate pre-development hydrology to reduce the impacts
of development at a lot-level basis, treating rainwater where it falls by
creating conditions that allow the water to infiltrate back into the ground.
LID emphasizes greater infiltration of stormwater on-site rather than
regarding the stormwater as a nuisance condition and disposable.
MAINTENANCE PLAN — A document required for all major development
projects for stormwater management maintenance.
§ 16.84.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.020
1.01:803
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any "development" that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land or would create 1/4 acre or more of
impervious surface. Major development shall not include municipal road
reconstruction or resurfacing within an existing paved footprint and with no
additional impervious area not to exceed 1/4 acre or no disturbance of one
acre beyond the existing road footprint.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE — Compliance with the specific
objective to the greatest extent possible taking into account equitable
considerations and competing factors, including but not limited to,
environmental benefits, pollutant removal effectiveness, regulatory
compliance, ability to implement given site-specific environmental
conditions, cost and technical or engineering feasibility.
MITIGATION — An action by an applicant-providing compensation or offset
actions for onsite stormwater management requirements where the
applicant has demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict
compliance with the stormwater management requirements set forth in
N.J.A.C. 7:8, in an adopted regional stormwater management plan, or in
this Chapter 16.84, and has received a waiver from strict compliance from
the Township. Mitigation, for the purposes of this chapter, includes both
the mitigation plan detailing how the project's failure to strictly comply
will be compensated, and the implementation of the approved mitigation
plan within the same HUC-14 within which the subject project is proposed
(if possible and practical), or a contribution of funding toward a regional
stormwater control project, or provision for equivalent treatment at an
alternate location, or other equivalent water quality benefit.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NEW JERSEY NONSTRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
STRATEGIES POINT SYSTEM (NSPS) — the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protections methodology and calculation spreadsheet used
to determine if the nonstructural stormwater management strategies had
been used to the maximum extent practicable as required by the
stormwater rules.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities that are not organized in a compact
form.
NONSTRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES —
Techniques that control or reduce stormwater runoff in the absence of
stormwater structures (e.g., basins and piped conveyances), such as
minimizing site disturbance, preserving important site features including,
but not limited to, natural vegetation, reducing and disconnecting
impervious cover, minimizing slopes, utilizing native vegetation, minimizing
turf grass lawns, increasing time of concentration and maintaining and
enhancing natural drainage features and characteristics.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of plants,
algae and other organisms or vegetation.
§ 16.84.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.020
1.01:804
NUTRIENT CONCENTRATION — The amount of a nutrient in a defined
volume of water (such as milligrams of nitrogen per liter). The relationship
between nutrient concentration and nutrient load can vary and depends on
the surface water flow, the volume of water in the water body or aquifer,
and watershed characteristics.
NUTRIENT LOAD — The total amount of a nutrient such as nitrogen or
phosphorus entering the water during a given time, such as "tons of
nitrogen per year", or "pounds of phosphorus per day." Nutrients may enter
the water from runoff, ground water recharge, point source discharges, or
the air (in the form of wet deposition such as rain or snow as well as dry
deposition).
PERMEABLE — A surface or land cover capable of transmitting or
percolating a significant amount of precipitation into the underlying soils.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Township of Raritan, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the State, or to
a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous
pollutants.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water to the extent that the
pollutant concentration or level violates either the Ground Water Quality
Standards (N.J.A.C. 7:9-6) or the Surface Water Quality Standards (N.J.A.C.
7:9B) of New Jersey.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground, and becomes part of a ground water body.
REVIEW AGENCY (MUNICIPAL) — The municipal body or official that is
responsible for the review of a major development project for compliance
with the stormwater management requirements.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension and
is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water
or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
§ 16.84.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.020
1.01:805
SOLID AND FLOATABLE MATERIALS — Sediment, debris, trash, and other
floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Any material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities, that could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to ground or surface
water. Source materials include, but are not limited to raw materials,
intermediate products, final products, waste materials, by-products,
industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are
exposed to stormwater.
SPECIAL RESOURCE WATERS — Water bodies receiving special
protections due to their drinking water status or role as high-quality habitat
for threatened and endangered species or species of commercial or
recreational importance. This includes waterways so designated through
the NJ Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8) because of exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional water supply significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional shellfish resource, or exceptional
fisheries resource. Waters so designated are protected by a 300-foot buffer
extending on either side of the waterway measured perpendicular from topof-
bank or center of channel for waterways lacking a defined top-of-bank.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Is defined as the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin
or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin),
or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (a constructed stormwater
wetland).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or ground water recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The flow of stormwater on or across the surface
of the ground, in drainage facilities or in storm sewers.
§ 16.84.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.020
1.01:806
STREAM BUFFER — A strip of land located immediately adjacent to a
stream channel consisting of natural, undisturbed vegetative cover, which
serves as a transition area between uplands and riparian lands. A stream
buffer may encompass wetlands, may be contained with a flood plain or
floodway or may extend beyond a wetland, floodplain or floodway boundary.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER TECHNIQUES — A stormwater management
measure that involves control of concentrated stormwater runoff or
infiltration such as stormwater basins, piped conveyance systems and
manufactured stormwater devices, and can include various types of basins,
filters, surfaces, and devices located on individual lots in a residential
development or throughout a commercial, industrial, or institutional
development site in areas not typically suited for larger, centralized
structural facilities.
THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES — Endangered species are
those whose prospects for survival in New Jersey are in immediate danger
because of a loss or change in habitat, over-exploitation, predation,
competition, disease, disturbance or contamination. Assistance is needed
to prevent future extinction in New Jersey. Threatened species are those
who may become endangered if conditions surrounding them begin to
or continue to deteriorate. Habitats of endangered or threatened species
are those identified by the Department's Landscape Project as approved
by the Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program, or by
the Department pursuant to the Highlands Act at N.J.S.A. 13:20-32k and
13:20-34a(4).
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — Is defined as the time it takes for
stormwater runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the
watershed to the point of interest within a watershed.
TRANSITION AREA — An area of protected uplands adjacent to a
freshwater wetland that minimizes adverse impacts on the wetland or
serves as an integral component of the wetlands ecosystem. Also called
"buffer" area.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Is defined as previously developed
portions of areas delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1); Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation of Chapter 16.84 shall comply
with the requirements of Sections 16.84.090.B and C.
§ 16.84.030. General Standards. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
§ 16.84.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.030
1.01:807
A. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
designed to meet the erosion control, ground water recharge, and
stormwater runoff quantity and quality standards in Section
16.84.030, as described in technical guidance documents listed in
Section 16.84.060. As detailed in 16.84.030, to the maximum
extent practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design.
If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design. If these
strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design along with
the practicable nonstructural strategies, and/or off site mitigation
measures.
2. The standards in this chapter apply to both new major development
and redevelopment and are intended to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in receiving
water bodies and maintain ground water recharge. The standards
do not apply to major development to the extent that alternative
design and performance standards are applicable under a regional
stormwater management plan or Water Quality Management Plan
adopted in accordance with Department rules.
B. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major Development.
1. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies. To the
maximum extent practicable, the standards in Sections
16.84.030.B and C shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth in this subsection into
the design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. Documentation of the
use of nonstructural stormwater management measures shall
require the preparation by the applicant of the N.J.D.E.P. Low
Impact Development checklist. If the applicant contends that it is
not feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any or only specific nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Section 16.84.030.B.2 below
into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify
the strategy or strategies considered and provide a basis for the
contention. In both cases, the applicant bears the burden of
proving any impracticability. If the Board finds that, the applicant
has not provided stormwater management strategies to the
maximum extent practicable then the application shall be deemed
to be in violation of the stormwater management regulations.
§ 16.84.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.030
1.01:808
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
a. Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
b. Minimize the creation of new impervious surfaces and reduce,
break up or otherwise disconnect the flow of runoff over
impervious surfaces;
c. Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation, except where native or natural vegetation is
considered invasive;
d. Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction
to post construction;
e. Minimize land clearing and disturbance and overall site
grading;
f. Minimize soil compaction;
g. Retain native, non-invasive vegetation, plant low-maintenance
landscaping, plant native vegetation, and minimize the
creation of lawns and the use of plantings and vegetation that
require the excessive use of fertilizers, pesticides and
irrigation;
h. Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
i. Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use,
exposure and/or mobilization of pollutants and prevent or
minimize the release and transport of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are not
limited to:
j. Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of trash
and debris in drainage systems, including features that satisfy
Section 16.84.030.B.3 below;
k. Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and
debris from drainage systems;
l. Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain spills
or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at industrial or
commercial developments; and
m. When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
application fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules. Prior to
§ 16.84.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.030
1.01:809
applying fertilizer, soil tests must be conducted onsite to
determine the type of fertilization necessary.
3. Site design features identified under Section 16.84.030.B.2 above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For exemptions
to this standard see Section 16.84.030.A.3.e below.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
b. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (N.J.D.O.T.)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
c. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
d. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
e. This standard does not apply:
i. Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
ii. Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in 16.84.030.C.1 are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
(A) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
(B) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(C) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that
has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm
as specified in Section 16.84.030.C.1; or
§ 16.84.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.030
1.01:810
(D) Where the review agency determines that action to
meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes
an encroachment or will damage or destroy a
structure or site listed or determined to be eligible to
be listed on the National Register for Historic Places
as listed within the Township Historical Survey,
Hunterdon County Historical Survey, The New Jersey
Register of Historical Places or the National Register
of Historic Places or as may be further recommended
by the Raritan Township Local Historians Committee.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Sections
16.84.030.B and C shall be:
a. Dedicated to a government agency; or
b. Subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
Hunterdon County Clerk's Office; or
c. Subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures that
measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Section 16.84.060, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org
6. The applicant shall show that the proposed non-structural
stormwater management measures are adequate using the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protections Nonstructural
Stormwater Management Strategies Point System (NSPS). If the
Board finds that the applicant has not provided for nonstructural
stormwater management strategies to the maximum extent
practicable then the application shall be deemed to be in violation
of the stormwater management ordinance and appropriate
mitigation measures shall be provided for.
C. Erosion Control, Ground Water Recharge and Stormwater Runoff
Quantity Control Standards.
1. This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, maintain ground water recharge, and
control stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major development
projects.
a. The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
§ 16.84.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.030
1.01:811
b. The minimum design and performance standards for ground
water recharge are as follows:
i. Using the criteria for calculating stormwater runoff and
ground water recharge in Section 16.84.040.B, the design
engineer shall comply with at least one of the following
standards:
(A) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the post-developed project site maintains
100% of the site's pre-developed average annual
ground water recharge volume; or
(B) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that any increase in the project site's
projected stormwater runoff volume produced by the
two-Year, twenty-four-hour storm from pre-developed
to post-developed conditions is fully infiltrated.
ii. Ground water recharge is not required at major
development projects located within an "urban
redevelopment area" as defined in Section 16.84.020 or
from those portions of major development projects that
produce stormwater runoff described in Subsection
C.I.b.iii. below.
iii. The following two types of stormwater runoff shall not be
recharged:
(A) Stormwater runoff from areas of high pollutant
loading. High pollutant loading areas are: 1) areas in
industrial and commercial developments where
solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/
unloaded, stored, or applied; 2) areas where
pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; 3) areas
where hazardous materials are expected to be present
in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; and 4) areas where recharge
would be inconsistent with a Department approved
remedial action work plan or landfill closure plan and
areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials, such
as gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
(B) Stormwater runoff from industrial areas exposed to
"source material".
iv. The design engineer shall assess and certify the hydraulic
impact on the ground water table and design the project
site and all site ground water recharge measures so as to
avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, raising the ground
§ 16.84.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.030
1.01:812
water table so as to cause surface ponding, flooding of
basements and other subsurface facilities, and
interference with the proper operation of subsurface
sewage disposal systems and other subsurface structures
in the vicinity of a ground water recharge measure.
c. The minimum design and performance standards for the
control of stormwater runoff quantity are as follows:
i. Using the criteria for calculating stormwater runoff and
ground water recharge in Section 16.84.040, the design
engineer shall comply with at least one of the following
standards:
(A) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the post-developed stormwater runoff
hydrographs from the project site for the two-, ten-,
and 100-Year storms do not exceed, at any point in
time, the site's pre-developed runoff hydrographs for
the same storms;
(B) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that under post-developed site conditions: 1)
there is no increase in pre-developed stormwater
runoff rates from the project site for the two-, ten-, and
100-Year storms; and 2) any increased stormwater
runoff volume or change in stormwater runoff timing
for these storms will not increase flood damage at or
downstream of the project site. When performing this
analysis for pre-developed site conditions, all off-site
development levels shall reflect existing conditions.
When performing this analysis for post-developed site
conditions, all off-site development levels shall reflect
full development in accordance with current zoning
and land use ordinances.
(C) Design onsite stormwater management measures so
that the peak post-developed stormwater runoff rates
from the project site for the two-, ten- and 100-Year
storms are 50, 75 and 80%, respectively, of the site's
peak pre-developed stormwater runoff rates. Peak
stormwater outflow rates for these storms shall be
adjusted where necessary to account for the discharge
of increased stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes
from project site areas not controlled by the onsite
measures. The percentages do not have to be applied
to those portions of the project site that are not
proposed for development at the time of application
provided that such areas are: 1) protected from future
development by conservation easement, deed
restriction, or other acceptable legal measures or 2)
§ 16.84.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.030
1.01:813
would be subject to review under these standards if
they are proposed for any degree of development in
the future.
2. Any application for a new agricultural or horticultural development
that meets the definition of major development in Section
16.84.020 shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation
District for review and approval in accordance with the
requirements of this section and any applicable Soil Conservation
District guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion
control.
D. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce by
80% the anticipated post-construction load of total suspended
solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff from the developed site,
expressed as pounds per year. Stormwater management measures
shall only be required for water quality control if an additional 1/4
acre or more of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. Daily limits of TSS (TMDL) may apply to the site
development based on conditions of regulatory approvals.
2. The water quality design storm shall be 1.25 inches of rainfall in
two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into account the
distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as
reflected in Table 1, subject to revision due to subsequent rule
changes. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into
account the implementation of non-structural and structural
stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
§ 16.84.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.030
1.01:814
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
(Source: New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual)
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See Section 6.C
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
§ 16.84.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.030
1.01:815
3. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 presents the
presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed, constructed
and maintained in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual, subject to revision due to
subsequent rule changes. The current edition of the BMP Manual
may be obtained from the address identified in Section 16.84.060,
or found on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
The BMP Manual and other sources of technical guidance are listed
in Section 16.84.060. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on
the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2. Alternative BMPs,
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
approved if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative BMPs, removal
rates and computational methods to the review agency.
Documentation for alternative rates and methods shall consist of
published (peer-reviewed) journal article or scientific paper. A copy
of any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the
removal rate, including documentation, shall be provided to the
Department at the following address: Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
4. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A+B-(AXB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal (expressed as a whole
number) from application of both BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate (whole number)
applicable to the first (upstream) BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate (whole number)
applicable to the second (downstream) BMP
In cases where three (or more) BMPs are used in series, the
applicant shall calculate the TSS reduction for the two most
upstream BMps in the series using the above formula, then
substitute the result (R) of that calculation in the formula for "A"
when calculating the combined result with the next BMP in the
series.
5. If there is more than one onsite drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to the discharge of each drainage subarea,
unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case
the removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using
an area-weighted average.
§ 16.84.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.030
1.01:816
6. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the post-construction
nutrient load from the developed site in stormwater runoff
generated from the water quality design storm. In achieving
reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent practicable, the
design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Sections 16.84.030.B and
C. This standard may be superseded by a more stringent numeric
effluent limitation imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. Daily limits for nutrient loading (TMDL) may apply to
the site development based on conditions of regulatory approvals.
7. Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in Section 16.84.060.
8. In accordance with the definition of FWI at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff and any new stormwater
discharge point to waters classified as FWI.
9. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and along all
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps, in
the County Soil Surveys within the associated HUC14 drainage
area, the Municipal Stormwater Management Plan, or a stream
delineation overlay prepared by the Department. These areas shall
be designated and protected as follows:
a. The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following, unless superseded by a local Stream Corridor
Protection Ordinance:
i. A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession.
ii. Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection D.9.a.i. above
shall only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, pre-existing active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
§ 16.84.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.030
1.01:817
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the review
agency that the functional value and overall condition of
the special water resource protection area will be
maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no case
shall the remaining special water resource protection area
be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
centerline of the waterway where the bank is undefined.
b. All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
c. If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
i. Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
ii. Stormwater discharges allowed by this section shall
achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal rate;
iii. Thermal pollution by stormwater discharges shall be
addressed to ensure no significant increase or decrease in
temperature occurs in the receiving waterway outside of
the mixing zone;
iv. The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the review
agency that the ecological value and condition of the
special water resource protection area will be maintained
to the maximum extent practicable;
v. A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
Township staff to identify necessary stabilization
measures; and
vi. All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
reviewed and approved by the Department prior to
approval by the review agency.
§ 16.84.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.030
1.01:818
d. A stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
Subsection D.9. shall maintain or enhance the current
ecological value and condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined above. In no case shall a stream
corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the Special
Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
e. Subsection D.9. does not apply to the construction of one
individual single family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development and is on a lot receiving preliminary or final
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided
that the construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
E. Maintenance Plan. The development shall incorporate a maintenance
plan for the stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development in accordance with Section 16.84.090.
F. Exemptions. The following linear development projects are exempt
from the ground water recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of Sections 16.84.030.B and C:
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are re-vegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is constructed of permeable material such as wood chips, unpacked
gravel, or porous pavement.
G. Waivers from Strict Compliance.
1. A waiver from strict compliance with the ground water recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quantity
requirements of Sections 16.84.030.B and C may be obtained for
the enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access,
provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
b. The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis
acceptable to the review agency, that through the use of
nonstructural and structural stormwater management
strategies and measures, the option selected complies with the
§ 16.84.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.030
1.01:819
§ 16.84.040. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Ground Water
Recharge. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
requirements of Sections 16.84.030.B and C to the maximum
extent practicable;
c. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of Sections 16.84.030.B and C, existing
structures currently in use, such as homes and buildings,
would need to be condemned; and
d. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection F.1.c. above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of Sections 16.84.030.B and C that were not
achievable on-site.
2. A waiver from strict compliance with the requirements of Sections
16.84.030.B and C may be issued in those cases where an applicant
has demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict
compliance, other than projects addressed under Subsection F.1,
with the stormwater management requirements set forth in
N.J.A.C.7:8, in an adopted regional stormwater management plan,
or in a local ordinance which is as strict as N.J.A.C. 7:8. A waiver
from strict compliance for such projects can only be obtained if the
applicant agrees to undertake a suitable mitigation measure
identified in the mitigation section of the municipality's Stormwater
Management Plan. In such cases, the applicant must submit a
mitigation plan detailing how the project's failure to strictly comply
will be compensated. In cases where a waiver is granted, an
applicant should provide mitigation, if possible and/or practical
within the same HUC-14 watershed within which the subject
project is proposed, or contribute funding toward a regional
stormwater control project, or provide for equivalent treatment at
an alternate location, or other equivalent water quality benefit, in
lieu of implementing the required stormwater control measures on
their specific site.
H. Threatened and Endangered Species. When habitat for threatened and
endangered species (see definition for Environmental Critical Areas in
Section 16.84.020 is present on a site, stormwater management
measures shall be implemented to avoid adverse impacts caused by
pollutant discharge, the creation of concentrated flow, or the alteration
of recharge.
A. Stormwater Runoff Calculations.
§ 16.84.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.040
1.01:820
1. In complying with the design and performance standards in
Sections 16.84.030, the design engineer shall calculate stormwater
runoff using one of the following methods:
a. The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation, NRCS
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, and appropriate NRCS
twenty-four-hour design storm, as described in the current
NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology,
and the current Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds or superceding document; or
b. The Rational Method for peak stormwater runoff rate
calculations and the Modified Rational Method for stormwater
runoff hydrograph calculations. Use of the Rational Method
and Modified Rational Method are limited to drainage areas of
20 acres or less. Neither the Rational Method nor Modified
Rational Method shall be used to calculate runoff volumes for
ground water recharge or stormwater runoff infiltration
purposes.
2. When selecting or calculating runoff coefficients for pre-developed
project site conditions using any of the above methods, the project
site's land cover shall be assumed to be woods. However, another
land cover may be used to calculate runoff coefficients if: 1) such
land cover has existed at the site or portion thereof site without
interruption for at least five years immediately prior to the time of
application; and 2) the design engineer can document the
character and extent of such land cover through the use of
photographs, affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use records.
If more than one land cover other than woods has existed on the
site during the five years immediately prior to the time of
application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
(including woods) shall be used for the computations. All predeveloped
land covers shall be assumed to be in good hydrologic
condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to have applied
appropriate conservation practices.
3. In calculating pre-developed site stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall include the effects of all land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows and
culverts, that reduce pre-developed site stormwater runoff rates
and/or volumes.
4. In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall use appropriate twenty-four-hour rainfall
depths as developed for the project site by the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration.
5. In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall separately calculate and then combine the
§ 16.84.040 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.040
1.01:821
§ 16.84.050. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management
Measures. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
runoff volumes from pervious and directly connected impervious
surfaces within a drainage area.
6. Calculation of stormwater runoff from unconnected impervious
surfaces shall be based, as applicable, upon the Two-Step
methodology as described in the Department's current Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual or the NRCS methodology
described in the current Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology
for Small Watersheds.
B. Ground Water Recharge Calculations.
1. In complying with the design and performance standards in Section
16.84.030, the design engineer may calculate ground water
recharge in accordance with the New Jersey Groundwater
Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS) computer program as described in
the Department's current Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual. Alternative ground water recharge calculation methods
may be used upon approval by the municipal engineer.
2. In complying with the design and performance standards in Section
16.84.030, the design engineer shall calculate stormwater runoff
infiltration volumes in accordance with the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) methodology, including
the NRCS Runoff Equation, as described in the current NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Part 630 — Hydrology and the
current Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds. In addition, the design engineer shall use appropriate
two-Year, twenty-four-hour rainfall depths as developed for the
project site by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.
3. When selecting or calculating runoff coefficients for pre-developed
project site conditions for ground water recharge or stormwater
runoff infiltration calculations, the project site's land cover shall be
assumed to be woods. However, another land cover may be used to
calculate runoff coefficients if: 1) such land cover has existed at the
site or portion thereof site without interruption for at least five
years immediately prior to the time of application; and 2) the
design engineer can document the character and extent of such
land cover through the use of photographs, affidavits, and/or other
acceptable land use records. If more than one land cover other than
woods has existed on the site during the five years immediately
prior to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest
runoff potential (including woods) shall be used for the
computations. All pre-developed land covers shall be assumed to be
in good hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to
have conservation treatment.
§ 16.84.040 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.050
1.01:822
A. Structural Management Measures. Standards for structural
stormwater management measures are as follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
factor into the design the existing site conditions which may cause
the measure to fail, have an adverse effect on water quality or
quantity, or cause harm or damage to persons or property,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands;
flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil
type, permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage
patterns; existing or former mines; significant land filling; and the
presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone) and related
Karst topography.
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of Section 16.84.070.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement. The
measures are to be sequenced in the site development process so
that erosion control standards are met and so the measure is not
compromised or impaired by construction runoff.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
Section 16.84.070.
6. Where tail water will affect the hydraulic performance of a
stormwater management measure, the design engineer shall
include such effects in the measure's design.
B. Guidelines for Management Measures. Stormwater management
measure guidelines are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual and other documents as described in
Section 16.84.060. Other stormwater management measures may be
utilized provided the design engineer demonstrates to the satisfaction
§ 16.84.050 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.050
1.01:823
§ 16.84.060. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Amended by Ord.
06-11]
of the review agency that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, ground water recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by Section
16.84.030 of this ordinance.
C. Manufactured Treatment Devices.
1. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of Section 16.84.030 of this chapter, provided the
pollutant removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation
for Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
2. Non-verified manufactured treatment devices may also be used for
purposes other than underground discharge of stormwater, where
such devices provide a clear benefit to stormwater quality or flow
control in a manner that facilitates improved nonstructural
stormwater management controls on the site, or avoids the need
for approval of off-site mitigation. The benefits of proposed nonverified
manufactured treatment devices must be proved to the
satisfaction of the review agency.
3. Manufactured treatment devices may be used only where the
maintenance plan required by Section 16.84.090 ensures that the
manufactured device will be properly maintained for its functional
lifespan and will be replaced as needed with management
measures that are at least as effective as the original manufactured
treatment device working in accordance with manufacturers
specifications.
A. Primary Technical Guidance. Technical guidance for stormwater
management measures can be found in the documents listed at
Subsection A.1. and A.2 below, which are available from Maps and
Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, 428
East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; telephone
(609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds. This document is also
available at www.njstormwater.org.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, (NJDEP
§ 16.84.050 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.060
1.01:824
§ 16.84.070. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
[Amended by Ord. 06-11]
Ocean County Demonstration Study, Stormwater Management
Facilities Maintenance Manual, dated June 1989) as amended.
B. Additional Technical Guidance. Additional technical guidance for
stormwater management measures can be obtained from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O.
Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540, or the
Hunterdon County Soil Conservation District, 687 Pittstown Road,
Suite 1, Frenchtown, NJ 08825, (908) 788-1397.
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306.
3. The Hunterdon County Soil Conservation District, 687 Pittstown
Road, Suite 1, Frenchtown, NJ 08825, (908) 788-1397.
4. The United States Environmental Protection Agency, including the
National Management Measures to Control Nonpoint Source
Pollution from Urban Areas, available at the Web site:
http://www.epa.gov/owow/nps/urbanmm/index.html.
5. Field guides of the United States Department of Agriculture,
Natural Resources Conservation Service, where supplemental to
and not conflicting with a source of Primary Guidance in Section
7.A.
6. Other similarly authoritative governmental or trade association
sources acceptable to the Township.
A. General Scope. This section sets forth requirements to protect public
safety through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. This section applies to any new stormwater
management basin.
B. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device intended to intercept runoff-borne trash
and debris that might otherwise block the hydraulic openings in the
outlet structure of a structural stormwater management measure.
Trash racks shall be installed upstream of such outlet structure
openings to ensure proper functioning of the structural stormwater
management measure in accordance with the following:
a. The trash rack should be constructed primarily of bars aligned
in the direction of flow with a maximum bar spacing of
approximately 1/2 the diameter or width of the hydraulic
opening it is protecting. Transverse bars aligned perpendicular
§ 16.84.060 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.070
1.01:825
to flow should be sized and spaced as necessary for rack
stability and strength.
b. The trash rack shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
performance of either the outlet structure opening it is
protecting or the overall outlet structure.
c. The trash rack shall have sufficient net open area under clean
conditions to limit the peak design storm velocity through it to
a maximum of 2.5 feet per second.
d. The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ft sq.
2. An overflow grate is a device intended to protect the opening in the
top of a stormwater management measure outlet structure. If an
outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the
following requirements:
a. The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
b. The overflow grate spacing shall be no more than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
c. The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft sq.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall include escape
provisions as follows:
a. If a structural stormwater management measure has an outlet
structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. Escape provisions means the permanent installation
of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide readily
accessible means of ingress and egress from the outlet
structure.
b. Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
structural stormwater management measures having a
permanent pool of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety
ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four
to six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately
2 1/2 feet below the permanent water surface, and the second
step shall be located 1-1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Section 16.84.070.B for an illustration of safety
ledges in a stormwater management basin.
c. In new stormwater management basins, the maximum slope of
the interior and exterior of an earthen dam, embankment, or
§ 16.84.070 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.070
1.01:826
§ 16.84.080. Conflict of Provisions. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
berm shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-6(c)3.
d. An emergency drawdown method for detention basins is
required where the permanent pool will be more than 2 1/2
feet deep. This drawdown method must consider downstream
or offsite stability at the outfall in accordance with the
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey.
A. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this Chapter 16.84, the applicant shall submit all of the
required components of the Checklist for the Site Development
Stormwater Plan at Section 16.84.080.C below as part of the
submission of the applicant's application for subdivision or site plan
approval.
§ 16.84.070 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.080
1.01:827
2. The applicant shall demonstrate through submission requirements
that the project meets the standards set forth in this chapter.
3. The applicant shall submit to the approving municipal authority the
required number of copies of the materials listed in the checklist
for site development stormwater plans in accordance with Section
16.84.080.C of this chapter.
B. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought (the Review Agency). That Review Agency
shall consult the Township Engineer to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets
the standards set forth in this ordinance.
C. Submission Requirements. The information in 16.84.080.C.1 through
16.84.080.C.8 below shall be provided unless a waiver is approved
through 16.84.080.C.9 below:
1. Existing Site Conditions Base Map, including topography, streams,
roads and current built environment. The reviewing engineer may
require upstream tributary drainage system information as
necessary. It is recommended that the topographic base map of the
site be submitted which extends a minimum of 300 feet beyond the
limits of the proposed development, at a scale appropriate to show
site details, showing two foot contour intervals.
2. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
critical areas and to those that provide particular opportunities or
constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at a scale
appropriate for the site indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
4. Stormwater Site Planning and Design Summary. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Section
3 through 6 are being met, including both nonstructural and
structural approaches. The focus of this plan shall be to describe
how the site is being managed or developed to meet the objective of
§ 16.84.080 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.080
1.01:828
controlling ground water recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible. Refer to the Municipal
Stormwater Management Plan and/or the Municipal Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan for additional requirements. It should
explain in full the maps required by this section.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map(s). The following
information, illustrated on a map at a scale appropriate for the site,
shall be included:
a. Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, land
area to remain in natural vegetation, and details of the
proposed plan to infiltrate, manage, control and dispose of
stormwater.
b. Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention, and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
a. Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design and discharge
stability calculations for the pre-development and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms specified in
Section 16.84.030 of this chapter.
b. When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on onsite boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure. The Township shall be notified of site
investigation activities and given the opportunity to have a
witness, either prior to approval or as a condition of approval,
as appropriate for the specific type of measure. Subsequent to
approval of the major development, post-construction bulk soil
density and infiltration testing shall be required for all
infiltration measures that were used as justification for
meeting the recharge standard, to ensure that they were
properly constructed.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Section 16.84.090.
§ 16.84.080 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.080
1.01:829
§ 16.84.090. Maintenance and Repair. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
8. Completed New Jersey Department of Environmental Protections
Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies Point System
(NSPS) spreadsheet and narrative further describing the
information used to prepare the spreadsheet.
9. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The Review Agency may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Sections 16.84.080.C.1 through
16.84.080.C.6 of this ordinance when it can be demonstrated that
the information requested is impossible to obtain or it would create
a significant economic hardship on the applicant to obtain and its
absence will not materially affect the review process.
A. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review pursuant to Section 16.84.010.C of this
chapter shall comply with the requirements of Sections
16.84.090.B and C.
B. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development. This plan shall be separate from all other
documents and designed for ongoing use by the site owners or
operators in performing and documenting maintenance and repair,
and by the Township in ensuring implementation of the
maintenance plan. The final maintenance plan shall be updated and
provided to the Township post-construction to include an
evaluation based on the specifications of the initial maintenance
plan and as-built conditions.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventive
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal and disposal;
safety needs; identification of methods and disposal sites for
materials removed during maintenance; maintenance
requirements for created wetlands and other ecological systems;
safety devices and systems; warranty and operational standards
from the manufacturers of any manufactured treatment devices
(See Section 16.64.050.C); and the name, address, and telephone
number of the person or persons responsible for preventive and
corrective maintenance (including replacement), using
maintenance guidelines for stormwater management measures
from Section 16.64.060, the Municipal Stormwater Management
Plan, Municipal Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan and any
relevant regional stormwater management plan. If the
maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer (for
example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as having
§ 16.84.080 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.090
1.01:830
the responsibility for continuing maintenance, the plan shall
include documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
16.84.090.B.2 above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Section 16.84.090.B.7 below
shall be recorded upon the deed of record for each property on
which the maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
5. Preventive and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measures,
including repairs or replacement to the structures; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of non-vegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
16.84.090.B.2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventive
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
16.84.090.B.2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Section
16.84.090.B.2 above shall retain, submit annually to the Township
and make available, upon request by any public entity with
administrative, health, environmental, or safety authority over the
site, the maintenance plan and the documentation required by
Section 16.84.090.B.6 and 16.84.090.B.7 above.
9. The requirements of Sections 16.84.090.B.3 and 16.84.090.B.4 do
not apply to stormwater management facilities that are dedicated
to and accepted by the Township or another governmental agency
of competent jurisdiction.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health or is in need of
maintenance or repair, the Township shall so notify the responsible
§ 16.84.090 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.090
1.01:831
§ 16.84.100. Site Conditions to Be Considered for a Site
Development Stormwater Plan. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible
person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and repair of the
facility in a manner that is approved by the Township Engineer or
his designee. The Township, in its discretion, may extend the time
allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for good cause. If the
responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance
and repair, the Township or County may immediately proceed to do
so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Township in which the major
development is located from requiring the posting of a performance or
maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
D. The maintenance plan shall specifically provide a specific municipal
right of access for inspection of measures, and for maintenance if
required under Section 16.64.090.B.10.
A. In addition to the prescribed information in Section 16.84.080;
requirements for a site development stormwater plan, Subsection C.
Submission Requirements, the following elements should be considered
and presented as appropriate and in combinations sufficient to
adequately indicate the existing site conditions and that of the
surrounding environs:
1. Hydrology.
a. Perennial or intermittent streams as shown on the USGS 7.5
Minute Quadrangle Maps and as indicated in the Soil Survey of
Hunterdon County, New Jersey.
b. Special water resource protection areas along all waters
designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps,
in the Municipal Stormwater Management Plan, or in the
County Soil Surveys.
c. Wetlands, NJDEP Linear Non-Tidal Wetlands, Marshlands and
NJDEP Letter of Interpretation findings.
d. FEMA Q3 Flood Data 100-Year-Floodplains and Floodways.
e. Geometry of on-site drainage areas.
2. Boundaries and Buffers.
a. Appropriate buffers to streams, rivers, wetlands, marshlands,
ponds, lakes and other water bodies as specified in pertinent
"ordinances, rules, regulations, statutes or other provisions of
law imposed by local, County, State or Federal agencies."
§ 16.84.090 RARITAN CODE § 16.84.100
1.01:832
b. Existing and proposed bearing and distances of property lines.
c. Existing and proposed conservation, maintenance,
construction, reconstruction, sight, utility, drainage and rightof-
way easements and dedications.
3. Vegetation and Landscaping.
a. Pervious and vegetated surfaces, i.e. woodlands, grasslands
and other significant natural features not listed if being utilized
for LID credit.
b. Native and invasive stands of vegetation.
c. Vegetated habitat for threatened and endangered species.
4. Geology and Soils (as indicated in the Soil Survey of Hunterdon
County, New Jersey).
a. Steep slopes, 10% or > slopes.
b. Soil types.
c. Highly erodible soils, with an erodibility factor (K) of 0.40 or <.
d. Drainage class and recharge potential.
e. Colloidal soils.
f. Depth to bedrock.
g. Seasonal high water table.
h. Soils subject to dynamic compaction and compacted soils.
i. Soil pH.
j. Shrink swell potential.
k. Deeply fractured bedrock.
l. Limestone and karst topography.
m. Hardpans and plough pans.
5. Existing Man Made Structures and Activities.
a. Existing buildings and significant permanent manmade
features.
b. Roads by classification, parking areas and other impervious
surfaces.
c. Bridges and culverts.
d. Utilities, sub-surface and above ground.
§ 16.84.100 CODE ADOPTION § 16.84.100
1.01:833
Chapter 16.85
FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS
§ 16.85.010. Site Plan and Permit Requirements in Floodplain.
[Amended by Ord. 06-11]
e. Mining/quarry operations and blasting areas.
f. Acid or other hazardous runoff.
g. Areas of fill and buried debris.
h. Wellheads and associated ground water withdrawals pipes,
discharges and BMP's of existing stormwater utilities.
i. Groundwater mounding.
j. Septic systems and wells of adjacent lots.
k. Leaking sanitary lines.
l. Previous land use (agricultural, industrial, commercial).
A. Site Plan Data. Action by Planning Board. In addition to the site plan
approval requirements contained in Chapter 16.20, no building or
structure shall hereafter be erected, enlarged, expanded, externally
altered or modified nor any paving, fill, excavation or improvement be
permitted within any floodplain area unless a development application
has been submitted to the Township Planning Board for its review and
approval.
Such plan shall be drawn to a scale not less than one inch equals 50
feet and shall show in addition to the information required under other
ordinances, the following information:
1. Existing and proposed buildings and structures;
2. Proposed finished grade elevations at the corners of any structure
or structures;
3. Existing topography and proposed grading at contour intervals of
at least two feet;
4. The lowest elevation within any proposed structure after its
completion;
5. The location, type and size of all existing and proposed storm
drainage facilities and other utilities servicing or proposed to
service the premises in question;
6. The location, size and nature of all existing and proposed drainage
rights-of-way or easements and the location, size and description of
any lands to be dedicated to the municipality, county or state;
§ 16.84.100 RARITAN CODE § 16.85.010
1.01:834
7. The layout and size of existing and proposed public or private
streets;
8. The elevation of any existing or proposed pumping facilities;
9. The nature and extent of any construction alterations or repairs;
10. The location, size and nature of the entire lot or lots in question and
any contiguous lots owned by the applicant or in which the
applicant has a direct or indirect interest;
11. Proof of stream encroachment lines obtained from the Department;
12. The extent of filling of the land, if any;
13. The location, type and size of all existing and proposed erosion and
siltation control measures, such as slope protection, soil
stabilization, sedimentation basins, sediment traps, headwalls,
aprons and the like;
14. Any and all other information and data necessary to meet any of the
requirements of this Title.
In any given situation for good and sufficient reasons the Planning
Board may waive any of the above submission requirements.
In addition, where required by the Planning Board, the developer
shall furnish information relating to subsurface conditions, based
on percolation tests and soil borings or probes. Test borings or
probes shall be performed by a licensed professional engineer with
proven competency in the field of soils engineering standards and
practices. A detailed report of the test shall be submitted to the
Planning Board and Township Engineer for review.
The Planning Board shall act upon the site plan within 60 days
of the date of formal acceptance by the Planning Board thereof
or the date of approval by the Department, whichever is later,
or other extension of time agreed to by the applicant. Failure of
the Planning Board to act within the time limit, or limits, shall
be deemed a denial of any site plan submitted under this Title.
Planning Board disapproval shall include written findings upon any
site plan element found contrary to the provisions or intent of this
Title.
B. Permits. No person shall engage in a permitted use within a delineated
floodplain until all necessary permits have been obtained.
C. Conditions. The Planning Board may impose such conditions on
permitted uses as it deems appropriate to promote the public safety,
health and welfare, to protect public and private property, wildlife and
fisheries, and to preserve, protect and enhance the natural environment
of the floodplain. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all
conditions of approval have been complied with.
§ 16.85.010 CODE ADOPTION § 16.85.020
1.01:835
§ 16.85.020. Specific Floodplain Requirements. [Prior code
§ 15-11.6; amended by Ord. 06-11]
A. Preservation of Natural Land. It is found that natural floodplains,
periodic flooding, soils, vegetation, fish and wildlife and that periodic
flooding of lowland areas, marshes and swamps adjacent to stream
channels produces a rich physical-chemical environment for may living
organisms. It is further found that floodplains contain biological
communities which are among the most productive of natural systems
and perform the following essential to the natural environment:
1. Passage and storage of storm floodwaters;
2. Removal of sediment loads from streams through deposition;
3. Replenishment of groundwater supplies through soil infiltration;
4. Dissipation of energy of flood flows, thereby reducing downstream
destruction;
5. Provide areas of recreational and aesthetic pleasure.
Because of the importance of the natural floodplain as cited above, all
natural land within any delineated floodplain shall be preserved in its
natural state and, where possible, developed land within the floodplain
shall be restored to its natural state so as to duplicate the natural or
undeveloped drainage characteristics in terms of runoff and velocity.
B. Permitted Uses in Channels, Floodplains and Floodplain (500 year)
Areas.
1. Channel. Within any channel, structures may be erected, enlarged,
expanded or externally altered and fill, excavation or other
improvements or changes may be permitted only in connection
with stream improvement or stabilization, which improvements or
changer shall have the specific approval of the State Department of
Environmental Protection and the Township Planning Board. The
Hunterdon County Planning Board shall receive copies of all
exhibits for their review and approval as required.
2. Floodplain. Within any floodplain, structure may be erected,
enlarged, expanded or externally altered, and fill, excavation or
other improvement or changes may be permitted only in
connection with stream improvement or stabilization, which
improvements or changes shall have the specific approval of the
State Department of Environmental Protection and the Township
Planning Board. The Hunterdon County Planning Board shall
receive copies of all exhibits for their review and approval as
required.
The accepted practices of soil husbandry and farming, as well as
recreational uses in the nature of parks, playgrounds, picnic areas,
golf course, and boat landings shall be permitted in accordance
§ 16.85.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.85.020
1.01:836
with the issuance of a permit as provided by Section 16.84.050.B.
No material, equipment or vehicles shall be parked or stored in the
floodway even in conjunction with a permitted use.
3. Floodplain (500 year) Areas. Until a floodplain (500 year) has been
designated by the Department, the requirements for the floodplain,
Subsection C.2. of this section, shall apply to the floodplain (500)
area.
Once a floodplain has been designated, structures may be
constructed, erected, enlarged, expanded, externally altered or
modified and fill, excavation and other improvements may be
permitted in the floodplain (500 year) area only after receiving
specific approval of the Township Planning Board a use allowed by
the zoning chapter and further subject to the conditions set forth in
this Title.
C. Prohibited Uses in Channels, Floodways and Flood Fringe Areas. No
person shall hereafter engage in, cause, or permit other persons to
engage in prohibited uses within a delineated floodplain. The following
uses shall be prohibited:
1. Placing, depositing, or dumping any fill, solid waste, garbage,
refuse, trash, rubbish or debris;
2. Dumping or discharging untreated domestic sewerage or industrial
wastes, either solid or liquid;
3. The storage or disposal of pesticides or of chemical soil nutrients;
4. The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding
buoyant, flammable or explosive;
5. The storage or processing of hazardous materials.
D. Pre-existing Nonconforming Structures and Uses.
1. Structures or land uses in any floodplain which existed on or before
April 28, 1975, may be permitted to continue subject to the
following conditions:
a. If any pre-existing structure is destroyed by any means,
including floods, to an extent of 50% or more of its replacement
cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed, except
in conformity with the provisions of this Title;
b. No pre-existing structure shall be moved, altered, expanded,
changed or enlarged unless the provision of this Title are
complied with. This provision does not apply to routine
maintenance and repair, provided that such maintenance and
repair does not increase the flood damage potential of the
structure.
§ 16.85.020 CODE ADOPTION § 16.85.020
1.01:837
§ 16.85.030. Application Procedures for Building Permit. [Amended
by Ord. 06-11]
In any portion of the floodplain, an existing nonconforming use
or structure may be altered or expanded provided that such
alteration or expansion does not increase its ground coverage
or flood damage potential.
2. Structures in the floodplain, vacant or unused, for six consecutive
months or longer shall not qualify as pre-existing uses. This
subsection shall not apply to structures for rent or sale.
A. Notice of Hearing — Review by Planning Board.
1. Notice of Hearing. Upon application for a development in the
floodplain, a public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board in
accordance with Section 16.08.050. In addition to the requirements
of Section 16.08.050, notice shall be given to the Township's
Environmental Commission and the governing bodies and
Environmental Commissions of other municipalities which may be
affected by the proposed use.
2. Review — Criteria. In reviewing the application and arriving at
findings, the Planning Board shall consult with the Township
Engineer and other experts and consider the following criteria in
addition to those set forth in Section 16.84.060.B;
a. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachment;
b. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;
c. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
insulation of these systems form disease, contamination, and
unsanitary conditions resulting from flooding;
d. The susceptibility of the proposed use to flood damage and the
effects of such damage;
e. The need for a waterfront location;
f. The availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding;
g. The duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
h. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
i. The extent to which the hydraulic capacity of the floodway will
be disrupted;
§ 16.85.020 RARITAN CODE § 16.85.030
1.01:838
j. The degree to which any aspect of food chain or plant, animal,
fish or human life process are affected adversely within or
beyond the proposed use area;
k. The degree to which the proposed activity alters natural water
flow or water temperature;
l. The degree to which the proposed use provides facilities for
the proper handling of litter, trash, refuse, and sanitary and
industrial waste;
m. The degree to which irreplaceable land types will be destroyed;
n. The degree to which the natural scenic and aesthetic values at
the proposed activity site can be retained;
o. The degree to which materials not subject to major damage by
floods are firmly anchored to prevent flotation or are readily
removable from the area within the time available after flood
warning.
If the Planning Board finds that the proposed use would violate or tend
to violate the purposes and intent of this Title, the application shall be
denied.
B. Condition of Approval for Permitted Uses. If the application shall not
violate the purposes and intent of this Title, the Planning Board may
approve the application and impose such permit conditions as are
necessary to promote the public safety, health and welfare, to protect
public and private property, wildlife and fisheries, and to preserve,
protect, and enhance the natural environment of the floodplain.
1. General Conditions. These conditions may include, but are not
limited to, the following:
a. Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities;
b. Imposition of operation controls, sureties and deed
restrictions;
c. Requirements for construction of stormwater detention
facilities, channel modifications, dikes, levees and other
protective measures;
d. Installation of an adequate flood warning system;
e. Postponement of development until such time as protective
measures are installed, or until the floodway and flood hazard
area have been delineated by the Department or the Township.
2. Specific Conditions. Where applicable, the Planning Board shall
condition approval as follows:
§ 16.85.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.85.030
1.01:839
a. Fill shall be no lower than one foot above the flood hazard
design elevation and shall extend at such height for a distance
of at least 15 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected
thereon;
b. Structures on fill shall be built so that the first floor or
basement are at a minimum of one foot above the flood hazard
design elevation;
c. Structures not placed on fill shall be otherwise elevated so that
the first floor is at a minimum of one foot above the flood
hazard design elevation or shall be flood proofed as set forth in
Subsection B.2.d. of this section. Flood proofing alone shall not
be adequate for residences, hospitals, nursing homes, schools,
day care centers, and similar uses;
d. Flood proofing measures shall be consistent with the flood
protection elevation for the particular area, flood velocities,
durations, rates of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces,
and other similar factors. The Planning Board shall require the
applicant to submit a plan or document certified by a
registered professional engineer that the flood proofing
measures are consistent with the flood hazard design elevation
and associated flood factors. Any or all of the following flood
proofing measures may be required:
i. Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement,
ii. Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, and shutters,
or similar devices,
iii. Reinforce walls to resist water pressures,
iv. Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of
water through walls,
v. Addition of weight to structures to resist floatation,
vi. Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures,
vii. Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems
in a manner which prevents the entrance of flood waters,
viii. Pumping facilities, or comparable measures, for the
subsurface drainage systems of buildings to relieve
external foundation wall and basement flood pressures,
ix. Construction that resists rupture or collapse caused by
water pressure or floating debris,
x. Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm
drains which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent
backup of sewerage or stormwaters into the structure.
§ 16.85.030 RARITAN CODE § 16.85.030
1.01:840
§ 16.85.040. Conflict of Provisions. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
Should the provisions of this chapter conflict with the provisions of any
other ordinance of the Township the provisions of this chapter shall take
precedence unless such other ordinance places greater restrictions on the
use of land and density of development or construction standards, then such
other ordinance shall apply.
§ 16.85.050. Administration and Enforcement. [Amended by Ord.
06-11]
The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
relating to the construction, erection, maintenance and continued operation
at design capacity of stormwater detention facilities and other facilities,
structures, devices and techniques required under this chapter to carry out
the objectives of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township
Engineer. Failure to maintain any stormwater detention facility, structure or
device at design capacity or carry out procedures or techniques required as
part of this chapter shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
The Township Engineer shall serve notice on the owner or occupant to
correct any violations of this chapter within 30 days. Upon failure of the
Gravity drainage of basements may be eliminated by
mechanical devices,
xi. Location of all electrical equipment, circuits and installed
electrical appliances in a manner which will assure they
are not subject to inundation and flooding,
xii. Storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant
materials, flammable liquids, or other toxic or hazardous
materials shall be situated above the flood hazard design
elevation and shall be flood proofed to prevent flotation of
storage containers or damage to storage containers which
could result in the escape of toxic materials into the air or
flood waters.
xiii. Use of construction materials are resistant to water
damage;
xiv. Installation of emergency standby electrical power
equipment.
C. Flood Map. The Planning Board, after proper investigation, survey and
public hearing, may recommend amendments to the Department of
Housing and Urban Development Flood Map.
D. Flood Insurance. Flood insurance, in accordance with the National
Flood Insurance Program shall be required for all development in the
floodplain.
§ 16.85.030 CODE ADOPTION § 16.85.050
1.01:841
owner or occupant to correct such violation, the Township Engineer shall
prosecute a complaint to correct such violation before the municipal judge.
§ 16.85.060. Floodplain Certificates. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
Upon written application identifying the property to be certified and the
payment of a $30 fee, the Township Engineer shall certify to the applicant
that the property identified in the application is or is not within the
floodplain or flood hazard area.
§ 16.85.070. Violation — Penalty. [Amended by Ord. 06-11]
Refer to the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Raritan
Chapter 1.08, General Penalty.
Schedules - Title 16
Schedule I
SCHEDULE OF AREA, YARD AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
Schedule II
MINIMUM UTILITY REQUIREMENTS
Schedule III
CLUSTER REQUIREMENTS
Schedule IV
SCHEDULE OF FEES
Title 17: Board of Health Regulations
Chapter 17.04
HEALTH REGULATIONS GENERALLY
§ 17.04.010. Definition, Construction and Severability. [Prior code
§ BH:1-1]
The provisions of Chapter 1.04 of the Code of the Township of Raritan,
concerning short title, definitions, construction and severability shall apply
to all chapters adopted by the Board of Health.
§ 17.04.020. Violation; Penalty. [Prior code § BH:1-2; amended by
Ord. 06-03; BH Ord. adopted 11-17-1988]
§ 16.85.050 RARITAN CODE § 17.04.020
1.01:842
Chapter 17.08
WATER SUPPLY CODE
§ 17.08.010. Establishment of Code. [Prior code § BH:5-1]
A code regulating the location, construction, alteration, use and supervision
of individual and semipublic water supplies, requiring the fixing of fees
and prescribing penalties for violations is adopted pursuant to P.L. 1950,
c. 188 (N.J.R.S. 26:3-69.1 through 3-69.6), as amended wherever applicable
by law. In their interpretation and application the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion
of the public health, safety and welfare. To protect the public, among
other purposes, such provisions are intended to provide for an adequate
water supply which is free from deleterious substances and fit for human
consumption.
§ 17.08.020. Title. [Prior code § BH:5-2]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Individual and Semi-Public Water Supply Code
of New Jersey (1966) and has been placed on file in the office of the
secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain on file there for use and
examination by the public.
§ 17.08.030. Public Record. [Prior code § BH:5-3]
Three copies of the Individual and Semi-Public Water Supply Code of New
Jersey (1966) have been placed on file in the office of the secretary of the
Board of Health and shall remain on file there for use and examination by
the public.
§ 17.08.040. Permits. [Prior code § BH:5-4]
A. Maximum Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of any
chapter adopted by the Board of Health of the Township shall, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter
1.08.010. Complaint shall be made in the municipal court of the
Township or before another judicial officer having authority under the
laws of the State of New Jersey. The court shall have the power to
impose the other and additional penalties provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-77
and N.J.S.A. 26:3-78.
B. Separate Violation. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day
in which a violation of any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by
the Board of Health exists shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Permit Required. No person shall locate, construct or alter any water
supply until a permit for the location, construction or alteration of the
water supply shall have been issued by the administrative authority.
§ 17.04.020 CODE ADOPTION § 17.08.040
1.01:843
§ 17.08.050. (Reserved)
§ 17.08.060. Casings. [Prior code § BH:5-6]
B. Application for Permit. Application for a permit to locate, construct or
alter any portable water supply system shall be made to the
administrative authority by the well driller, on forms furnished by the
administrative authority.
C. Approval of Location by Administrative Authority. No permit to locate
and construct a new potable water supply shall be issued until the
design and location of the sewage disposal system on the property has
been approved by the administrative authority. No permit to alter an
existing water supply shall be issued until the location of the existing
sewage disposal system on the property has been approved by the
administrative authority. No permit shall be issued to construct a new
water supply or to alter an existing potable water supply where there is
danger of pollution of the water supply from any sewage disposal
system.
D. Denial of Permit. In case any permit or certification required by this
chapter is denied by the administrative authority, a hearing shall be
held thereon before the Board of Health within 15 days after request
therefor is made by the applicant. Upon the hearing, the Board of
Health may affirm, modify or reverse its previous determination and
must announce its decision within 15 days after the date of the hearing.
E. Adequate Water Supply Required. The well driller shall, upon request,
furnish the Board of Health with proof satisfactory to the board that the
proposed water supply will have sufficient depth and pump sufficient
gallons of water per minute to be adequate to supply the home or
homes in the areas to be served by the water supply.
A. Requirements. All casings shall be of new and undamaged pipe of
standard wrought iron or steel. They shall extend to a minimum of 50
feet below grade, or additional casing necessary to go 10 feet into solid
rock, and to be sealed with a one sand, one cement wet mixture. No
casing shall be sealed without administrative authority present.
B. Casing Sizes. Casing sizes are as follows:
Type Weight Wall Thickness
Six-inch casing 19 lb. per feet 0.280
Eight-inch casing 24.70 lb. per feet 0.277
Ten-inch casing 40.48 lb. per feet 0.365
Twelve-inch casing 49.56 lb. per feet 0.375
C. Well Shafts. All wall shafts must be four inches larger than casing to
provide proper sealing for one sand, one cement mixture of approved
§ 17.08.040 RARITAN CODE § 17.08.060
1.01:844
§ 17.08.070. Location of Well. [Prior code § BH:5-7]
The location of the well for any new water supply shall be shown on the plan
of any sewage disposal system, and no change in the location of either shall
be made without approval of the administrative authority.
§ 17.08.080. Inspections. [Prior code § BH:5-8]
When the well is ready for inspection, the well driller shall notify the
administrative authority at least one day in advance, exclusive of mailing
time and Saturdays, Sundays, holidays that the work is ready for inspection.
The well driller or his or her representative shall be present when the
inspection is made. Any test the Board of Health or the administrative
authority may require shall be performed by the well driller at his or her
expense.
Upon the completion of the installation of a water supply system or
following repairs to its pumping equipment, it shall be flushed, disinfected
with chlorine solution and the chlorine solution shall remain in the well for a
minimum of 24 hours, then the well shall be thoroughly reflushed to remove
all traces of chlorine.
§ 17.08.090. Well Record. [Prior code § BH:5-9]
When the work is completed, the owner shall submit a well record on
forms furnished by the Board of Health. The record must be certified by
the well driller, stating that the water supply system has been located
and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the Water Supply
Code of New Jersey (1959) and this chapter. Application for a certificate of
occupancy shall not be approved until the well record, fully completed, is
submitted.
§ 17.08.100. Rules and Regulations. [Prior code § BH:5-10]
The Board of Health may adopt such rules and regulations as they deem
necessary in connection with this chapter and the code.
§ 17.08.110. Water Line Check Valves. [Prior code § BH:5-11]
consistency, extending from the bottom of the casing to surface slab,
and shall be placed in one continuous operation.
D. Couplings. Sections of casings shall be joined with couplings with
ample full threaded joints, drive pipe couplings, or by welding, so that
all joints shall be closed and made water tight.
A. Mandatory Installation of Valves. The owner of every house, building or
structure, now or hereafter constructed, assembled or moved to any lot
or lots in the Township intended for residential or commercial use or
professional occupancy, when connecting such house, building or
structure, to the public water supply stream, shall install a check valve
§ 17.08.060 CODE ADOPTION § 17.08.110
1.01:845
Chapter 17.12
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
§ 17.12.010. State Regulations Incorporated by Reference. [Prior
code § BH:4-1; amended by BH Ord. passed 10-18-1990; 2-15-2018
by Ord. No. BOH 18-2]
In relation to the location, design, construction, use, installation, operation
and maintenance of subsurface sewage disposal systems and pursuant to
the authority granted under N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 through 26:3-69.6, the
Raritan Township Board of Health adopts, by reference, N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1 et
seq. (BH Ord. passed 10-18-90: prior code § BH:4-1)
§ 17.12.020. Availability of Regulations for Public Inspection. [Prior
code § BH:4-2; amended by BH Ord. passed 10-18-1990]
The regulations established and adopted by this chapter are described and
commonly known as Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems, and are set forth in the New Jersey Administrative Code, Title 7,
Chapter 9A, commonly cited as N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1, et seq. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.2, three copies of the regulations have been placed on file in the
office of the secretary of the Raritan Township Board of Health upon the
introduction of this chapter and will remain on file until final action is taken
on this chapter for the use and examination by the public.
§ 17.12.030. Permit Required. [Prior code § BH:4-3; amended by BH
Ord. passed 10-18-1990]
No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage disposal
system until a permit for the location, construction, alteration or repairs of
said sewage disposal system shall have been issued by the administrative
authority as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-2.1.
which is to be placed next to the water meter on the interior side of the
water line closest to such house, structure or building.
B. Failure To Comply. Failure to install a check valve as required is
declared to be a health hazard and annoyance.
C. Inspection. The Plumbing Inspector or any authorized agent shall have
free access to all parts of any premises to which public water services
are supplied or connected for the purpose of inspection, examination,
or doing anything in connection with such inspection or examination of
check valves for the purpose of protecting the interests of the
inhabitants of the Township, by enforcing the provisions of this section.
D. Penalty. Any person, who shall violate this section by failing to install a
check valve as required shall be subject to a fine of $25. Each day of
noncompliance, after notification by the Plumbing Inspector, shall be
considered a separate offense.
§ 17.08.110 RARITAN CODE § 17.12.040
1.01:846
§ 17.12.040. Issuance of Permit. [Prior code § BH:4-4; amended by
BH Ord. passed 10-18-1990]
The administrative authority may issue a permit if the application is
determined to be in compliance with the regulations adopted under this
chapter and applicable local ordinances.
§ 17.12.050. Compliance Requirements of All Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems. [Prior code § BH:4-5; amended by BH Ord. passed
10-18-1990]
All individual subsurface sewage disposal systems constructed, repaired or
certified for operation after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter shall comply with the operation and maintenance requirements
set forth under N.J.A.C. 7:9A-12.1.
§ 17.12.060. Certificate of Compliance. [Prior code § BH:4-6;
amended by BH Ord. passed 10-18-1990]
New individual subsurface sewage disposal systems shall not be placed
in operation, nor shall any dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be
sold or occupied, which rely on such a system for sewage disposal, until
the administrative authority shall have issued a certificate indicating that
the subsurface sewage disposal system has been located and constructed
in compliance with the terms of the permit issued, the provisions of the
Municipal Code and the provision of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq.
§ 17.12.070. Duration of Approval; Renewals. [Prior code § BH:4-7;
amended by BH Ord. passed 10-18-1990]
Any approved application for the location, construction and/or alteration of
an individual subsurface sewage disposal system shall be valid for a period
of three years from the date of issue. Thereafter, a new approved application
must be obtained which will be reviewed under the regulations in effect at
the time of the new application.
§ 17.12.080. Status of Systems Previously Approved. [Prior code
§ BH:4-9; amended by BH Ord. passed 10-18-1990]
This chapter shall not apply to any subsurface sewage disposal system for
which approvals were granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, provided that for any such systems should the
landowner seek to amend, modify, or otherwise alter the system previously
approved then the requirements of this chapter shall apply.
Chapter 17.16
PORTABLE CHEMICAL TOILETS
§ 17.12.040 CODE ADOPTION § 17.16.010
1.01:847
§ 17.16.010. Permit Required for Installation. [Amended by BH Ord.
passed 3-23-1981]
No person, firm or corporation shall install, provide or permit the
installation, furnishing or operation of a portable chemical toilet within
the Township unless a permit therefor is first obtained from the Board of
Health. Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
§ 17.16.020. Length of Use Restricted. [Amended by BH Ord. passed
3-23-1981]
A portable chemical toilet shall be allowed only for temporary use not
exceeding 12 months except that a renewal of a license may be obtained
where the continued temporary use is shown to the satisfaction of the Board
of Health to be necessary.
§ 17.16.030. (Reserved)
§ 17.16.040. Sanitation and Maintenance. [Amended by BH Ord.
passed 3-23-1981]
The portable chemical toilet shall be used only so long as field sanitations
and maintenance service is provided. This shall include pumping out all
waste matter from the tank, sterilizing and recharging tank with fresh
chemicals, fresh supply of toilet tissue and thorough cleaning of premises,
throughout the entire period of use of the portable chemical toilet.
§ 17.16.050. Permitted Where. [Amended by BH Ord. passed
3-23-1981]
The portable chemical toilet is intended to be used and to be permitted
for such purposes as sport events, picnics, parades, construction operations
and for similar purpose where other toilet facilities are not feasible and the
need for toilet facilities exists.
§ 17.16.060. Disposal of Waste Matter. [Amended by BH Ord. passed
3-23-1981]
The waste matter from all portable chemical toilets shall be disposed of and
properly treated only at a sewage treatment plant, and no wastes from a
portable chemical toilet shall be otherwise disposed of within the limits of
the Township.
§ 17.16.070. Subject to Inspection. [Amended by BH Ord. passed
3-23-1981]
Portable chemical toilet facilities and disposal of waste therefrom shall be
subject to inspection and investigation and the same shall be permitted to
representatives of the Board of Health at all times.
§ 17.16.010 RARITAN CODE § 17.16.080
1.01:848
§ 17.16.080. Violation; Penalty. [Amended by Ord. 06-03; BH Ord.
adopted 3-23-1981]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall upon conviction thereof be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 1.08.010. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute
of a separate offense.
Chapter 17.20
PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE CODE
§ 17.20.010. Establishment of Code. [Prior code § BH:3-1]
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the board of health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950. A copy of the code is
annexed to this chapter and made a part of it without the inclusion of the
text herein.
§ 17.20.020. Short Title. [Prior code § BH:3-2]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953).
§ 17.20.030. Public Record. [Prior code § BH:3-3]
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the office of the secretary of the Board of Health and
shall remain on file there for the use and examination of the public.
§ 17.20.040. Amendments to Code. [Prior code § BH:3-4]
The Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) is adopted in its
entirely with the exception that Section II, 2.1 (e and f) are deleted and not
adopted by the Board of Health.
Chapter 17.24
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 17.16.080 CODE ADOPTION § 17.24.010
1.01:849
§ 17.24.010. Establishment of Code. [Prior code § BH:7-1; amended
by BH Ord. passed 8-5-1985]
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties for
violations is established pursuant to N.J.R.S. 26:3-69.1 through 3-69.6. A
copy of the code is annexed to this chapter and made a part of it without the
inclusion of test herein.
§ 17.24.020. Title. [Prior code § BH:7-2; amended by BH Ord.
passed 8-5-1985]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey
(1965).
§ 17.24.030. Public Record. [Prior code § BH:7-3; amended by BH
Ord. passed 8-5-1985]
Three copies of the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)
have been placed on file in the office of the secretary of the Board of Health
and shall remain on file there for use and examination by the public.
§ 17.24.040. Licenses. [Prior code § BH:7-4; amended by BH. Ord.
passed 8-5-1985]
All retail food and beverage handling establishments shall be licensed by
the Board of Health.
§ 17.24.050. Duration of Licenses. [Prior code § BH:7-6; amended
by BH Ord. passed 8-5-1985]
§ 17.24.060. License Applications. [Prior code § BH:7-7; amended
by BH Ord. passed 8-5-1985]
A. Each permanent license shall be in effect until December 31st of each
calendar year.
B. Each temporary license shall be for a period of time not to exceed 21
days.
A. Each applicant for a license shall complete an application and provide
all information requested on the application. When requested, each
applicant shall provide satisfactory proof to the Board of Health of any
representation contained in the application. Failure to do so shall result
in the application being denied.
B. If there is a material misrepresentation or omission in an application,
any license issued on the basis of that application shall be revoked or
suspended.
§ 17.24.010 RARITAN CODE § 17.24.070
1.01:850
§ 17.24.070. Miscellaneous. [Prior code § BH:7-8; amended by BH
Ord. passed 8-5-1985]
Chapter 17.26
REGULATION OF GREASE TRAPS
§ 17.26.010. Definitions. [Amended by BH Ord. 07-2]
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any business or other entity that sells,
processes, manufactures, makes or otherwise deals in or with and empties
food, food by-products and/or other animal products into the sewer system.
RTMUA — Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
§ 17.26.020. Prohibited Waste. [Amended by BH Ord. 07-2]
The following solid or viscous waste which will or may cause obstruction to
the flow in the sewer lines or otherwise interfere with the proper operation
of the treatment of sewage are prohibited from entering the sewer system;
any liquid containing oils, fats, wax or grease (whether emulsified or not)
in excess of 100 mg/l of solvent soluble materials, or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and
150° F. (0° and 65° C.) improperly shredded garbage, animal guts or tissues,
bones, hides, entrails, feathers, spent grains or hops, milk or milk byproducts,
waste paper and such similar substances as may be designated by
the RTMUA.
§ 17.26.030. New Establishments. [Amended by BH Ord. 07-2]
All new Food Establishments shall install and have approved such traps,
filters, etc., prior to commencing business. Type of establishment will
dictate the size of the required grease trap, upon review by the RTMUA.
§ 17.26.040. Existing Establishments. [Amended by BH Ord. 07-2]
Within 90 days after receipt of notice, all Food Establishments as of the
date of the adoption of this chapter shall provide the RTMUA with details as
to existing traps, filters, pretreatment facilities and operating procedures.
Upon review and/or inspection by the RTMUA, said Food Establishments
shall, within six months, install or upgrade such traps, filters, pretreatment
A. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to exempt any beverage or
food handling establishments from any licensing requirements.
B. All beverage or food handling establishments licensed by the Board of
Health or required to be licensed by the Board of Health shall comply
with all applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations,
etc. Failure to do so shall result in revocation or suspension of any
license issued and shall subject the offender to such other penalties as
provided by law.
§ 17.24.070 CODE ADOPTION § 17.26.040
1.01:851
facilities and/or operating procedures as prescribed by the RTMUA in order
to comply with this chapter.
§ 17.26.050. Installation. [Amended by BH Ord. 07-2]
All food establishments shall install such grease traps, filters or other
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures designed to prevent such
above specified materials from entering the sewer system. A detail of the
plan for such grease traps, filters, etc., shall be supplied to the RTMUA
along with an outline of the establishment's operating procedures to
prevent entry into the sewer system. Such installation, plans and
procedures shall be approved by the RTMUA.
§ 17.26.060. Compliance. [Amended by BH Ord. 07-2]
In order to identify those traps, filters, etc., which may be malfunctioning
or are of a capacity or design inadequate to properly intercept the waste
discharged, each food establishment subject to this chapter shall, at the
owner's expense, install a monitoring point(s) which shall be kept
reasonably open to the Raritan Township Board of Health agent or the
RTMUA agent. Should a Food Establishment owner feel that it should be
exempt from same or all of the requirements of this chapter, he/she may
apply in person or in writing to the Raritan Township Board of Health. The
Raritan Township Board of Health may, for good cause shown, waive some
or all of the requirements herein set forth. Such waiver shall apply only to
the then owner and shall be in effect only so long as the then existing use
and/or procedures continue and only so long as there is no evidence that
prohibited waste are entering the sewer system.
§ 17.26.070. Maintenance. [Amended by BH Ord. 07-2]
All Food Establishments shall maintain such traps, filters, etc., in proper
working order and they shall perform the necessary operating procedures
on a continuous basis. Removal of trapped waste shall be only by licensed
haulers. Each Food Establishment shall maintain a written report of trap
maintenance for a period of three years which records shall be readily
available for inspection by the RTMUA and the Raritan Township Board of
Health. Contractor must use a 3-Part Form as follows: 1) Restaurant File; 2)
Contractor File; 3) Copy to Hunterdon County Health Department.
§ 17.26.080. Clean Out. [Amended by BH Ord. 07-2]
In the event that, after the owner refuses a request to abate the problem, it
shall be necessary to clean out, repair and/or replace any sewer line due to
the failure to install and/or maintain such traps, filters, and/or procedures,
the cost of the same shall be paid by the owner of such establishment.
§ 17.26.090. Inspection Fees. [Amended by BH Ord. 07-2]
An annual inspection fee of $50 shall be charged and payable to the
Township of Raritan. A fee of $35 shall be charged and payable to the
§ 17.26.040 RARITAN CODE § 17.26.090
1.01:852
Township of Raritan for each reinspection performed by the RTMUA.
Maintenance records should be part of the regular health inspection.
Should an establishment not have the records in place, a "Conditionally
Satisfactory Certificate" will be given and, if maintenance is necessary, will
be performed by the RTMUA at the expense of the owner at the hourly rate
of $200.
§ 17.26.100. Penalties. [Amended by BH Ord. 07-2]
Should a Food Establishment fail to provide installation plans, fails to
install and maintain and/or fails to comply with the operating procedures or
refuses to allow inspection, the RTMUA shall inform the Food Establishment
that it is referring the matter to the Raritan Township Board of Health for
its agent to determine compliance with the Grease Trap Ordinance. If the
agent of the Raritan Township Board of Health determines that a violation
has occurred, the penalty for non-compliance shall be $500. Additionally,
the establishment will be closed until such violation is abated.
Chapter 17.28
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINE CODE
§ 17.26.090 CODE ADOPTION § 17.26.100
1.01:853

ARTICLE 1
Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code
§ 17.28.010. Establishment of Code. [Prior code § BH:8-1; amended
by BH Ord. passed 12-16-1985]
10A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and
beverage vending machines and licensure thereof; prohibiting the sale or
possession with intent to sell through vending machines of adulterated or
misbranded foods or drinks; authorizing inspection of vending machines
and operations connected therewith; and fixing penalties for violations is
established pursuant to Revised Statutes 26:3-69.1 to 69.6. A copy of the
code is annexed to this article and made a part of it without the inclusion of
the text herein.
§ 17.28.020. Short Title. [Prior code § BH:8-2; amended by BH Ord.
passed 12-16-1985]
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New Jersey
(1961).
§ 17.28.030. Public Record. [Prior code § BH:8-3; amended by BH
Ord. passed 12-16-1985]
Three copies of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961) have been placed on file in the office of the secretary of
the local Board of Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will
remain on file there until final action is taken on this article for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 17.28.040. Violation; Penalty. [Prior code § BH:8-4; amended by
Ord. 06-03; BH Ord. adopted 12-16-1985]
Any person who violates any provision of, or order promulgated under
this article or code established herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.08.010 for each violation. Each day a
particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 17.28.010 CODE ADOPTION § 17.28.040
1.01:855

ARTICLE 2
General Operation Regulations
§ 17.28.050. Permits and Licenses Required. [Prior code § BH:9-1;
amended by BH Ord. passed 12-16-1985]
It is unlawful for any person whether as principal as principal or agent,
clerk or employee, either for himself or herself or any other person, or for
any body corporate, or as an officer of any corporation, or therewise to:
§ 17.28.060. (Reserved)
§ 17.28.070. Permits and Licenses; Application and Issuance. [Prior
code § BH:9-3; amended by BH Ord. passed 12-16-1985]
Application for and issuance of the permits and licenses referred to in
Section 17.28.050. shall be made in conformity with the provisions of the
Food and Beverage Vending Code of New Jersey (1961) as adopted or
amended by the Board of Health of this municipality. Such permits and
licenses are not transferable.
§ 17.28.080. Permits and Licenses — Suspension, Revocation or
Reinstatement. [Prior code § BH:9-4; amended by BH Ord. passed
12-16-1985]
Permits and licenses issued under authority of this article may be
suspended, revoked or reinstated by the Board of Health of this municipality
pursuant to the provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending Code of New
Jersey (1961) as adopted or amended by the Board of Health.
A. Engage in the operation of one or more machines or devices offered for
a public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by other
means dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or
package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices between
each vending operation, without first having applied to and procured a
permit from the Board of Health of this municipality so to do, or without
complying with any and all of the provisions of the Food and Beverage
Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961) as adopted or amended by
the Board;
B. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in this
municipality, one or more machines or devices offered for public use
which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by other means
dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package,
without the necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending
operation, without first having applied to and procured a license for
each such machine or device from the Board of Health of this
municipality or without complying with any and all of the provisions of
the Food and Beverage Vending Code of New Jersey (1961) as adopted
or amended by the Board.
§ 17.28.050 CODE ADOPTION § 17.28.090
1.01:857
§ 17.28.090. Interstate Commerce. [Prior code § BH:9-5; amended
by BH Ord. passed 12-16-1985]
No provision of this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the State or Federal
government.
§ 17.28.100. Violation; Penalty. [Prior code § BH:9-6; amended by
Ord. 06-03; BH Ord. adopted 12-16-1985]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the provisions of Chapter
1.08.010, and each violation of any of the provisions of this article, and each
day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 17.28.090 RARITAN CODE § 17.28.100
1.01:858
Chapter 17.32
SWINE
§ 17.32.010. Definitions. [Prior code § BH:6-1]
As used in this chapter:
GARBAGE — Includes all waste material from the tables of hotels,
restaurants, private homes, and all other waste products from kitchens,
stores, bake shops, or places where food is prepared, consumed, handled or
sold for human use.
PIGS — Includes hogs, swine, shoats and pigs, more than 60 days of age.
TANKAGE — Sterilized, dehydrated, ground animal protein.
§ 17.32.020. Permit Limitations. [Prior code § BH:6-2]
The granting of a permit shall, in no way, authorize the creation of a
nuisance or the maintenance of an obnoxious condition and shall in no
way regulate or prevent the passing of future ordinances concerning the
prohibition of, or the limitation upon, the keeping of pigs or the bringing of
garbage into the Township.
§ 17.32.030. License Required. [Prior code § BH:6-3]
No person shall have, keep, raise or maintain more than 100 pigs in the
Township without first procuring a license. The license period shall be from
the first day of January to the 31st day of December of each year.
§ 17.32.040. Application for License; Inspection of Premises. [Prior
code § BH:6-4; amended by BH Ord. passed 11-17-1988]
A. Application for License. Application for a license shall be made to the
secretary of the Board of Health of the Township in writing. The
application shall include a statement of the location of the premises on
which the pigs proposed to be kept; the name and address of the owner
and operator of the premises; the number of pigs proposed to be kept
thereon, and shall include such other information as may be required by
the Board of Health. If the application is refused, the fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
B. Inspection of Premises; Granting of License. The Board of Health shall
inspect the premises of the applicant prior to issuing the license, and
may conduct a public hearing upon the application. It shall be the duty
of the applicant to publish a notice of his or her intention to apply for a
license in a newspaper circulating within the Township, at least two
weeks before the date of issuing the license. The Board of Health shall
have the authority either to grant the license or to refuse the license, or
to grant it upon condition or in modified form. The license shall not be
assignable and shall be limited to the premises on which the licensee
§ 17.28.100 CODE ADOPTION § 17.32.040
1.01:859
§ 17.32.050. Regulations. [Prior code § BH:6-5]
had pigs on the date the license was issued. All applicants, in accepting
a license, must agree to conform to the requirements of this chapter.
A. General Regulations. Any person having or keeping pigs under a license
issued under this chapter shall comply with the following provisions:
1. All buildings, yards or enclosures in which any pigs shall be kept
shall be, at all times, in a neat, orderly, clean and sanitary
condition.
2. All buildings used for the keeping of pigs shall be provided with the
concrete or other nonabsorbent floor built above the surface of the
surrounding ground with a concrete or other nonabsorbent
sidewall on all enclosed portions extending 36 inches above the
floor and so jointed with the floor as to furnish a cove or curved
surface for easy cleaning.
3. All feeding shall be done under cover upon a concrete floor or floor
of a nonabsorbent character.
4. A suitable receptacle for manure and other waste material shall be
constructed of concrete or other nonabsorbent material, shall be
under cover, shall be water tight on the sides and bottom, and shall
be covered by a tight removable top to prevent the escape of odors
and access of flies or other insects. Compliance with this
subsection shall not be necessary if manure is spread daily. Dung,
manure and food residue shall be removed from the area where
pigs are kept at least once daily. When the material is spread upon
the ground, it shall be spread in thin applications so as to dry
quickly, but the same area shall not be spread more often than once
in every 30 days.
5. All liquid waste, including water used to wash down the sidewalls,
liquids from the sheds, the barns, from the manure pit or leading
area, and any water from washing trucks or other equipment shall
be conducted by a suitable drain to an underground cistern end
disposed of either in an approved sewage disposal field or pumped
into a closed tank and spread upon the fields in such a manner and
at such time as to prevent it gathering in pools or running off the
land.
6. There must be an available supply of water kept under at least 20
pounds pressure, equipped with sufficient hose connections to
allow all parts of the building wherein pigs are kept to be
completely hosed down at least once in each seven days, or all such
times as the Board of Health shall indicate.
7. All buildings where pigs are kept shall be whitewashed
semiannually.
§ 17.32.040 RARITAN CODE § 17.32.050
1.01:860
Chapter 17.36
SWIMMING POOL CODE
§ 17.36.010. Establishment of Code. [Amended by BH Ord. passed
10-15-1981]
A code entitled The Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey-1970 is adopted
pursuant to P.L. 1950, c. 188 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 through 3-69.6) as amended
wherever applicable by law.
§ 17.36.020. Short Title. [Amended by BH Ord. passed 10-15-1981]
The code established and adopted herein is described and commonly known
as the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey-1970 and has been placed on file
in the office of the secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain on file
there for use and examination by the public.
§ 17.36.030. Public Record. [Amended by BH Ord. passed
10-15-1981]
Three copies of the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey-1970, have been
placed on file in the office of the secretary of the Board of Health and shall
remain on file there for use and examination by the public.
8. Proper equipment and material shall be constantly kept on hand
and used as required to control flies and other insects.
9. All dead animals shall be buried or removed within 24 hours of
death.
B. Location of Building. No person operating under a license issued
hereunder shall locate any building, pig run, yard or pasture wherein
pigs are kept closer than 500 feet to any highway or closer than 1,000
feet to any dwelling or residence other than the dwelling or residence of
the farm whereon the pigs are kept.
C. Fences Required. The area wherein pigs are kept, except where they
are housed in closed buildings, shall be completely fenced with a sturdy,
well constructed closely woven wire fence or other equally effective
fence so as to prevent any pigs from trespassing on adjoining property.
D. Pigs at Large. No pig or pigs shall be allowed at large upon the owner's
property outside of properly fenced pasture.
E. Transportation of Garbage Prohibited. No garbage or vegetable matter
and no flesh of any animal, fowl or fish, shall, at any time, be
transported upon the highways of the Township, or brought into the
Township, for the purpose of feeding the same to pigs within the
Township.
§ 17.32.050 CODE ADOPTION § 17.36.040
1.01:861
§ 17.36.040. License Required to Operate. [Amended by BH Ord.
passed 10-15-1981]
Every pool operator as defined in the Swimming Pool Code of New
Jersey-1970 shall be required to obtain, from the Board of Health of Raritan
Township, a license each year before being allowed to operate a swimming
pool.
§ 17.36.050. Rules and Regulations. [Amended by BH Ord. passed
10-15-1981]
The Board of Health may adopt such rules and regulations as they deem
necessary in connection with the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey-1970.
§ 17.36.060. License Fees. [Amended by BH Ord. passed
10-15-1981; BH Ord. passed 11-17-1988]
Any swimming pool that is found to be in operation without first procuring
a license shall be deemed a nuisance as defined in the Swimming Pool Code
of New Jersey-1970, and each operator shall be subject to all penalties as
provided by law.
Chapter 17.40
PERMEABILITY AND SOIL LOG TESTING
§ 17.40.010. Application. [Prior code § BH:11-1; amended by BH
Ord. passed 7-17-1997]
Every applicant requesting a witness for permeability and soil log testing
shall complete an application in the form attached and submit the same to
the Raritan Township Board of Health.
Attached to the application, the applicant shall attach the engineer's
qualifications for review by the Township Engineer as well as a list of the
names and qualifications of the people that are actually going to conduct
the field work.
§ 17.40.020. Fees. [Prior code § BH:11-2; amended by BH Ord.
passed 7-17-1997]
Every applicant shall submit a fee of $100 per lot, per day for each lot that
is to be tested.
A. The $100 witness fee per lot is limited to obtaining two soil logs and two
acceptable permeability tests or one successful alternate test (pit bail
or basin flood within the proposed septic bed.)
B. Any additional work performed on the lot after the testing specified in
Subsection A of this section is achieved, shall require an additional fee
as set forth below:
§ 17.36.040 RARITAN CODE § 17.40.020
1.01:862
§ 17.40.030. Limitations, Requirements and Standards. [Prior code
§ BH:11-3; amended by BH Ord. passed 7-17-1997]
1. Each additional soil log: $50.
2. Each additional pit bail or basin flood: $50.
3. Each additional permeability test: $50.
C. Any work performed outside of an approved septic site will be
considered a separate septic site and an additional $100 will be
charged.
D. Any cancellation or postponement of the days scheduled for testing
shall result in the forfeiture of $100 per day. No rescheduling shall
occur until an additional $100 per lot is paid.
A. There will be no more than six soil logs worked on in one day unless
agreed otherwise by witness.
B. There will be no permeability testing on more than three lots at any one
time unless the witness agrees to do more.
C. Every soil log shall have its own independent identification number in
addition to the block and lot number.
D. All soil log holes that are located within 40 feet of a passing
permeability test shall be logged for depth, seepage and mottling.
E. A metal stake shall mark all passing permeability tests.
F. Lots will be numbered in the field prior to any testing.
G. Lots will be cleared of underbrush prior to testing.
H. Such other reasonable requirements as may be determined necessary
for review witnessing and approval of proposed systems and as
determined by the administrative authority or its authorized agents.
I. The witness is a representative of the Township and he or she has the
authority to make sure that all tests are run in accordance with Chapter
199.
J. All holes left open must be fenced in.
K. All unused holes must be filled in before the end of the work day.
L. Where observations of the soil profile pit are to be used to determine
the seasonally high water table outside of the January through April
season, the supervising licensed professional engineer must perform
the observation in person.
§ 17.40.020 CODE ADOPTION § 17.40.040
1.01:863
§ 17.40.040. Time for Testing. [Prior code § BH:11-4; amended by
BH Ord. passed 7-17-1997]
Soil logs may be performed at any time of the year in accordance with the
Standards for the Construction of Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems, per N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5. The certification by the engineer shall be
stated on any drawings submitted to the administrative authority or its
authorized agent prior to the subdivision or site plan approval. The
certification shall also appear on the drawings submitted to the Raritan
Township Planning Board or Board of Adjustment prior to site plan or
subdivision approval.
Chapter 17.44
APPLICATIONS, LICENSES, PERMITS, AND FEE SCHEDULE
§ 17.44.010. Licensing Year Fees. [Prior code § BH:10-1; amended
by BH Ord. passed 11-17-1988]
The licensing year shall run from January 1st to December 31st. All license
fees required to be paid pursuant to any Raritan Township Board of Health
ordinance shall cover the balance of the licensing year during which the
licensing fee is paid, except that all licensing fees paid for permanent
retail food establishments shall be paid during the month of December
immediately prior to the licensing year commencing on January 1st of the
following year.
§ 17.44.020. Procedure for Payment. [Prior code § BH:10-2;
amended by BH Ord. passed 11-17-1988]
Unless otherwise set forth by specific ordinance, all application, license
or permit fees as well as any penalties set forth in any Raritan Township
Board of Health ordinance shall be payable to the Secretary of the Raritan
Township Board of Health.
§ 17.44.030. Fee Schedule. [Prior code § BH:10-3; amended by BH
Ord. adopted 11-17-1988; BH Ord. adopted 11-21-2002; BH 03-1;
BH Ord. 04-3; BH Ord. 06-1; BH Ord. 07-1; 2-15-2018 by Ord. No.
BOH 18-1]
The application, license and permit fee schedule for the Raritan Township
Board of Health is fixed as follows:
Type Fee
A. Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
System
1. For the filing of an application and issuance
of a permit
$35
B. Individual Potable Water Supply
§ 17.40.040 RARITAN CODE § 17.44.030
1.01:864
Type Fee
Each application for a permit:
Raritan Township well permit $40
C. Retail Food Establishment License
1. Permanent establishments
a. Newsstands, pharmacies, liquor stores,
video stores and other establishments
handling commercially prepared,
prepackaged, non-potentiallyhazardous
foods as an incidental part
of their business
$150*
b. Agricultural markets (where there is no
food preparation) where potentially
hazardous foods are offered for sale or
where grocery food items account for
50% or more of the sales area
$150*
c. All other retail food establishments $250*
d. Supermarkets with gross annual sales
in excess of $100,000
$350*
2. Temporary food establishments
a. Temporary food establishments in
excess of 3 days
$160
b. Temporary food establishments of 3
days or less
$110
D. Public Swimming Pool License Fee $25
E. Marriage and Remarriage License, Civil
Union and Domestic Partnership
Application Fees (municipality to keep
$3)
$28
F. Burial and Removal Permits
(municipality to keep fee)
$5
G. Birth, Death, Marriage, Civil Union and
Domestic Partnership Certificates -
each copy
$10
Notes:
* If the permanent food establishment license fee is not paid in the month
of December or before, preceding the year for which the license is to be
issued, there shall be an additional $50 charge.
Chapter 17.46
§ 17.44.030 CODE ADOPTION § 17.44.030
1.01:865
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS TO STORM SEWERS
§ 17.46.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 05-23]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or non-physical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Raritan, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Non-physical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Non-domestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Raritan or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 17.44.030 RARITAN CODE § 17.46.010
1.01:866
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 17.46.020. Prohibited Conduct. [Amended by Ord. 05-23]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Township of Raritan any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 17.46.030. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. 05-23]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Board of Health or its designee.
§ 17.46.040. Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 05-23; Ord. 06-03]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.08.010 for each violation.
Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 17.48
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS TO THE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
§ 17.48.010. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. 07-23]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
AUTHORITY — The Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or non-physical connection that
discharges stormwater, groundwater, non-contract cooling water, process
wastewater, industrial waste, or any substance prohibited by Section
17.48.030 other than domestic sewage, to the sanitary sewer system
operated by the Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority, unless that
discharge is specifically permitted in writing by the Authority. Non-physical
connections may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows or overflows
into the sanitary sewer system. Sump pump discharges, cellar drains and
§ 17.46.010 CODE ADOPTION § 17.48.010
1.01:867
floor drains that convey groundwater or stormwater to any part of the
WTP, sanitary sewer system or plumbing system are also considered illicit
connections.
PERSON — Any individual corporation, company, limited liability company,
partnership, firm, business entity, association or political subdivision of this
State subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WTP — The Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority Wastewater
Treatment Plant including all components of the associated collection
system and infrastructure.
§ 17.48.020. Incorporation of Regulations. [Amended by Ord.
07-23]
The Raritan Township Municipal Utilities Authority Use, Rules and
Regulations, as amended and supplemented from time to time (the
"Regulations"), are hereby incorporated by reference in this chapter. A copy
of the regulations, including all current amendments and supplements, shall
be maintained in the office of the Township Clerk and made available to the
public for inspection and copying during regular business hours.
§ 17.48.030. Prohibited Conduct and Discharge. [Amended by Ord.
07-23]
No person shall engage in improper use or construction of sanitary sewers.
No person shall construct, operate, utilize or own an illicit connection.
A. No person or entity shall discharge or cause to be discharged through
any connection to the WTP any of the following described waters,
wastes or substances, except as may be otherwise specifically
permitted in writing by the Authority:
1. Any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, ground water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water;
2. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than that
stipulated hereinafter;
3. Any water or waste which may contain soluble oil or grease or any
water containing floatable fats, oils, greases or other substance
that will solidify or become viscous at normal climatic conditions or
impair the operation of the WTP;
4. Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, motor oil, mineral spirits,
commercial solvent or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or
gas;
§ 17.48.010 RARITAN CODE § 17.48.030
1.01:868
5. Any water or wastes that contain hydrogen sulfide, sulphur dioxide
or nitrous oxide in quantities higher than 10 mg/l;
6. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, offal, plastics, wood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings,
entrails, lime residues, cannery waste bulk solids, unshredded
garbage, antibiotic wastes, free mineral acid, concentrated pickling
wastes or plating solutions or any other solid or viscous substances
capable of causing obstruction to the flow or other interference
with the proper operation of the WTP;
7. Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances in
such concentrations as to constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, or to interfere with any sewage treatment process, or to
create any hazard in the receiving waters of the WTP;
8. Wastes which will cause corrosive structural damage to the WTP;
9. Any waters containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual provision, attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the WTP;
10. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into sewers for
their maintenance, inspection and repair;
11. Any waters containing quantities of radium, naturally occurring or
artificially produced radioisotopes in excess of presently existing or
subsequently accepted limits for drinking water as established by
the national committee on radiation protection and measuring;
12. Any concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions or other
wastes which are highly colored, or wastes which are of unusual
volume, concentration of solids or composition that may create
obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the WTP or the quality of the effluent from the
WTP;
13. The following fixed upper limits of acceptable quantity
(concentration) and characteristics of material shall apply:
a. CONCENTRATIONS
Item Concentration (mg/l)
ABS/L.A.S. 0.5
Acetylene Generation Sludge None
Arsenic 2.0
Barium 2.0
Boron 1.0
Cadmium 1.0
§ 17.48.030 CODE ADOPTION § 17.48.030
1.01:869
Chlorinated Hydrocarbons 0.25
Chromium (total) 1.0
Chromium (trivalent) 0.044
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.0003
Chrome (total) 0.5
Copper 2.0
Cyanides 1.0
Fluoride 4.0
Iron (total) 5.0
Lead 0.5
Manganese 1.0
Mercury 0.01
Mineral Acide (Free) None
Nickel 2.0
Nitrous Oxide 10.0
Oil & Grease (Total) 50.0
Phenolic Compounds 0.005
Phenols 2.0
Phosphorous 10.0
Selenium 0.05
Selenite 0.035
Selenate 0.760
Silver 1.0
Sulphur Dioxide 10.0
Zinc 2.0
b. CHARACTERISTICS
Item Limitation
Temperature, max 110.0
pH-allowable range 5.5 - 9.0
Biochemical Oxygen Demand 250.0 ppm
Suspended Solids, Max 250.0 ppm
Color 200.0 Co. - Pt. Units
Chlorine Demand 15.0 ppm
The above listed concentrations and characteristics may be
altered by the Authority as required by Regulatory Agencies,
Treatment or Reuse Requirements or in the event of cumulative
overload of the WTP.
§ 17.48.030 RARITAN CODE § 17.48.030
1.01:870
§ 17.48.040. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. 07-23]
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the Hunterdon County
Health Department or their designated authorized representative. Pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:14B-20, representatives of the Authority shall have the power
to enter, at all reasonable times, any premises on which such a prohibited
discharge pursuant to Section 17.48.030 is suspected to exist, for the
purpose of inspecting, rehabilitating or securing samples of any such
prohibited discharge.
B. The admission into the WTP of any water or wastes having a five-day
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) in excess of 250 parts per million,
by weight on a twenty-four-hour composite basis, or for any grab
sample having a five-day BOD5 in excess of 400 MG per liter, will be
subject to review by the Authority. Where necessary in the opinion of
the Authority, the Owner shall provide and operate, at his own expense,
such pretreatment as may be required to reduce the biochemical
oxygen demand to meet the above requirements.
C. The admission into the WTP of any waters or wastes having a
suspended solids content in excess of 250 parts per million by weight on
a twenty-four-hour composite basis or for any grab sample having
suspended solids content in excess of 400 MG per liter, will be subject
to review by the Authority. Where necessary in the opinion of the
Authority pretreatment may be required to reduce the suspended solids
content to meet the above requirements.
D. The admission into the WTP of any waters or wastes in volumes, or with
constituents, such that the existing dilution conditions in the WTP
would be affected to the detriment of the Authority shall be subject to
review and approval of the Authority. Where necessary in the opinion of
the Authority, pre-treatment or equalizing units may be required to
bring constituents or volume of flow within the limits previously
described or to an otherwise acceptable level, and to hold or equalize
flows such that no peak flow conditions may hamper the operations of
any unit of the WTP. Said equalization or holding unit shall have a
capacity suitable to serve its intended purpose, and be equipped with
acceptable outlet control facilities to provide flexibility in operation and
accommodate changing conditions in the waste flow.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to fail to correct a violation
of any provision of the regulations within 30 days after delivery to
such person or entity of a written notice of violation from the authority
administrator or plant superintendent, or their designated authorized
representative, except that committing or causing an illicit connection
or the commission of a prohibited discharge, as defined in the
regulations or in Section 17.48.030 of this chapter, shall be an unlawful
act at the time it occurs.
§ 17.48.030 CODE ADOPTION § 17.48.050
1.01:871
§ 17.48.050. Penalties. [Amended by Ord. 07-23]
In addition to the penalties provided in the regulations for violation of
any provision of this chapter or of the regulations, the maximum penalty,
upon conviction, shall be a fine not exceeding $2,000, or imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 90 days, or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. Each day on which any
waters or wastes are discharged in violation of Section 17.48.030 shall
constitute a separate violation.
In addition to the penalties provided in the regulations and in this chapter
for violation of any provision of this chapter or of the regulations, the
Township will require the disconnection of any illicit connection to the WTP,
including but not limited to any unauthorized sump pump or drainage pipe
connection, and may recover the cost as an assessment upon the premises
for which the connection was made in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:63-54, et seq.
Chapter 17.50
MOTOR-DRIVEN OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
§ 17.50.010. Purpose. [Adopted 4-18-2019 by Ord. No. BOH 19-01]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for the operation
of motor-driven, off-road vehicles within the Township of Raritan, County
of Hunterdon, State of New Jersey, to minimize the impact of noise from
the operation of such vehicles on residents of the municipality and the
environment.
§ 17.50.020. Definitions. [Adopted 4-18-2019 by Ord. No. BOH
19-01]
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
AFFECTED PERSON — Any person on a regulated property who has
registered a noise complaint with an authorized enforcement agency and
such person has an interest in the protected property as an owner, tenant,
or employee.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound-dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gases on equipment.
NOISE CONTROL INVESTIGATOR (NCI) — An employee of a municipality,
county or regional health commission that has a Department-approved
§ 17.48.050 RARITAN CODE § 17.50.020
1.01:872
noise control ordinance and the employee has not received noise
enforcement training. However, they are knowledgeable about their model
noise ordinance and enforcement procedures. An NCI may only enforce
sections of the ordinance that do not require the use of a sound level meter.
The employee must be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction
and must be authorized by their municipality, county or regional health
commission to issue a violation and/or summons.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) — An employee of a local, county or
regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities; or a municipality with a Department-approved noise
control ordinance and the employee has received noise enforcement
training and is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must
be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized
to issue a summons in order to be considered a noise control officer.
OCCUPIED PROPERTY — Any affected person's property, including but not
limited to their home, studio, pool, tennis courts, barn, stable, penned areas,
or similar structure or confined area occupied by livestock.
OFF-ROAD VEHICLE (ORV) — Motor vehicles that are capable of human
transport and designed or used for the purpose of recreation off of the
public right-of-way by, but not limited to, all-terrain vehicles (ATV), trail/dirt
bikes, minibikes, go-carts and snowmobiles.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased or controlled by a nongovernmental
entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — The imaginary line including its vertical extension
that separates one parcel of real property from another.
§ 17.50.030. Applicability. [Adopted 4-18-2019 by Ord. No. BOH
19-01]
All off-road vehicles as defined in Section 17.50.020 shall comply with the
requirements herein.
§ 17.50.040. Exceptions. [Adopted 4-18-2019 by Ord. No. BOH
19-01]
A. ORVs specifically used for farming activities under the New Jersey
Right-To-Farm regulations, yard work and snow removal.
B. ORVs engaged in government or emergency functions, including but
not limited to utility repair, search-and-rescue operations, firefighting
§ 17.50.020 CODE ADOPTION § 17.50.040
1.01:873
§ 17.50.050. Prohibited Acts. [Adopted 4-18-2019 by Ord. No. BOH
19-01]
§ 17.50.060. Enforcement; Violations and Penalties. [Adopted
4-18-2019 by Ord. No. BOH 19-01]
or vehicles engaged in scientific research in otherwise inaccessible
areas.
C. ORVs in transit to or from public roadways or when being loaded or
unloaded from their transport vehicles.
D. Lawn mowers, tractors, lawn, garden or similar equipment for
residential use. This equipment must, however, operate with a factoryinstalled
or functionally equivalent muffler.
E. Public celebrations that are government-sponsored or governmentpermitted
events.
F. Permitted motor vehicle racetracks.
G. Safety training by a certified instructor under the Motorcycle Safety
Foundation (MSF) or another sanctioned curriculum and with written,
permitted approval from the municipality.
H. Cleaning, maintenance or repair of an ORV or ORVs between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. when the engine use or operation of one or
more ORVs does not exceed 15 minutes in any hour, no more than two
times per day, for a total of 30 minutes, unless sound levels are below
65dBA at or within a complainant's property line.
A. Sound levels made by an ORV or ORVs shall not exceed the day (7:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) and nighttime (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) limits of
65dBA and 50dBA, respectively, when measured at or within a
complainant's property line unless otherwise specified in this chapter;
or
B. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any ORV not equipped
with a factory-installed or functionally equivalent muffler in good
working order and in constant operation; or
C. When not measuring dBAs and upon the audible determination by the
NCO or NCI, no ORVs shall be operated within 400 feet of an affected
person's occupied property during the day (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) or
within 800 feet of an affected person's property during the night (10:00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m.). If the NCO or NCI determines the use of an ORV or
ORVs is not impacting on the complainant's enjoyment of life and
property as a result of relative loudness, distance to the property line,
number of vehicles or frequency of drive-bys, even if the ORV
operator(s) is/are within 400 or 800 feet depending on the time of day, a
violation does not exist.
§ 17.50.040 RARITAN CODE § 17.50.060
1.01:874
§ 17.50.070. Severability and Repealer. [Adopted 4-18-2019 by Ord.
No. BOH 19-01]
Ordinance List
Chapter OL
ORDINANCE LIST
§ OL-1. Ordinance List (1982 through 2006).
Ordinances enacted subsequent to Ord. 06-31 are on the Disposition List
which follows.
A. Any violation of this chapter shall be cause for an enforcement
document to be issued to the violator or the property owner on which
the ORV or ORVs was/were operated, by the noise control officer or
noise control investigator according to procedures set forth at N.J.A.C.
7:29. The recipient of an enforcement document with a monetary
penalty shall be entitled to a hearing in municipal court having
jurisdiction to contest such action.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $2,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense. The violator can
request a settlement conference to discuss potential reductions in
penalty or to enter a payment schedule.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
D. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having control or custody of
an ORV to allow or enable a minor (under age 18) to operate said ORV
in a manner violating any section of this chapter. When a minor
operates an ORV in violation of this chapter, it shall be a refutable
presumption that the parent or guardian enabled the ORV to be so
operated, and, as such, the parent or guardian shall be an additional
responsible party.
A. If any provision or portion of a provision of this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional, preempted by federal or state law or otherwise invalid
by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this
chapter shall not be invalidated.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with any
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
§ 17.50.060 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:875
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
82-1 Salaries (Special)
82-2 Zoning (Special)
82-3 Approves acquisition of certain property (Special)
82-4 Adds § 4-10 to prior code, coin-controlled amusement devices
(5.16)
82-5 Regulates parks and recreational facilities (Repealed by 94-15)
82-6 Amends Ord. 80-7, bond issuance (Special)
82-7 Salaries (Special)
82-8 Appropriation (Special)
82-9 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
82-10 Adds § 4-1.14 to prior code, site plans (5.04)
82-11 Zoning (Special)
82-12 Zoning (Special)
82-13 Vacates certain road (Special)
82-14 Zoning (Special)
82-15 Bond issuance (Special)
82-16 Bond issuance (Special)
82-17 Appropriation (Special)
82-18 Amends § 6-2.4, fees (Repealed by 98-42)
82-19 Zoning (Special)
82-20 Rezone (Special)
82-21 Zoning (Special)
82-22 Amends § 7-10, public roads and streets (Special)
82-23 Zoning (Special)
83-1 Salaries (Special)
83-2 Rezone (Special)
83-3 Adds § 9-1.3al(e) and 9-1.3a8(e); amends § 9-1.3a1(a) — (c),
9-1.3a2 and 3 of prior code, fees (Repealed by 98-42)
83-4 Approves certain grant (Special)
83-5 Zoning (Special)
83-6 Increases municipal cap (Special)
83-7 Amends §§ 6-2.3, 6-2.4 and 6-3.2 of prior code, licenses and
fees (Not codified)
83-8 Amends § 5-3.2 of prior code, license fees (5.08)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:876
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
83-9 (Not adopted)
83-10 Appropriation (Special)
83-11 Appropriation (Special)
83-12 Appropriation (Special)
83-13 Appropriation (Special)
83-14 Appropriation (Special)
83-15 Zoning (Superseded by 84-3)
83-16 Approves land sale and acquisition of certain properties
(Special)
83-17 Approves reconstruction of certain road (Special)
83-18 Amends Ord. 83-13, appropriation (Special)
83-19 Extends performance guarantees (Special)
83-20 Amends § 14-8j4 of prior code, fees (Repealed by 84-3)
83-21 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
83-22 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
83-23 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
83-24 Amends § 3-4 of prior code, bicycles (10.16)
83-25 Planning board (Special)
83-26 (Not adopted)
84-1 Salaries (Special)
84-2 Amends § 9-1.3a8(a) of prior code, fees (Repealed)
84-3 Adopts new land development code; repeals prior code Chs.
12, 14, 17 and Ord. 84-3 (16.02-16.84)
84-4 Amends § 5-3.2 of prior code, license fees (5.08)
84-5 Bond issuance (Special)
84-6 Increases municipal cap (Special)
84-7 Amends zoning (Included in prior code Ch. 15)
84-8 Amends §§ 6-5.1, 6-5.2, 6-5.3 and 6-6.1 of prior code; repeals
§ 6-6.2, vicious dogs (6.04)
84-9 Amends § 15-9.69a of prior code, fees (Included in prior code
Ch. 15)
84-10 Amends zoning (Included in prior code Ch. 15)
84-11 Bond issuance (Special)
84-12 Amends zoning (Included in prior code Ch. 15)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:877
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
84-13 Appropriation (Special)
84-14 Appropriation (Special)
84-15 Amends subdivision and site plan ordinance (Repealed)
84-16 Amends zoning (Included in prior code Ch. 15)
84-17 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
84-18 Rezone (Special)
84-19 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
84-20 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
84-21 Regulates traffic and parking at Hunterdon shopping center
(Special)
84-22 Amends land subdivision regulations (Not included in prior
code Ch. 15)
84-23 Adds § 15-9.13d5 and 15-9.34R to prior code, development
standards (Included in prior code Ch. 15)
84-24 Zoning (Special)
84-25 Establishes speed limits for certain roads (Not codified)
84-26 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
85-1 Amends prior code § 15-9.23, development code (16.64)
85-2 Salaries (Special)
85-3 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
85-4 (Not adopted)
85-5 Vacates certain road (Special)
85-6 Adds § 15-4.9j to prior code, fees (16.08)
85-7 Amends §§ 2-11A.1, road department supervisor and 4-2.5 of
prior code, hours of solicitation (2.32, 5.24)
85-8 (Not adopted)
85-9 (Not adopted)
85-10 (Not adopted)
85-11 Amends index rate ordinance (Special)
85-12 Vacates certain drainage easement (Special)
85-13 Amends prior code § 15-9.25, development code (16.64)
85-14 Amends Ord. 84-5, bond issuance (Special)
85-15 Amends Ord. 83-10, appropriation (Special)
85-16 Approves purchase of certain vehicle (Special)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:878
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
85-17 Appropriation (Special)
85-18 Approves purchase of computers (Special)
85-19 Rezone (Special)
85-20 Amends § 6-2.4 of prior code, fees
85-21 Designates fire department as local fire code enforcement
agency (Repealed by 85-24)
85-22 Amends § 15-9.65b of prior code, land use enforcement officer
(16.78)
85-23 Bond issuance (Special)
85-24 Creates bureau of fire prevention as local fire code
enforcement agency (8.16)
85-25 Amends prior code §§ 15-9.7(f)(8)(b)(1) and 15-9.38(e),
development code (16.34, 16.70)
85-26 Flood damage prevention ordinance (15.24)
85-27 Amends prior code §§ 15-9.7(b)(5), 15-9.8(f)(2) and
15-9.10(f)(2)(a), development code (16.36, 16.40)
85-28 Amends § 15-1.3 of prior code, day nursery (16.02)
86-1 Salaries (Special)
86-2 Appropriation (Special)
86-3 Regulates road events on public thoroughfares (8.32)
86-4 Amends prior code § 15-9.66(d), development code (16.78)
86-5 Authorizes regional transportation study committee (Special)
86-6 Establishes affordable housing board and housing officer
(Repealed)
86-7 Amends §§ 15-1.3, 15-9.8f2 and 15-9.10f2 of prior code,
development standards (Repealed by 87-30)
86-8 Amends prior code §§ 15-7.7(c), 15-7.9(12), 15-8.2(a) and
15-8.2(c)(44), development code (Repealed by 93-27)
86-9 Amends prior code §§ 15-7.5(j), 15-8.5(k) and 15-9.38(e),
development code (16.18, 16.20, 16.70)
86-10 Amends § 5-3.2 of prior code, license fees (5.08)
86-11 Amends §§ 10-3.1 and 10-3.2 of prior code, fees (12.20)
86-12 Amends title of § 4-7 of prior code and §§ 4-7.1, 4-7.2, 4-7.3,
4-7.4, 4-7.6 and 4-7.7, inoperable or unregistered motor
vehicles (8.20)
86-13 Appropriation (Special)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:879
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
86-14 Appropriation (Special)
86-15 Amends prior code § 15-10.2, development code (16.82)
86-16 Amends prior code § 15-7.11(D)(7), development code (16.18)
86-17 (Not adopted)
86-18 Bond issuance (Special)
86-19 Street vacation (Special)
86-20 (Not adopted)
86-21 Amends Ord. 86-13, appropriation (Special)
87-1 Street vacation (Special)
87-2 Establishes pay guide (Special)
87-3 Salaries (Special)
87-4 Amends prior code §§ 15-9.19(a) and 15-9.27, development
code (16.64)
87-5 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, road names (Special)
87-6 Appropriation (Special)
87-7 Amends prior code §§ 15-6.1(c), 15-6.1(e) and 15-6.2,
development code (16.16)
87-8 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
87-9 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, road names (Special)
87-10 Amends prior code § 15-9.69, development code (16.78)
87-11 Increases municipal cap (Special)
87-12 Adds § 5.2-3 and amends §§ 2.0, 4.3-2, 5.1-1, 5.1-3, 5.1-5 and
5.2-2 of Ord. 85-26, flood damage prevention ordinance
(15.24)
87-13 Appropriation (Special)
87-14 Appropriation (Special)
87-15 Adds § 7-3.6 to prior code, parking on specific streets (Not
codified)
87-16 Regulates newsracks (12.36)
87-17 Approves reconstruction of certain road (Special)
87-18 Amends § 5-3.2 of prior code, license fees (5.08)
87-19 Amends § .7-4 of prior code, traffic (Not codified)
87-20 Appropriation (Special)
87-21 Appropriation (Special)
87-22 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, road names (Special)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:880
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
87-23 Appropriation (Special)
87-24 Vacates certain road (Special)
87-25 Amends § 7-3.6 of prior code, parking on specific street (Not
codified)
87-26 (Not adopted)
87-27 Amends prior code §§ 15-1.3, 15-7.9(c) and (d), 15-9.36(a) and
15-9.43(d)(4); amends Ord. 87-10 and prior code § 15-9.69,
development code (16.02, 16.18, 16.70, 16.72, 16.78)
87-28 Amends Ord. 87-2, pay guide (Special)
87-29 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, road names (Special)
87-30 Low and moderate income housing; establishes R-6LM zoning
district; repeals Ord. 86-7, development code (16.02, 16.36,
16.38, 16.40, 16.66)
87-31 Appropriation (Special)
87-32 Bond issuance (Special)
87-33 Vacates certain road (Special)
87-34 Appropriation (Special)
87-35 Amends Ord. 87-33, road vacation (Special)
87-36 Mandates recycling program (Repealed by 92-11)
87-37 Appropriation (Special)
87-38 Amends § 14-8j4 of prior code, building permit fees
(Superseded by development code)
88-1 Salaries (Special)
88-2 Amends salary guide (Special)
88-3 Appropriation (Special)
88-4 Amends § 15-4.9(i) of prior code, zoning permit fees (Special)
88-5 Assessment for certain road (Special)
88-6 Adopts affordable housing regulations and affirmative
marketing plan; repeals Resolution 87-100 (Repealed)
88-7 Amends §§ 15-6.2, 15-6.3 and 15-6.5 of prior code; repeals
§ 15-6.1g(4) and renumbers (5) — (10) to be (4) — (9),
guarantees and improvements (Repealed by 88-13)
88-8 Amends § 14-8j4 of prior code, fees (Superseded by
development code)
88-9 Appropriation (Special)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:881
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
88-10 Amends §§ 9-1.3a2, 6, 8, 11, 12, 13 and 18 of prior code;
renumbers §§ 9-1.3a21 and 22 to be 20 and 21; repeals and
replaces §§ 9-1.3a1(a) — (c), 9-1.3a3 — 4, 10, 15, 17, 19;
repeals existing §§ 9-1.3a20, 9-1.5 and 9-1.6, fees (Repealed by
98-42)
88-11 Increases municipal cap (Special)
88-12 Amends § 5-3.2, license fees (5.08)
88-13 Repeals Ord. 88-7
88-14 Amends capital improvement fund (Special)
88-15 Amends Ord. 87-14, appropriation (Special)
88-16 Street vacation (Special)
88-17 Appropriation (Special)
88-18 Appropriation (Special)
88-19 (Not adopted)
88-20 Force account (Special)
88-21 Amends prior code §§ 15-6.2, 15-6.3 and 15-6.5; repeals prior
code § 15-6.1(g)(4) and renumbers subsequent subdivisions
development code (16.16)
88-22 (Not adopted)
88-23 (Not adopted)
88-24 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
88-25 Adds §§ 3-1.2(d) — (h) and 3-1.5 to prior code; amends
§§ 3-1.1; repeals and replaces §§ 3-1.3, police regulations
(8.24)
88-26 Adds § 4-7.7 to prior code; amends chapter title and § 4-7.1 —
4; renumbers existing § 4-7.7 to be 4-7.8, inoperable or
unlicensed motor vehicles (8.20)
88-27 Approves farmland preservation program for certain parcel of
land (Special)
88-28 Rezone; creates R-1A zoning district (Repealed by 89-11)
88-29 Adds § 7-10 to prior code, traffic controls for street and
highway construction and maintenance operations (12.28)
88-30 Appropriation (Special)
88-31 Amends § 9-1.3a12 of prior code, fees (Not codified)
88-32 Appropriation (Special)
88-33 Dog littering (6.04)
88-34 Establishes speed limits for certain road (10.16)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:882
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
88-35 (Not adopted)
88-36 Amends Ord. 88-5, road assessment (Special)
88-37 Cancels certain appropriations (Special)
89-1 Salaries (Special)
89-2 Amends salary guide (Special)
89-3 Amends § 2-8.1 of prior code, police department (2.56)
89-4 Bond issuance (Special)
89-5 Authorizes 1989 force account projects (Special)
89-6 Amends § 7-7 Schedule V of prior code, maximum speed limit
(Not codified)
89-7 Amends § 6-2.4 of prior code, fees (Repealed by 98-42)
89-8 Amends § 5-3.2 of prior code, license fees (5.08)
89-9 Amends § 7-3.6 of prior code, parking on specific streets (Not
codified)
89-10 Finance officer (2.48)
89-11 Rezone; creates R-1A zoning district; repeals Ord. 88-28
(16.26)
89-12 Appropriation (Special)
89-13 Amends §§ 9-1.3a2, 6, 8, 11, 12 and 18 of prior code;
renumbers §§ 9-1.3a21 and 22 to be 20 and 21; repeals and
replaces §§ 9-1.3a1(a) — (c), 9-1.3a3 — 4, 10, 15, 17, 19;
repeals existing §§ 9-1.3a20, 9-1.5 and 9-1.6, fees (Repealed by
98-42)
89-14 Amends § 2-17.3 of prior code, municipal utilities authority
(2.68)
89-15 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
89-16 Amends § 15-9.2 of prior code, land development (Title 16
appendix)
89-17 Amends Ord. 88-20, force account (Special)
89-18 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
89-19 Repeals and replaces § 15-6.5 of prior code, land development
(Repealed by 96-35)
89-20 Amends development code (Not adopted)
89-21 Adds § 15-9.20b(6) to prior code, land development (Repealed
by 97-27)
89-22 Appropriation (Special)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:883
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
89-23 Establishes speed limits for certain roads (Not codified)
89-24 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
89-25 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
89-26 Amends § 2-17.3 of prior code, municipal utilities authority
(2.68)
89-27 Certificates of occupancy (Repealed by 94-23)
89-28 Amends Ord. 88-32, appropriation (Special)
89-29 Amends development code (Not adopted)
89-30 Approves purchase of certain vehicle (Special)
89-31 Transfers police from PERS to PFRS (Special)
89-32 Accepts certain right-of-way (Special)
89-33 Regulates alarm systems (8.04)
89-34 Adds § 15-9.27L — N to prior code and amends § 15-9.31a4,
land development (16.64)
89-35 Appropriation (Special)
89-36 Appropriation (Special)
89-37 Adds §§ 9-1.3a22 and 9-1.4 to prior code; amends §§ 9-1.3a3, 5,
8(b) and (f), 12, 20 and 21; repeals and replaces §§ 9-1.3a4,
8(a) and 14; repeals §§ 9-1.3a1(e), 13 and 18, fees (Repealed
by 98-42)
89-38 Approves sale of certain property (Special)
89-39 Amends development code (Not adopted)
89-40 Amends § 89-33.11 of prior code, enforcement (8.04)
90-1 Salaries (Special)
90-2 Cancels certain capital accounts (Special)
90-3 (Not adopted)
90-4 Vacates certain roads (Special)
90-5 Adds § 15-6.6al to prior code, land development (16.16)
90-6 Adds §§ 15-7.9b10(g) and c21 — 23, 15-7.12-15-7.14,
15-8.2a13, bl(w) and c45 — 46, and 15-8.11 to prior code, land
development (16.18, 16.20)
90-7 Amends § 5-3.2 of prior code, liquor license fees (5.08)
90-8 Amends Ord. 89-4, bond issuance (Special)
90-9 Adopts Subtitle I, Title 39, Revised Statutes of New Jersey,
vehicles and traffic (Special)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:884
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
90-10 Regulates numbering of houses and structures (12.44)
90-11 Authorizes force account projects for 1990 (Special)
90-12 Repeals and replaces § 2-7.3 of prior code, approving,
recording and paying claims (3.12)
90-13 Amends § 7-7 Schedule V of prior code, speed limits (Not
codified)
90-14 Appropriation (Special)
90-15 Salaries (Special)
90-16 Appropriation (Special)
90-17 Accepts dedication of fire station lot (Special)
90-18 Adds §§ 15-9.3b3 and 15-9.5b3 to prior code; amends
§§ 15-9.28al — 4, 15-9.38 and 15-9.61a; repeals § 15-9.63, land
development (16.24, 16.30, 16.64, 16.70, 16.76)
90-19 Approves purchase of certain equipment (Special)
90-20 Adds § 15-9.69(2)(c), (4) and (16) to prior code; amends
§ 15-9.69c; renumbers §§ 15-7.5i-k to be f-h, 15-8.5j and k to be
i and j, and 15-9.69(5)- (14) to be (6)-(15); repeals existing
§ 15-7.5f and g, and 15-8.5i(1) — (3), land development (16.18,
16.20, 16.78)
90-21 Adds §§ 9-1.3a8(h) and 9-1.3a23 of prior code, fees (Repeales
by 98-42)
90-22 Amends Ch. 6 of prior code, animal control (6.04)
90-23 Applies Subtitle I, Title 39, Revised Statutes of New Jersey, to
certain development (Special)
90-24 Applies Subtitle I, Title 39, Revised Statutes of New Jersey, to
certain development (Special)
90-25 (Not adopted)
90-26 Applies Subtitle I, Title 39, Revised Statutes of New Jersey, to
certain development (Special)
90-27 Applies Subtitle I, Title 39, Revised Statutes of New Jersey, to
certain development (Special)
90-28 Amends § 15-9.10A(e), 11a and 11f2 of prior code; repeals and
replaces § 15-9.7f12(a); repeals § 15-0.7f12(c) and (d) and
15-9.11Ad, land development (16.34, 16.38, 16.40, 16.66)
90-29 Amends § 7-4 Schedule II of prior code, traffic (Not codified)
90-30 Amends Ords. 86-6 and 88-6, affordable housing board and
housing officer (15.20)
90-31 Easement (Special)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:885
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
90-32 Authorizes certain land conveyance (Special)
90-33 Applies Subtitle I, Title 39, Revised Statutes of New Jersey, to
certain development (Special)
90-34 Amends § 2-20.3(b) of prior code, township administrator
(2.12)
90-35 Salaries (Special)
90-36 Appropriation (Special)
90-37 Approves certain road and drainage work (Special)
90-38 Appropriation (Special)
90-39 Vacation of certain right-of-way easement (Special)
91-1 Salaries (Special)
91-2 Approves purchase of certain property (Special)
91-3 Approves exceeding index rate on municipal cap (Special)
91-4 Regulates obscene material (9.08)
91-5 Approves purchase of certain property (Special)
91-6 Amends Ord. 90-11, force account projects for 1990 (Special)
91-7 Appropriation (Special)
91-8 Amends Ords. 90-8 and 90-11, appropriation (Special)
91-9 Amends § N of Ord. 89-34, land development (16.64)
91-10 Amends §§ 3 and 4 of Ord. 87-10 and § IVb(1) of Ord. 90-20,
land development (16.78)
91-11 Amends Ord. 91-1, salaries (Special)
91-12 Designates township fire company as fire protection agency
(8.16)
91-13 Adds § 15-5.5a(7), h and i to prior code; amends §§ 15-1.3,
15-5.5 title, 15-5.5f, and 15-9.24; renumbers existing § 15-5.5h
to be g, land development (16.02, 16.14, 16.64)
91-14 Appropriation (Special)
91-15 Approves preliminary engineering and design work for various
roads (Special)
91-16 Approves certain park improvements (Special)
91-17 Reappropriates certain funds (Special)
91-18 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
91-19 (Tabled)
91-20 Reappropriates certain funds (Special)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:886
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
91-21 Amends § 7-4 Schedule II of prior code, traffic (Not codified)
91-22 Amends §§ 15-8.4d(o) and 15-9.2a of prior code, land
development (16.20, Title 16 appendix)
91-23 (Tabled)
91-24 Appropriation (Special)
91-25 Appropriation (Special)
91-26 Salaries (Special)
91-27 Appropriation (Special)
91-28 Appropriation (Special)
91-29 Approves certain public improvements (Special)
91-30 Transfer of funds (Special)
91-31 Amends § 15-9.7f8(a)(3) of prior code, land development
(16.34)
91-32 Amends pool/billiard room ordinance (5.28)
91-33 Salaries (Special)
91-34 Adds §§ 5-3.3 and 5-4.5 to prior code; amends § 5-3.2, liquor
licenses (5.08)
91-35 Adds § 15-9.18a to prior code; amends § 15-9.1, land
development (16.22, 16.62)
91-36 Approves certain project (Special)
91-37 Amends § 4-6.7 of prior code, pool and billiard rooms
(Repealed by 98-42)
91-38 Amends § 15-9.2a and 15-9.19 of prior code, land development
(16.64, Title 16 appendix)
91-39 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
91-40 Amends Ord. 90-38, appropriation (Special)
91-41 (Tabled)
91-42 Appropriation (Special)
91-43 Appropriation (Special)
91-44 Appropriation (Special)
92-1 Amends salary guides (Special)
92-2 Adds § 15-3.2d and e to prior code; amends § 15-3.2a, planning
board (16.06)
92-3 Increases municipal cap (Special)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:887
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
92-4 Amends §§ 15-9.2, 15-9.19, 15-9.41g and 15-9.45d of prior
code, sign ordinance (16.72, Title 16 appendix)
92-5 Repeals and replaces § 3-9.1 of prior code, penalties (1.08)
92-6 Adds § 15-6.1h — j to prior code; amends §§ 15-6.1g(1) and
15-9.69(4); repeals § 15-6.1g(7) — (9), land development
(16.16, 16.78)
92-7 Establishes fees for duplication of tax bills and insufficient
funds checks (2.100)
92-8 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
92-9 Adds § 3-12 to prior code, signs within public rights-of-way
(12.40)
92-10 Amends Ord. 91-42, appropriation (Special)
92-11 Mandates recycling program (8.36)
92-12 Appropriation (Special)
92-13 Appropriation (Special)
92-14 Appropriation (Special)
92-15 Appropriation (Special)
92-16 Appropriation (Special)
92-17 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
92-18 (Tabled)
92-19 Adds § 5-6 to prior code, display of fetal alcohol syndrome
warning signs (5.08)
92-20 Sidewalks (Special)
92-21 Appropriation (Special)
92-22 Appropriation (Special)
92-23 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
92-24 Approves preliminary engineering design for various roads
(Special)
92-25 (Not adopted)
92-26 Adds § 2-11A.4 to prior code; amends § 2-11A title, 2-11A.2j
and k, municipal superintendent of public works (2.32)
92-27 Municipal superintendent of public works (Special)
92-28 Amends Ord. 90-30, affordable housing board and housing
officer (15.20)
92-29 Amends Ord. 90-30, affordable housing board and housing
officer (15.20)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:888
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
92-30 (Not adopted)
92-31 Vacates certain road (Special)
92-32 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
92-33 Amends Ord. 90-9, vehicles and traffic (Special)
92-34 (Not adopted)
93-1 Salaries (Special)
93-2 Amends § 3-1.1 of prior code, police regulations (8.24)
93-3 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
93-4 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
93-5 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
93-6 Appropriation (Special)
93-7 Amends Ord. 93-1, salaries (Special)
93-8 Increases index rate for municipal cap (Special)
93-9 Appropriation (Special)
93-10 Appropriation (Special)
93-11 Appropriation (Special)
93-12 Appropriation (Special)
93-13 Appropriation (Special)
93-14 Vacates certain bikeway easement (Special)
93-15 Appropriation (Special)
93-16 Appropriation (Special)
93-17 Adds §§ 10-7.6 and 10-7.7 to prior code; amends §§ 10-7.1,
10-7.2 and 10-7.4, removal of snow and ice (12.32)
93-18 Appropriation (Special)
93-19 Appropriation (Special)
93-20 Appropriation (Special)
93-21 Appropriation (Special)
93-22 Amends § 7-7 Schedule V of prior code, speed limits (Not
codified)
93-23 Appropriation (Special)
93-24 Adds §§ 15-9.13A and 15-9.22e to prior code; amends
§§ 15-9.1, 15-9.2, 15-9.2a Schedule I and 15-9.22, land
development (16.22, 16.50, 16.64, Title 16 appendix)
93-25 Establishes curfew for minors (9.12)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:889
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
93-26 Appropriation (Special)
93-27 Amends §§ 15-7.7, 15-7.9b and 15-8.2a — c; repeals Ord. 86-8,
land development (16.18, 16.20)
93-28 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
93-29 Vacates certain conservation easement (Special)
93-30 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
93-31 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
93-32 Amends Ord. 90-9, vehicles and traffic (Special)
93-33 Amends Ord. 93-1, salaries (Special)
94-1 Township road system (Special)
94-2 (Not adopted)
94-3 Adds § 7-3.6 to prior code, parking prohibited on snow covered
roads (10.08)
94-4 Adds § 9-1.3a to prior code; amends § 9-1.3a(1)(b) and (c),
9-1.3a(2) and (19), fees (Repealed by 98-42)
94-5 Adds §§ 15-9.3d14, 15-9.4d7, 15-9.5d16, 15-9.6d10, 15-9.8d10
and 15-9.34S to prior code; amends § 15-1.3 and § 4b of Ord.
89-11, land development (16.02, 16.24, 16.26, 26.28, 16.30,
16.32, 16.36, 16.68)
94-6 Appropriation (Special)
94-7 Prohibits smoking in police/court facility (8.40)
94-8 Increases municipal cap rate (Special)
94-9 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
94-10 Amends § 7-7 Schedule V of prior code, speed limits (Not
codified)
94-11 Amends §§ 2-18 title, 2-18.1 and 2-18.2 of prior code, economic
development committee (2.84)
94-12 Salaries (Special)
94-13 Salaries (Special)
94-14 Amends Ord. 93-32, vehicles and traffic (Special)
94-15 Regulates open space and recreation areas; repeals and
replaces Ord. 82-5 (12.48)
94-16 Appropriation (Special)
94-17 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
94-18 Amends § 7-7 Schedule V of prior code, speed limits (Not
codified)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:890
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
94-19 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
94-20 Salaries (Special)
94-21 Appropriation (Special)
94-22 Appropriation (Special)
94-23 Repeals Ord. 89-27 (Repealer)
94-24 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
94-25 Establishes speed limits for certain roads (Not codified)
94-26 (Not adopted)
94-27 Amends Ord. 93-16, appropriation (Special)
94-28 Establishes speed limits and no passing zones for certain road
(Not codified)
94-29 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
94-30 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
94-31 Cooperative pricing ordinance (Special)
94-32 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
94-33 Vacates certain conservation and drainage easement (Special)
94-34 (Not adopted)
94-35 Appropriation (Special)
94-36 Rezone (Special)
94-37 Right to farm ordinance (16.12)
94-38 Establishes certain through streets (Not codified)
94-39 Applies Subtitle I, Title 39, Revised Statutes of New Jersey, to
certain public parks (Special)
94-40 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
94-41 (Not adopted)
94-42 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
94-43 Approves addition to township road system (Special)
94-44 Accepts certain land dedication (Special)
95-1 Vacates certain storm sewer easement (Special)
95-2 Adds § 15-12 to prior code; amends § 15-1.3, land development
(16.02, 16.10)
95-3 Amends Ord. 94-38, through streets (Not codified)
95-4 Vacates certain right-of-way (Special)
95-5 Amends Ord. 94-12, salaries (Special)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:891
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
95-6 Bond issuance (Special)
95-7 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
95-8 Approves exceeding municipal cap (Special)
95-9 Authorizes participation in joint insurance fund (Special)
95-10 Amends § 2-17.3 of prior code, utilities authority (2.68)
95-11 Fee schedule (2.100)
95-12 Salaries (Special)
95-13 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
95-14 Amends § 15-12.3a and b of prior code, land development
(16.10)
95-15 Appropriation (Special)
95-16 Bond issuance (Special)
95-17 Bond issuance (Special)
95-18 Prohibits tobacco vending machines (5.40)
95-19 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
95-20 Vacates certain drainage easement (Special)
95-21 Renews franchise agreement with Comvideo Systems, Inc.,
cable television system (Special)
95-22 Appropriation (Special)
95-23 Appropriation (Special)
95-24 Adds § 9-1.3d to prior code, fee exemptions (Not codified)
95-25 Amends Ord. 93-26, appropriation (Special)
95-26 Amends Ord. 94-16, appropriation (Special)
95-27 Appropriation (Special)
95-28 Appropriation (Special)
95-29 Prohibits smoking on board of education property (8.40)
95-30 Appropriation (Special)
95-31 Adds § 15-9.4c [15-9.2a(c)(8)] to prior code, land development
(16.64)
95-32 Approves mutual aid agreements (Special)
95-33 Amends §§ 15-9.28c, 15-9.31c [15-9.30c] and 15-9.34q of prior
code, land development (16.64, 16.68)
95-34 Amends § 7-7 Schedule V of prior code, speed limits (Not
codified)
95-35 Collection bins (8.12)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:892
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
95-36 Amends § 4-10.3(b) of prior code, coin operated amusement
devices (5.16)
95-37 (Not adopted)
95-38 Bond issuance (Special)
95-39 Bond issuance (Special)
95-40 Amends Ord. 90-30, affordable housing board and housing
officer (15.20)
95-41 Amends §§ 15-9.35gl(b) [15-8.34g(1)(b)] and 15-9.39e
[15-9.38(e)] of prior code, land development (16.68, 16.70)
96-1 Street vacation (Special)
96-2 (Not adopted)
96-3 Salaries (Special)
96-4 Appropriation (Special)
96-5 Approves exceeding municipal cap (Special)
96-6 Adds § 15-9.11a(g) to prior code, low and moderate income
housing units (16.66)
96-7 Establishes speed limits on certain road (Not codified)
96-8 Amends Ord. 95-34, speed limits (Not codified)
96-9 Vacates certain easement (Special)
96-10 Designates through streets and establishes speed limits for
certain roads (Not codified)
96-11 Bond issuance (Special)
96-12 Bond issuance (Special)
96-13 Appropriation (Special)
96-14 Appropriation (Special)
96-15 Adds § 15-9.7b3 [15-9.5b3] to prior code; renumbers
§ 15-9.7d14 [15-9.5d14] and 15 to be 13 and 14; repeals
existing § [15-9.5d13], land development (16.30)
96-16 Amends § 15-9.3 Schedule 1 of prior code, land development
(Title 16 appendix)
96-17 Salaries (Special)
96-18 Appropriation (Special)
96-19 Appropriation (Special)
96-20 Appropriation (Special)
96-21 Repeals and replaces § 9-1.3a(3) of prior code, fees (Repealed
by 98-42)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:893
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
96-22 Bond issuance (Special)
96-23 Acquisition of land condemnation (Special)
96-24 Amends Ord. 96-10, speed limits (Not codified)
96-25 Bond issuance (Special)
96-26 Bond issuance (Special)
96-27 Bond issuance (Special)
96-28 Appropriation (Special)
96-29 Amends Ord. 96-3, salaries (Special)
96-30 Vacates certain drainage easement (Special)
96-31 Appropriation (Special)
96-32 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
96-33 Accepts certain land donation (Special)
96-34 Amends § IV(11) of Ord. 94-15, open space and recreation
areas (12.48)
96-35 Repeals and replaces § 15-6.5 of prior code, land development
(16.16)
96-36 Amends development ordinance (Not adopted)
96-37 Amends §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. 93-25, curfew for minors (9.12)
96-38 Adds § 15-9.15b6 to prior code, land development (16.52)
97-1 Applies Subtitle I, Title 39, Revised Statutes of New Jersey, to
certain development (Special)
97-2 Establishes speed limits for certain roads (Not codified)
97-3 Regulates vehicles and traffic at certain school (Not codified)
97-4 Regulates vehicles and traffic at certain school (Not codified)
97-5 Amends Ord. 85-24, rapid entry key lock systems (8.16)
97-6 Franchise grant to Elizabethtown Gas Company, gas
distribution system (Special)
97-7 Establishes speed limits for certain road (Not codified)
97-8 Salaries (Special)
97-9 Amends § V of Ord. 94-15, open space and recreation areas
(12.48)
97-10 Municipal building (Special)
97-11 Emergency medical and rescue services agency (Tabled)
97-12 Applies Subtitle I, Title 39, Revised Statutes of New Jersey, to
certain development (Special)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:894
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
97-13 Establishes open space trust fund (2.88)
97-14 Establishes speed limits for certain roads (Not codified)
97-15 Farmland preservation program (Special)
97-16 Appropriation (Special)
97-17 Appropriation (Special)
97-18 Appropriation (Special)
97-19 Bond issuance (Special)
97-20 Appropriation (Special)
97-21 Appropriation (Special)
97-22 Appropriation (Special)
97-23 Appropriation (Special)
97-24 Appropriation (Special)
97-25 Appropriation (Special)
97-26 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
97-27 Repeals § 15-9.20 of prior code and Ord. 89-21 (Repealer)
97-28 Amends § 9-1 of prior code, uniform construction code (15.04)
97-29 Amends Ord. 97-8, salaries (Special)
97-30 Amends § 7-10 of prior code, public roads and streets (Special)
97-31 Lysy drainage easement (Special)
97-32 Repeals and replaces § VIII of Ord. 97-13, open space trust
fund (2.88)
97-33 Conveys certain easement (Special)
97-34 Amends §§ 5-3.3 and 5-4.5 of prior code, liquor licenses (5.08)
97-35 Amends § 2-18.1 of prior code, economic development
committee (2.84)
97-36 Appropriation (Special)
97-37 Accepts land donation (Special)
97-38 Towing (Not adopted)
97-39 Acquisition of property (Special)
97-40 Amends Ord. 97-5 § II, rapid entry key lock systems (8.16)
97-41 Amends prior code § 15-9.22(a) [15-9.21(a)], development code
(16.64)
97-42 Amends Ord. 97-38, salaries (Special)
97-43 Amends Ord. 95-38, bond issuance (Special)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:895
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
97-44 Amends Ord. 95-39, bond issuance (Special)
97-45 Towing (Not adopted)
97-46 Amends Ord. 97-8, salaries (Special)
97-47 Municipal public defender (2.64)
97-48 Appropriation (Special)
98-1 Adds prior code §§ 15-7.9(c)(24), 15-7.10(d)(10), 15-8.2(47),
15-8.3(p) and 15-8.4(q); amends prior code § 15-1.3; repeals
prior code § 15-9.3, Schedule 2, Note b and reletters Note c to
Note b, development code (16.02, 16.18, 16.20, Title 16
Appendix)
98-2 Traffic regulations for Hunterdon Chase development (Special)
98-3 Land acquisition (Special)
98-4 Traffic regulations for Hunterdon Central High School
(Special)
98-5 Traffic regulations for B.J. Warehouse Club (Special)
98-6 Traffic regulations for Barton Hollow Heights (Special)
98-7 Traffic regulations for Old York Manor (Special)
98-8 Traffic regulations for Rolling Hills (Special)
98-9 Traffic regulations for Sky View Estates (Special)
98-10 Traffic regulations for WaWa Store (Special)
98-11 Salaries, municipal public defender (Special)
98-12 Appropriation (Special)
98-13 Speed limits (Special)
98-14 Accepts certain roads in the township road system (Special)
98-15 Bond issuance (Special)
98-16 Speed limits (Special)
98-17 Accepts certain roads in the township road system (Special)
98-18 Amends prior code § 15-4.5(a)(1), development code (16.08)
98-19 Salaries (Special)
98-20 Rezone (Special)
98-21 Speed limits (Special)
98-22 Amends prior code § 5-4.1; repeals prior code § 5-4.2 and
renumbers prior code §§ 5-4.3 and 5-4.4 to 5-4.2 and 5-4.3,
alcoholic beverage control (5.08)
98-23 Traffic regulations for Flemington South Estates (Special)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:896
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
98-24 Towing (5.44)
98-25 Amends development code (Not adopted)
98-26 Appropriation (Special)
98-27 Bond issuance (Special)
98-28 Bond issuance (Special)
98-29 Adds § 6.3(G) to Ord. 90-30, housing board and housing officer
(15.20)
98-30 Amends prior code § 5-4.1(2)(A), alcoholic beverage control
(5.08)
98-31 Amends prior code §§ 15-9.3, 15-9.20(a) [15-9.19] and Ord.
91-38 § I(a), Ord. 94-5 § 8(S), development code (16.24, 16.64,
16.68, Title 16 Appendix)
98-32 Speed limits (Special)
98-33 Amends prior code §§ 2-2.1, 2-3.1, 2-4.4(b), 2-4.7, 2-7.1, 2-11,
2-11.2, 2-12.1, 2-12.3, 2-16, 2-19 and 2-20.6(k); repeals prior
code § 2-11A.1 and amends and renumbers §§ 2-11A.2 and
2-11A.3 to 2-11A.1 and 2-11A.2; repeals and replaces prior
code § 2-11.1; repeals prior code §§ 2-2.3, 2-4.6, 2-11.3, 2-11.4,
2-23 and 3-6 (2.04, 2.08, 2.12, 2.28, 2.32, 2.60, 2.76, 3.08)
98-34 Amends Ord. 98-19, salaries (Special)
98-35 Amends Ord. 97-8, salaries (Special)
98-36 Adds new § VIII to Ord. 98-31 and renumbers old §§ VIII-X to
IX-XI, development applications (16.24)
98-37 Accepts portion of a certain road in the township road system
(Special)
98-38 Accepts certain road in the township road system (Special)
98-39 Accepts certain road in the township road system (Special)
98-40 Lot acquisition (Special)
98-41 Amends prior code § 15-9.10A(a), rezone; amends prior code
§§ 15-9.10A(k), development code (16.38)
98-42 Adds § 9-1.4; amends prior code §§ 3-12, 3-12.7, 4-4, 4-6.7(b)
and (d), 4-10.8(d), 10-1.5(c), 10-5.1, 13-6 and title of Ch. VI
and Ord. 89-33 § 4; repeals and replaces prior code § 6-5.1;
repeals prior code § 4-4.3 and amends and renumbers prior
code §§ 4-4.2, and 4-4.4 to 4-4.1 and 4-4.2; renumbers old
§ 4-4.1 to § 4-4.3; repeals prior code §§ 3-3, 3-6, 6-5.2, 6-5.3
and Ords. 82-18, 83-3, 83-7 (amendment to § 6-2.4 only), 84-2,
85-20, 88-10, 88-31, 89-7, 89-37, 90-21, 91-37 94-4 and 96-21
(5.12, 5.16, 5.28, 6.04, 8.04, 12.24, 12.40, 15.16)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:897
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
98-43 Bond issuance (Special)
98-44 Appropriation (Special)
98-45 Amends Ord. 97-18, appropriation (Special)
98-46 Appropriation (Special)
98-47 Amends prior code § 15-9.2, rezone; adds prior code
§§ 15-9.7(16) [15-9.5(16)], 15-9.11B, 15-9.33(t) and 15-9.35(t);
amends prior code §§ 15-1.3, development code (16.02, 16.30,
16.42, 16.68)
98-48 Appropriation (Special)
98-49 Repeals and replaces prior code § 3-7, peace and good order
(9.04)
98-50 Adds prior code §§ 15-7.9(c)(10)(k), 15-9.5(b)(3) and
15-9.40(A)(11); amends prior code §§ 15-1.3, 15-3.2(c), 15-9.2
[15-9.3] and Ords. 86-8 § III, 87-30 § VI, 93-31, 96-15; repeals
prior code § 15-2.7 and renumbers the following Subsections
to 15-2.7 and 15-2.8 (16.02, 16.04, 16.06, 16.18, 16.30, 16.64,
16.72)
98-51 Rezone (Special)
99-1 Adds prior code § 15-9.11C; amends zoning map, development
(16.22, 16.43)
99-2 Bond issue (Special)
99-3 Requests turn restriction on certain street (Not codified)
99-4 Changes name of certain road (Special)
99-5 Establishes speed limit for certain road (Not codified)
99-6 Amends prior code §§ 15-7.9, 15-7.14, 15-8.2 and 15-8.11,
development (16.18, 16.20)
99-7 Establishes speed limit for certain road (Not codified)
99-8 Salaries (Special)
99-9 Salaries (Special)
99-10 Accepts certain road in the township road system (Special)
99-11 Amends prior code § 9-1.3, construction code (15.04)
99-12 Appropriations (Special)
99-13 Amends Ord. 98-23, traffic regulations (Special)
99-14 Capital funding for road improvements (Special)
99-15 Accepts certain roads in the township road system (Special)
99-16 Land acquisition (Special)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:898
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
99-17 Bond issue (Special)
99-18 Salaries (Special)
99-19 Bond issue (Special)
99-20 Salaries (Special)
99-21 Establishes local historians committee (2.104)
99-22 Appropriations (Special)
99-23 Bond issue (Special)
99-24 Accepts certain road in the township road system (Special)
99-25 (Not adopted)
99-26 Establishes agriculture advisory committee (2.108)
99-27 Establishes certain stop sign (Not codified)
99-28 Bond issue (Special)
99-29 Township share for funding of bond farm development rights
(Special)
99-30 Establishes weight restrictions for certain road (Not codified)
99-31 Bond issue (Special)
99-32 Bond issue (Special)
99-33 (Not adopted)
99-34 Appropriations (Special)
99-35 Amends prior code § 15-9.10A, development (16.38)
99-36 Adds prior code § 15-12.2C, development (16.10)
99-37 Initiates certain eminent domain proceedings (Special)
99-38 Appropriations (Special)
99-39 Repeals prior code § 2-15, board of assistance (Repealer)
00-1 Bond issue (Special)
00-2 Amends prior code § 15-7.5 development (16.18.050)
00-3 Repealed
00-4 Amends prior code § 15-1.3 development (16.02.030)
00-5 Vacation of easement (Special)
00-6 Conveying an easement (Special)
00-7 Establishing a speed limit for certain road (Not codified)
00-8 Salaries (Special)
00-9 Appropriation (Special)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:899
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
00-10 Accept certain roads into Township road system (Special)
00-11 Bond issue (Special)
00-12 Bond issue (Special)
00-13 Amends prior code § 15.04.040 fee extension for industrial
zone
00-14 Appropriation (Special)
00-15 Appropriation (Special)
00-16 Appropriation (Special)
00-17 Appropriation (Special)
00-18 Appropriation Amendment (Special)
00-19 Appropriation Amendment (Special)
00-20 Establishing a speed limit for certain road (Not codified)
00-21 Acceptance of donation (Special)
00-22 Accepts certain roads into Township road system (Special)
00-23 Vacation of easements (Special)
00-24 Appropriation (Special)
00-25 Appropriation (Special)
00-26 Initiates certain eminent domain proceedings (Special)
00-27 Codification adoption
00-28 Establishing a commercial property maintenance code
(Chapter 15.28)
00-29 Traffic (Special)
00-30 Acquisition of right-of-way (Special)
00-31 Amends 12.48.030
00-32 Amends 16.78.050.C.2.a.
00-33 Bond issue (Special)
00-34 Amends 16.18.100.D.1
00-35 Amends 16.72.070.D.3.c.
00-36 Establishes noise ordinance § 8.42
00-37 Acquisition of right-of-way (Special)
01-1 Amends § 2.88
01-2 Adds § 2.109 Cable Television Advisory Committee
01-3 Amends § 6.04.020 fees
01-4 Adds § limousine license
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:900
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
01-5 Amends § 2.104.010
01-6 Amends § 2.68.030
01-7 Salaries (Special)
01-8 Adds § 6.05 potentially dangerous & vicious dogs
01-9 Amends § 16.02.030 and 16.64.090
01-10 Bond issue (Special)
01-11 Bond issue (Special)
01-12 Appropriation (Special)
01-13 Appropriation (Special)
01-14 Traffic (Special)
01-15 Amends §§ 15.040.030.7, 15.04.030.12, 15.04.030.16.e,
15.04.030.3.c, 14.04.030.3.d. and deletes § 15.04.030.21.
01-16 Amends § 16.22.020, Schedule I, Note 14
01-17 Appropriation (Special)
01-18 Amending Ord. 99-19 & 00-40 Appropriations (Special)
01-19 Appropriation (Special)
01-20 Street Name Change (Special)
01-21 Appropriation (Special)
01-22 Appropriation (Special)
01-23 Taking streets in to the Township road system (Special)
01-24 Amends § 16.43.060, 16.43.070
01-25 Amends § 16.16.070
01-26 Appropriation (Special)
01-27 Accepting Easements (Special)
01-28 Amends § 16.22, Repeals § 16.68.060(P), Adds § 16.51
01-29 Appropriation (Special)
01-30 Appropriation (Special)
01-31 Dedication of Land (Special)
01-32 Authorize the Sale of Development Easements (Special)
01-33 Adds § 2.08.080
01-34 Appropriation (Special)
01-35 Amends § 2.100.020B(4) & H(3)
01-36 Salaries (Special)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:901
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
01-37 Salaries (Special)
01-38 Appropriation (Special)
01-39 Amends § 16.64.010
01-40 Appropriation (Special)
01-41 Amends 16.64.130
01-42 Amends § 2.88.080
01-43 Taking certain roads into the Township road system (Special)
02-1 Sale of Easements (Special)
02-2 Traffic (Special)
02-3 Appropriation (Special)
02-4 Vacating Easement (Special)
02-5 Transfer jurisdiction and ownership (Special)
02-6 Street Name Change (Special)
02-7 Salaries (Special)
02-8 Amends § 16.64.100
02-9 Amends § 16.18, 16.20 & 13.04
02-10 Traffic (Special)
02-11 Accepts roads into the Township road system (Special)
02-12 Appropriation (Special)
02-13 Compensation for Accumulated Absences
02-14 Amends § 16.18 & 13.04
02-15 Amends § 16.02, 16.18 & 16.20
02-16 Not adopted
02-17 Not adopted
02-18 Not adopted
02-19 Amends § 16.62
02-20 Not adopted
02-21 Amends § 16.02, 16.18, & 16.20
02-22 Not adopted
02-23 Appropriation (Special)
02-24 Appropriation (Special)
02-25 Appropriation (Special)
02-26 Appropriation (Special)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:902
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
02-27 Not adopted
02-28 Not adopted
02-29 Amends § 16.64
02-30 Appropriation (Special)
02-31 Appropriation (Special)
02-32 Street Name Change (Special
02-33 Vacation of road (Special)
02-34 Appropriation (Special)
02-35 Accepting Right-of-Way (Special)
02-36 Amends § 16.20 & 16.74
02-37 Releasing Emergency Access Easement & Site Triangle
Easement (Special)
02-38 LOSAP (Special)
02-39 Amends § 5.44.080
02-40 Not adopted
02-41 Traffic (Special)
02-42 Amends § 16.22 and Creates § 16.28
02-43 Amends § 16.13
02-44 Amends § 15.04.030 & 3.999.010
02-45 Road Vacation (Special)
02-46 Traffic (Special)
02-47 Amends § 16.02, 16.22, 16.64, 16.68 & 16.63
02-48 Appropriation (Special)
02-49 Salaries (Special)
02-50 Appropriation (Special)
02-51 Traffic (Special)
02-52 Traffic (Special)
02-53 Amends § 16.02, 16.51
02-54 Amends § 16.020.030, 16.18.110 & 16.20.040
02-55 Amends § 5.44.080
02-56 Traffic (Special)
02-57 Repeals § 2.84
02-58 Amends § 16.02.030, 16.68.060 & 16.54.040
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:903
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
03-1 Appropriation (Special)
03-2 Amends § 2.110
03-3 Amends § 16.64.010
03-4 Vacating Easement (Special)
03-5 Amends § 16.29
03-6 Authorizing Condemnation (Special)
03-7 Amends § Chapter 16.18 & 16.20
03-8 Amends § 2.80.020
03-9 Accepting roads into Township road system (Special)
03-10 Accepting portion of road (Special)
03-11 Salaries (Special)
03-12 Appropriation (Special)
03-13 Appropriation (Special)
03-14 Appropriation (Special)
03-15 Appropriation (Special)
03-16 Appropriation (Special)
03-17 Amends § 16.29
03-18 Salaries (Special)
03-19 Right-of-way given (Special)
03-20 Salaries (Special)
03-21 Salaries (Special)
03-22 Appropriation (Special)
03-23 Amends § 3.999
03-24 Authorizing sale (Special)
03-25 Salaries (Special)
03-26 Appropriation (Special)
03-27 Appropriation (Special)
03-28 Authorizing Sale of Easements (Special)
03-29 Hotel & Motel Occupancy Tax § 3.14
03-30 Appropriation (Special)
03-31 Amends § 16.72
03-32 Granting Easement (Special)
03-33 Traffic (Special)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:904
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
03-34 Amends §§ 5.08 & 6.04
03-35 Amends § 16.42
03-36 Appropriation (Special)
03-37 Not adopted
04-1 Appropriation (Special)
04-2 Not adopted
04-3 Roads (Special)
04-4 Amends § 8.16
04-5 Not adopted
04-6 Amends § 16.10
04-7 Appropriation (Special)
04-8 Mutual Aid (Special)
04-9 Accepting Gift of Land (Special)
04-10 Appropriation (Special)
04-11 Vacating Easement (Special)
04-12 Appropriation (Special)
04-13 Appropriation (Special)
04-14 Appropriation (Special)
04-15 Appropriation (Special)
04-16 Amends § 16.20
04-17 Accepting Gift of Land (Special)
04-18 Salaries (Special)
04-20 Amends § 16.72
04-21 Traffic (Special)
04-22 Amends § 16.64
04-23 Amends § 16.72.050
04-24 Vacation of Easement (Special)
04-25 Farming Lease (Special)
04-26 Vacation of Easement (Special)
04-27 Not adopted
04-28 Appropriation (Special)
04-29 Appropriation (Special)
04-30 Appropriation (Special)
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:905
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
04-31 Not adopted
04-32 Not adopted
04-33 Appropriation (Special)
04-34 Appropriation (Special)
04-35 Appropriation (Special)
04-36 Amends § 8.42
04-37 Amends § 3.999
04-38 Not adopted
04-39 Traffic (Special)
04-40 Salaries (Special)
04-41 Not adopted
04-42 Amends § 16.16
04-43 Amends § 5.44
04-44 Amends § 8.16
04-45 Cable Franchise (Special)
05-1 Amends § 5.08
05-2 Appropriation (Special)
05-3 Amends § 15.04.040
05-4 Amends § 16.18 and Establishes § 16.21
05-5 Amends § 16.10
05-6 Finance - Cap (Special)
05-7 Appropriation (Special)
05-8 Donation of Land (Special)
05-9 Amends § 16.78.050
05-10 Salaries (Special)
05-11 Appropriation (Special)
05-12 Appropriation (Special)
05-13 Appropriation (Special)
05-14 Appropriation (Special)
05-15 Not adopted
05-16 Traffic (Special)
05-17 Appropriation (Special)
05-18 Appropriation (Special)
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:906
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
05-19 Appropriation (Special)
05-20 Appropriation (Special)
05-21 Appropriation (Special)
05-22 Amends § 8.16
05-23 Establishes § 17.46
05-24 Traffic (Special)
05-25 Traffic (Special)
05-26 Establishes § 8.48
05-27 Creates § 8.50 Improper Disposal of Waste
05-28 Creates § 8.46 Wildlife Feeding
05-29 Creates § 8.44 Pet Waste
05-30 Appropriation (Special)
05-31 Appropriation (Special)
05-32 Appropriation (Special)
05-33 Appropriation (Special)
05-34 Appropriation (Special)
05-35 Dedication of Open Space (Special)
05-36 Creates § 12.49
05-37 Amends § 16.76
05-38 Sale of Municipal Property (Special)
05-39 Not Adopted
05-40 Changes Road Name (Special)
05-41 Parking on Certain Streets-Concord Ridge (Special)
05-42 Salary Animal Control Officer (Special)
05-43 PBA Salary & Wage Plan (Special)
05-44 Amends § 8.16.040
06-1 Creates § 9.16
06-2 PBA Salary & Wage Plan-Superior Officers (Special)
06-3 Amends § 1.08.010
06-4 Establishes § 6.02
06-5 Creates § 16.11 (Repealed by 20-01)
06-6 Appropriation (Special)
06-7 Amends § 15.04.030
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § OL-1
1.01:907
Ordinance
Number Subject (Disposition)
06-8 Salary Ordinance Administrative Personnel (Special)
06-9 Salary Ordinance Supervisory Personnel (Special)
06-10 Amends § 2.104
06-11 Amends §§ 16.18; 16.20; 16.80; 16.84 (Stormwater
Regulations)
06-12 Carriage Gate Streets into Road System (Special)
06-13 Amends § 6.04.010
06-14 Amends §§ 2.100.020; 16.17.050; 16.08.090; & 16.78.050
06-15 Establishes Position of Municipal Housing Liaison
06-16 Amends §§ 6.04.020; 6.04.100; & 6.04.120
06-17 Amends Salary Ordinance (Special)
06-18 Amends Salary Ordinance (Special)
06-19 Appropriation (Special)
06-20 Appropriation (Special)
06-21 Amends Ordinances 06-5 & 06-11 to Correct Errors
§§ 16.18.070C; 16.20.040C; 16.20.040D; 16.64.110; 16.18.110;
and 16.20.040
06-22 Appropriation (Special)
06-23 Appropriation (Special)
06-24 Appropriation (Special)
06-25 Forgiveness of Taxes (Special)
06-26 Amends § 15.20 (Repealed by 20-01)
06-27 Bond Ordinance
06-28 Establishes § 2.58 and Amends § 6.04.050
06-29 Amends Salary Ordinance (Special)
06-30 Not adopted
06-31 Amends §§ 16.44.020O., 16.46.020L., 16.48.020H.,
16.50.020E., 16.51.030V., 16.52.020G., 16.54.020F.,
16.56.020H., 16.58.020H., 16.60.020G., 16.62.030E,
16.44.020O, 16.24.040A., 16.28.040A., 16.30.040A.,
16.32.040A., 16.34.040A., 16.36.040A., 16.40.040A. &
16.43.060B.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
§ OL-1 RARITAN CODE § OL-1
1.01:908
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition List.
This Disposition List contains ordinances enacted subsequent to Ord. 06-31
and indicates for each its location within the Code or the reason for its
exclusion. Ordinances which are not general and permanent in nature are
considered non-Code material (NCM). Ordinances from 1982 through Ord.
06-31 are on the Ordinance List which precedes this Disposition List.
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-32 9-7-2006 Open Space Tax Title 2
2006-33 9-18-2006 COAH Applicants who are Non-
Profit
Title 16
2006-34 9-7-2006 Traffic: Veterinarian Hospital on
Voorhees Corner Road; Private
property where public invited
Title 39
2006-35 10-5-2006 Recycling and Towing Title 3,5
2006-36 10-5-2006 Municipal Clerk to Grant Raffle
and Bingo Licenses
Title 2
2006-37 10-5-2006 Open Space and Recreation
Areas
Title 12
2006-38 10-5-2006 Bond Ordinance NCM
2006-39 10-5-2006 Jurisdictional Control of Culvert
Q-102
NCM
2006-40 10-5-2006 Sale of Property NCM
2006-41 11-6-2006 Bond Ordinance NCM
2006-42 11-6-2006 Bond Ordinance NCM
2006-43 12-18-2006 Persons Conducting Sales from
Temporary Locations
Repealed by
Ord. No. 18-9
2007-01 2-26-2007 Traffic: Traffic Signal Title 10
2007-02 2-26-2007 Computer Disk Copy Fees Title 2
2007-03 2-26-2007 Reappropriation NCM
2007-04 2-26-2007 Pet License Fees Title 6
2007-05 4-23-2007 Reservation Fees for Open Space
and Recreation Areas
Title 12
2007-06 5-14-2007 Drainage Easement NCM
2007-07 5-14-2007 Traffic: Speed Limits and Parking
Prohibitions
Title 10
2007-08 5-14-2007 Cap Ordinance NCM
§ OL-1 CODE ADOPTION § DL-1
1.01:909
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-09 5-14-2007 Amend Ord. 2007-01, Insert
Latest Revision Date March 7,
2007, Traffic signal
Title 10
2007-10 5-31-2007 Salary and Compensation NCM
2007-11 6-25-2007 Fingerprinting and Background
Checks
Title 8
2007-12 6-25-2007 Discharge of Stormwater Title 8
2007-13 6-25-2007 Eliminate Fee Exemption-
Industrial Zone Development
from Building and Construction
Title 15
2007-14 Tabled NCM
2007-15 Not
Adopted
NCM
2007-16 7-23-2007 Bond Ordinance NCM
2007-17 7-23-2007 Bond Ordinance NCM
2007-18 Not
Adopted
NCM
2007-19 7-9-2007 Pet Licensing Title 6
2007-20 7-9-2007 Appropriation NCM
2007-21 7-9-2007 Accept Crystal Glenn Court
(portion) and Buckeye Lane into
Road System
NCM
2007-22 8-13-2007 Regulating the Statutory
Authority of United Telephone
Company of New Jersey, Inc.
NCM
2007-23 8-13-2007 Retitle "Illicit Connections" and
Add "Illicit Connections to
Municipal Sanitary Sewer
System"
Title 17
2007-24 8-13-2007 Authorizing Two Referendum
Questions for November 2007
Ballot
NCM
2007-25 8-13-2007 Use for Open Space Funds Title 2
2007-26B 8-13-2007 Reappropriation NCM
2007-27 Reappropriation NCM
2007-28 9-24-2007 Graffiti Prohibited and Removal
Required
Title 9
2007-29 9-24-2007 Traffic: Traffic Signal Title 10
§ DL-1 RARITAN CODE § DL-1
1.01:910
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-30 9-24-2007 Traffic: Speed Limit on Decker
Road
Title 10
2007-31 9-24-2007 Release, Extinguish and Vacate
Rights of the Public in a Portion
of a Street: Biggs Place
NCM
2007-32 9-24-2007 Bond Ordinance NCM
2007-33 11-5-2007 Hours of Operation and
Recreational Lighting
Title 16
2007-34 10-11-2007 Traffic: Speed Limit on Case
Boulevard; No stopping or
standing
Title 10
2007-35 10-11-2007 Purchase Property NCM
2007-36 11-5-2007 Traffic: Speed Limit on Rake
Road
Title 10
2007-37 11-5-2007 Taxicabs Title 5
2007-38 11-5-2007 Towing- Maximum Fee Schedule Title 3,5
2007-39 11-5-2007 Lease Agreement with
Flemington Area Food Pantry
NCM
2007-40 12-27-2007 Township Administrator Title 2
2007-41 12-27-2007 Graffiti: Individuals Authorized to
Enforce Provisions
Title 9
2007-42 12-27-2007 Reappropriation NCM
2007-43 12-27-2007 Utilities Authority: Composition
and Compensation
Title 2
2007-44 12-27-2007 Ethical Standards and Code of
Conduct
Title 2
2007-45 12-27-2007 Uniform Construction Code
Additional Fees
Title 15
2008-01 2-25-2008 Affordable Housing Repealed by
Ord. No. 20-01
2008-02 2-25-2008 Traffic: Speed Limit on Stanton
Road
Title 10
2008-03 3-10-2008 Land Development: Renumber
Sections 16.24 through 16.62
Title 16
2008-04 3-25-2008 Land Development: Chapter
16.64 Schedule I and Schedule II
Title 16
2008-05 Not
Adopted
NCM
§ DL-1 CODE ADOPTION § DL-1
1.01:911
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-06 4-14-2008 Fee Exemptions for Active Police,
Fire and Rescue Members
Title 3
2008-07 4-14-2008 Decrease the Open Space Tax
Authorization
Title 2
2008-08 4-14-2008 Land Development: Chapter
16.22 Zoning Map and Create
16.24.O Group Homes
Title 16
2008-09 4-28-2008 Land Development: Chapter
16.24.I, Single Family Dwelling
Permitted in R-6 Zone
Title 16
2008-10 4-28-2008 Land Development: Chapter
16.24.B and 16.64, Schedule I
Title 16
2008-11 4-28-2008 Land Development: Chapter
16.22, Zoning Map and Create
16.64.N, R-10 Zone
Title 16
2008-12 4-28-2008 Land Development: Chapter
16.22, Zoning Map and Create
Chapter 16.24.M, Agricultural
Residential Zone — 2, Amend Ch.
16.64 Schedule I, II and III
Title 16
2008-13 4-28-2008 Land Development: Chapter
16.22, Zones established, Zoning
Map and 16.24.L, Zone created
Title 16
2008-14 4-28-2008 Land Development: Amend
Chapter 16.22, Zoning Map
Title 16
2008-15 4-28-2008 Land Development: Amend
Chapter 16.24, R-6 Zone
Title 16
2008-16 5-12-2008 Land Development: Create
Section 16.64.140 Hours of
Operation
Title 16
2008-17 5-12-2008 Land Development: Create
Chapter 16.26.H, H Outdoor
Recreation Zone, Amend Chapter
16.22 Zoning Map, Amend
Chapter 16.64 Schedule I
Title 16
2008-18 6-23-2008 Land Development: Amend
Chapter 16.68 Conditional Uses
Title 16
2008-19 6-23-2008 Land Development: Amend
Chapter 16.10 Affordable
Housing Development Fees
Title 16
§ DL-1 RARITAN CODE § DL-1
1.01:912
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-20 6-23-2008 Land Development: Growth
Share Affordable Housing
Production
Repealed by
Ord. No. 20-01
2008-21 7-14-2008 Accept Additional Public Road
into Road System, Turtle Court in
the Twelve Oaks Subdivision
NCM
2008-22 7-14-2008 Chapter 2.94, Positions Eligible
for the Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Title 2
2008-23 Not
Adopted
NCM
2008-24 8-11-2008 Cap Ordinance NCM
2008-25 8-11-2008 Authorizing 4 Referendum
Questions for November 4, 2008
Election on Purchases and
Improvements
NCM
2008-26 8-11-2008 Salary and Compensation NCM
2008-27 9-29-2008 Bond Ordinance NCM
2008-28 9-29-2008 Bond Ordinance NCM
2008-29 Not
Adopted
NCM
2008-30 9-29-2008 Land Development: Amend
Chapter 16.02, Definitions,
Amend Chapter 16.22, Zoning
Map, Amend Chapter 16.32A,
Principal Permitted Uses in the
Public and Institutional Zone
Title 16
2008-31 9-29-2008 Land Development: Amend
Chapter 16.24.B, R-1A Lots and
Amend 16.24.M, AR-2 and R-3
Lots
Title 16
2008-32 10-27-2008 Salary and Compensation NCM
2008-33 Tabled
11-10-2008
Lease Agreement with
Flemington Midget Football, Inc.
NCM
2008-34 11-24-2008 Land Development: Chapter
16.10, Affordable Housing
Development Fees
Title 16
2008-35 11-24-2008 Lease Agreement with the
Greater Flemington Soccer Club
NCM
§ DL-1 CODE ADOPTION § DL-1
1.01:913
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-36 11-24-2008 Land Development: Chapter
16.64, Building and Use
Regulations
Title 16
2008-37 12-22-2008 Title 39 Applicable to Block 15,
Lot 65, Raritan Motorsports
Title 10
2009-01 3-3-2009 Charitable Bins Title 10
2009-02 3-17-2009 Carriage Gate Drive- Parking
Prohibited
Title 10
2009-03 3-17-2009 Bond Ordinance NCM
2009-04 Not
adopted
NCM
2009-05 4-22-2009 Cap Ordinance NCM
2009-06 5-5-2009 Non- Recycling Permit Fee
Schedule
Title 3
2009-07 5-5-2009 Public Peace, Morals and
Welfare: Add Chapter 9.18
Protective Custody
Title 9
2009-08 5-19-2009 Street and Building Numbers Title 12
2009-09 6-16-2009 Appropriation NCM
2009-10 7-21-2009 Reappropriation NCM
2009-11 7-21-2009 Land Development: Amend
Chapter 16.42, R-8 Planned Age
Restricted Adult Community
Zone
Title 16
2009-12 7-21-2009 Reappropriation NCM
2009-13 7-21-2009 Land Development: Amend
Chapter 16.10, Affordable
Housing Development Fees
Title 16
2009-14 8-18-2009 Salary and Compensation NCM
2009-15 8-18-2009 Salary and Compensation NCM
2009-16 9-15-2009 Flood Damage Prevention Title 15
2009-17 9-15-2009 Reappropriation NCM
2009-18 9-15-2009 Reappropriation NCM
2009-20 12-15-2009 Salary and Compensation NCM
2009-21 12-15-2009 Salary and Compensation NCM
§ DL-1 RARITAN CODE § DL-1
1.01:914
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-22 10-6-2009 Title 39 Applicable to Block 46,
Lot 1, Heritage Baptist Church;
Private property open where
public invited
Title 10
2009-23 11-5-2009 Title 39 Applicable to Block 9,
Lot 16.02, Raritan Village
Shopping Center; Private
property where public invited
Title 10
2009-24 11-5-2009 Land Development: Chapter
16.08, Zoning Permit Fee and
Schedule VI, Replacement of Air
Conditioning Units
Title 16
2009-25 11-5-2009 Forgiving and Refunding Real
Estate Tax
NCM
2009-26 12-15-2009 Appropriation NCM
2009-27 12-21-2009 Land Development: Amend
Chapter 16.64, Building and Use
Regulations, Roof mounted Solar
Panels as an Accessory Structure
Title 16
2010-01 2-16-2010 Acquisition of Property NCM
2010-02 2-16-2010 Reappropriation NCM
2010-03 3-2-2010 Chief of Police Title 2
2010-04 3-2-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-05 3-2-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-06 4-6-2010 Chapter 15.04, Construction Fee
Schedule
Title 15
2010-07 5-4-2010 Land Development: Chapters
16.02, 16.28 and 16.68, Assisted
Living Facilities
Title 16
2010-08 5-4-2010 Land Development: Chapter
16.28A Planned Residential
Development Overlay Zone
Title 16
2010-09 5-18-2010 Title 39 Applicable to Block 97,
Lot 26 Living Waters Lutheran
Church; Private property where
public invited
Title 10
2010-10 6-1-2010 Copy Fee Schedule Title 2
2010-11 6-1-2010 Non- Recycling Permit Fee
Schedule
Title 3
2010-12 6-1-2010 Recycling Sticker Fee Schedule Title 3
§ DL-1 CODE ADOPTION § DL-1
1.01:915
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-13 6-1-2010 Land Development: Chapter
16.28A Planned Residential
Development Overlay Zone
Title 16
2010-14 7-20-2010 Appropriation NCM
2010-15 8-17-2010 Land Development: Chapter
16.64, Sheds as Accessory
Structure in Non- Residential
Zones
Title 16
2010-16 8-17-2010 Stormwater: Dumpsters and
Refuse Containers
Title 8
2010-17 8-17-2010 Stormwater: Storm Drain Inlets Title 8
2010-18 8-17-2010 Salary and Compensation NCM
2010-19 10-5-2010 Chapter 8.36, Recycling Program Title 8
2010-20 10-5-2010 Land Development: Chapter
16.18 and Chapter 16.20,
Recycling Plan for Site Plan
Title 16
2010-21 10-5-2010 Salary and Compensation NCM
2010-22 10-5-2010 Stormwater: Dumpsters and
Refuse Containers
Title 8
2010-23 11-15-2010 Minutes, Film, Fee Schedule Title 3
2010-24 11-15-2010 Copying Fee Schedule Title 2
2010-25A 12-21-2010 Chapter 15.08, Delete Erection of
Tents
Title 15
2010-26 12-21-2010 Land Development: Chapter
16.14, Application and Filing
Procedure for Subdivision and
Site Plan Review
Title 16
2010-27 12-21-2010 Land Development: Chapter
16.02, Chapter 16.18 and
Chapter 16.20, Land Subdivision
and Site Development Standard,
Trees
Title 16
2011-01 1-18-2011 Purchase Property NCM
2011-02 2-15-2011 Land Development: Chapter
16.14, Change of Use for Site
Plan and Subdivision
Title 16
§ DL-1 RARITAN CODE § DL-1
1.01:916
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-03 2-15-2011 Land Development: Chapter
16.02, Chapter 16.18, Land
Subdivision and Site Plan
Standards, Trees, Checklist
Requirements
Title 16
2011-04 2-15-2011 Traffic: Weight Limits on certain
streets
Title 10
2011-05 2-15-2011 Cap Ordinance NCM
2011-06 3-1-2011 Reappropriation NCM
2011-07 4-5-2011 Add Chapter 2.102 (amends Ord.
2002-13 not codified) Leave
Policy for Certain Employees
Title 2
2011-08 6-9-2011 Reappropriation NCM
2011-09 6-9-2011 Reappropriation NCM
2011-10 6-9-2011 Reappropriation NCM
2011-11 7-19-2011 Reappropriation NCM
2011-12 7-19-2011 Reappropriation NCM
2011-13 7-19-2011 Alcoholic Beverages: Underage
Possession and Consumption on
Private Property
Title 8
2011-14 7-19-2011 Building and Construction: Fees
for Solar Installations
Title 15
2011-15 7-19-2011 Salary and Compensation NCM
2011-16 8-16-2011 Traffic: Speed Limit, Allen's
Corner Road
Title 10
2011-17 10-18-2011 Lease Agreement NCM
2011-18 10-4-2011 Salary and Compensation NCM
2011-19 10-18-2011 Purchase Property NCM
2011-20 12-6-2011 Chapter 15.04, Economic
Incentive to Businesses, Permit
Fee Exemptions
Title 15 (Check)
2011-21 12-6-2011 Bond Ordinance NCM
2011-22 12-6-2011 Chapter 2.88, Open Space
Advisory Committee and Trust
Fund: Extend Open Space Tax
until December 31, 2016
Title 2
§ DL-1 CODE ADOPTION § DL-1
1.01:917
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-01 2-7-2012 Land Development: Chapter
16.22, Establishment of Zones,
Chapter 16.22, Zoning Map,
Chapter 16.28C, Chapter 16.64,
Schedule I, Yale Redevelopment
Plan Ordinance
Title 16
2012-02 3-20-2012 Authorize the Sale of B 41 L 63-
B23 L 4
NCM
2012-03 5-15-2012 Cap Ordinance NCM
2012-04 5-15-2012 Community Garden Fee Schedule Title 3
2012-05 7-17-2012 Land Development: Chapters
16.02, 16.20, 16.28A, 16.28B,
Permit Solar or Photovoltaic
Energy Facility in I-1 and I-2
Zones
Title 16
2012-06 7-17-2012 Amend Traffic Chapter 10.08
Parking Generally and Add
Section 10.08.050, Parking
Prohibited at All Times
Title 10
2012-07 7-10-2012 Appropriation relating to the
Affordable Housing Plan
NCM
2012-08 8-21-2012 Rescind Chapter 6.02, Animals
Running at Large
Title 6
2012-09 8-7-2012 Bond Ordinance NCM
2012-10 8-7-2012 Bond Ordinance NCM
2012-11 8-7-2012 Bond Ordinance NCM
2012-12 10-2-2012 Accepting Deed for Block 63 Lot
78- Pizzo
NCM
2012-13 10-16-2012 Accepting Deed from the Garden
Homes
NCM
2012-14 12-4-2012 Granting 50 Year Franchise to
United Federal Data for
Telecommunication Transmission
Service
Not codified
2012-15 12-18-2012 Create Community Emergency
Response Team
Title 2
2013-01 3-19-2013 CWA White Collar Salary Ord.
2012-2014
NCM
2013-02 4-2-2013 Accepting Deed from Raritan
Hills Corporation
NCM
§ DL-1 RARITAN CODE § DL-1
1.01:918
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-03 5-23-2013 Land Development: Chapter
16.64 Agricultural Fence Height
Title 16
2013-04 7-16-2013 Chapter 12.44, Street and
Building Numbers
Title 12
2013-05 6-18-2013 Salary and Compensation NCM
2013-06 6-18-2013 Salary and Compensation NCM
2013-07 8-20-2013 Salary and Compensation NCM
2013-08 8-20-2013 CAP Ordinance NCM
2013-09 7-22-2013 Bond Ordinance NCM
2013-10 8-20-2013 Salary and Compensation NCM
2013-11 9-17-2013 Traffic: Accept Raritan Estates
Roads in Road System
NCM
2013-12 10-1-2013 Appropriation NCM
2013-13 10-1-2013 Bond Ordinance NCM
2013-14 10-1-2013 Bond Ordinance NCM
2013-15 10-1-2013 Bond Ordinance NCM
2013-16 10-1-2013 Bond Ordinance NCM
2013-17 10-1-2013 Bond Ordinance NCM
2013-18 12-3-2013 Chapter 6.04, Dog and Cat
Licensing
Title 6
2013-19 11-6-2013 Salary and Compensation NCM
2013-20 11-6-2013 Salary and Compensation NCM
2013-21 12-3-2013 Easement NCM
2014-01 3-4-2014 Chapter 2.88, Open Space
Advisory Committee-Membership
Title 2
2014-02 3-4-2014 Street Map Fee Schedule Title 3
2014-03 4-15-2014 Cap Ordinance NCM
2014-04 4-15-2014 Five Year Tax Abatement NCM
2014-05 5-6-2014 Tax Agreement Between Raritan
Junction and Raritan Township
NCM
2014-06 6-4-2014 Traffic: Close Portion of Hinkly
Road, local traffic only
Title 10
2014-07 6-17-2014 Bond Ordinance NCM
2014-08 6-17-2014 Salary and Compensation NCM
§ DL-1 CODE ADOPTION § DL-1
1.01:919
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-09 8-19-2014 Traffic: Change Name of a
portion of Hinkly Road to George
Place
Title 10
2014-10 8-19-2014 Salary and Compensation NCM
2014-11 8-19-2014 Bond Ordinance NCM
2014-12 8-19-2014 Bond Ordinance NCM
2014-13 8-19-2014 Bond Ordinance NCM
2014-14 8-19-2014 Energy Aggregation Program Title 3
2014-15 11-5-2014 Notice to Bidders- Sale of
Property
NCM
2014-16 11-17-2014 Accepting Deed from Johnson-
Amritt- Block 27, Lots 30.01 and
35.01
NCM
2014-17 11-17-2014 Accepting Deed of Dedication
from Millenium Development
Limited LLC
NCM
2014-18 11-17-2014 Purchase Property NCM
2014-19 12-2-2014 Bond Ordinance NCM
2014-20 12-16-2014 Land Development: Chapter
16.22 Establishment of Zones,
Zoning Map, Chapter 16.24,
Affordable Housing Overlay
Zone, Chapter 16.24, Affordable
Housing Overlay Zone,
Redevelopment Plan for Non-
Condemnation Area, Block 16.01/
Lots 37.01 and 54
Title 16
2015-01 4-7-2015 Salary and Compensation NCM
2015-02 5-5-2015 Acquisition of Property- Block 20
Lot 3
NCM
2015-03 6-3-2015 Junk Yard Code Title 5
2015-04 7-21-2015 Amend Ord. 2015-01 to Delete
Mileage and Car Allowance for
the CFO
NCM
2015-05 7-21-2015 Building and Construction:
Chapter 15.06, Registration and
Maintenance of Properties
Pending Foreclosure
Title 15
2015-06 7-21-2015 Building and Construction:
Chapter 15.07, Vacant Properties
Title 15
§ DL-1 RARITAN CODE § DL-1
1.01:920
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-07 7-21-2015 Building and Construction:
Chapter 15.08, Housing Code
Authority to Zoning Officer
Title 15
2015-08 7-21-2015 Building and Construction:
Chapter 15.16, Swimming Pools
Authority to Zoning Officer
Title 15
2015-09 8-10-2015 Bond Ordinance NCM
2015-10 8-10-2015 Bond Ordinance NCM
2015-11 8-10-2015 Bond Ordinance NCM
2015-12 8-10-2015 Reappropriation NCM
2015-13 9-1-2015 Bond Ordinance NCM
2015-14 10-6-2015 Salary and Compensation NCM
2015-15 10-6-2015 Salary and Compensation NCM
2015-16 10-6-2015 Traffic: Speed Limit on Autumn
Leaf Drive
Title 10
2015-17 11-4-2015 Accept Drainage Easement from
Yasenchak
NCM
2015-18 11-16-2015 Traffic: Accept Jurisdiction of
Portion of Pennsylvania Ave from
County
NCM
2015-19 11-16-2015 Rename Weatherburn Court to
Wetherburn Court
Title 10
2016-01 4-5-2016 CAP Bank NCM
2016-02 4-5-2016 Registration and Maintenance of
Foreclosed Properties; Violations
and Penalties, 15.06.090
Title 15
2016-03 4-5-2016 Vacant Properties; Penalties,
15.07.080
Title 15
2016-04 5-3-2016 Traffic; Adds Ch. 10.20 Traffic
Control Standards; Requirements
for Construction and
Maintenance 10.20.010 —
10.20.110
Title 10
2016-05 Not Adopted NCM
2016-06 5-3-2016 Outside Employment of Off-Duty
Police Officers, 2.56.160 —
2.56.190
Title 2
2016-07 5-17-2016 Street Vacation NCM
§ DL-1 CODE ADOPTION § DL-1
1.01:921
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-08 6-8-2016 Easement NCM
2016-09 7-28-2016 Bond NCM
2016-10 7-19-2016 Bond NCM
2016-11 7-19-2016 Renames Ch. 16.26G from
Commercial- Recreation District
to Commercial-Recreation-
Residential District 16.26G.010
— 16.26G.110; amends Schedule
I Schedule of Area and Building
Requirements; Zoning Districts
Established 16.22.010
Title 16
2016-12 7-9-2016 Employment of Off-Duty Police
Officers; Compensation 2.56.198
Title 2
2016-13 7-19-2016 Acceptance of Property from
County
NCM
2016-14 8-16-2016 Traffic; Stopping and Standing
Prohibited-River Road/CR 523
10.12.010
Title 10
2016-15 9-6-2016 Wildlife Management Advisory
Committee
Repealed by
Ord. No. 20-10
2016-16 Regulation of Weapons 9.04.040;
Open Space and Recreation
Areas, Rules and Regulations,
12.48.020 — 12.48.030
Title 9, 12
2016-17 Dedication/Easements Leffler Hill NCM
2016-18 Tabled NCM
2016-19 Not Adopted NCM
2016-20 Traffic; Adds No Parking Certain
Streets at Certain Times
10.12.100
Title 10
2016-21 Traffic; Stopping or Standing
Prohibited 10.12.010
Title 10
2016-22 Animal Control; Adds Ch. 6.08
Deer Management Program
Lottery 6.08.010 — 6.08.050
Title 6
2016-23 1-24-2017 Construction Permit Fees
15.04.030
Title 15
2016-24 NCM
§ DL-1 RARITAN CODE § DL-1
1.01:922
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-25 Funding of Open Space Trust
Fund 2.88.020; termination of
chapter provisions 2.88.080
Title 2
2016-26 1-24-2017 Renames Ch. 2.28 Township
Engineer to Department of
Engineering, Planning and
Zoning 2.28.010 — 2.28.040;
amends Ch. 2.40 Land Use
Enforcement Officer 2.40.010 —
2.40.040; deletes Ch. 2.44
Township Planner
Title 2
2017-01 Easement NCM
2017-02 3-21-2017 Construction Code Fees,
5.04.030; Fee waiver 15.04.050
Title 15
2017-03 3-21-2017 Towing and Storage Rate
Schedule 5.44.080
Title 5
2017-04 3-21-2017 Easement NCM
2017-05 3-21-2017 Deer Management Program
Lottery 6.08.010
Title 6
2017-06 3-21-2017 Easement NCM
2017-07 4-18-2017 CAP Bank NCM
2017-08 5-2-2017 Fee Exemptions for Active Police
Fire and Rescue Members and
Veterans 3.16.010
Title 3
2017-09 NCM
2017-10 Not Adopted NCM
2017-11 6-5-2017 Appropriation NCM
2017-12 Not Adopted NCM
2017-13 6-20-2017 Amends Redevelopment Plan for
Block 16.02/Lot 41; 16.28C
Raritan Junction Redevelopment
District; 16.28C.010 —
16.28C.140; Schedule I Schedule
of Area, Yard and Building
Requirements 16.64.010
Title 16
§ DL-1 CODE ADOPTION § DL-1
1.01:923
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-14 6-20-2017 Amends Ch. 16.26F Planned
Commercial-Office Service
District 16.26F.010 —
16.26F.090, 16.26F.110,
16.26F.120; 16.64.010 Schedule I
Schedule of Area, Yard and
Building Requirements;
16.68.060 Specific Standards
Title 16
2017-15 Not Adopted NCM
2017-16 7-18-2017 Salary NCM
2017-17 7-18-2017 Salary NCM
2017-18 8-15-2017 Salary NCM
2017-19 7-18-2017 Salary NCM
2017-20 7-18-2017 Salary NCM
2017-21 7-18-2017 Salary NCM
2017-22 Tabled NCM
2017-23 8-15-2017 Easement NCM
2017-24 9-5-2017 Fee Exemptions for Active Police,
Fire and Rescue Members and
Veterans 3.16.010
Title 3
2017-25 9-5-2017 Easement NCM
2017-26 9-5-2017 Drainage Easement NCM
2017-27 9-5-2017 Deed of Roadway NCM
2017-28 9-5-2017 Appropriation NCM
2017-29 10-3-2017 Easement NCM
2017-30 11-6-2017 Reappropriation NCM
2017-31 10-3-2017 Easement NCM
2017-32 11-6-2017 Bond NCM
2017-33 NCM
2017-34 11-6-2017 Acquisition of Property NCM
2017-35 11-6-2017 Reappropriation NCM
2017-36 Tabled NCM
2017-37 11-6-2017 Environmental Commission,
Composition 2.80.020
Title 2
2017-38 11-21-2017 Deed Restriction NCM
2017-39 12-5-2017 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 RARITAN CODE § DL-1
1.01:924
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-40 12-5-2017 Easement NCM
2017-41 12-19-2017 Amends purpose 5.04.010; adds
Ch. 5.50 Massage, Bodywork or
Somatic Therapy Establishments
5.50.010 — 5.50.140;
Title 5
18-1 3-20-2018 Land Development Code
Amendment
Ch. 16.02; Ch.
16.18; Ch.
16.64
18-2 2-6-2018 Department of Engineering,
Planning and Zoning Amendment
Ch. 2.28
18-3 2-6-2018 Fire Code Enforcement
Amendment
Ch. 8.16
18-4 2-20-2018 Acceptance of Deeds and
Easements
NCM
18-5 2-20-2018 Acceptance of Easements NCM
18-6 3-6-2018 Salaries NCM
18-7 3-6-2018 Salaries NCM
18-8 3-6-2018 Leave Policy for Certain
Employees Amendment
Ch. 2.102
18-9 3-6-2018 Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient
Merchants; Regulation of Food
Carts, Food Trucks and Other
Vehicle-Based Commercial
Activities; Special Events
Amendment
Ch. 5.24; Ch.
5.25; Ch. 5.36
18-10 3-20-2018 Uniform Construction Code
Amendment
Ch. 15.04
18-11 4-3-2018 Reappropriation NCM
18-12 4-3-2018 Street Vacation NCM
18-13 4-17-2018 Acceptance of Easements NCM
18-14 4-17-2018 Acceptance of Easement NCM
18-15 4-17-2018 Utilities Authority Amendment Ch. 2.68
18-16 5-1-2018 Cap Bank NCM
18-17 5-15-2018 Acceptance of Easement NCM
18-18 5-15-2018 Acceptance of Easements NCM
18-19 6-4-2018 Acceptance of Easements NCM
18-20 6-19-2018 Bond NCM
18-21 6-19-2018 Acceptance of Easements NCM
§ DL-1 CODE ADOPTION § DL-1
1.01:925
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-22 6-19-2018 Development Agreement NCM
18-23 8-21-2018 Reappropriation NCM
18-24 9-4-2018 Appropriation NCM
18-25 9-4-2018 Authorization to Execute
Quitclaim Deed
NCM
18-26 9-18-2018 Self-Insurance Fund for Group
Health Benefits
NCM
18-27 9-18-2018 Salaries NCM
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
18-28 11-7-2018 General Design and
Use Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 16.64 1
18-29 10-2-2018 Acceptance of
Easement
NCM 1
18-30 12-18-2018 Charitable Clothing
Bins Amendment;
Collection Bins
Amendment;
General Design and
Use Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 5.49;
Ch. 8.12;
Ch. 16.64
1
18-31 12-18-2018 Meetings, Hearings,
Notices and Appeals
Amendment;
Administration and
Enforcement
Amendment;
Schedule of Fees
Amendment
Ch. 16.08;
Ch. 16.78;
IV
1
18-32 11-20-2018 Deed of Dedication NCM 1
18-33 11-20-2018 Appropriation NCM 1
18-34 11-20-2018 Easement Vacation NCM 1
18-35 12-4-2018 Fire Code
Enforcement
Amendment
Ch. 8.16 1
§ DL-1 RARITAN CODE § DL-1
1.01:926
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-01 3-5-2019 Purpose,
Administration and
Definitions
Amendment; R-9
Planned Age
Restricted, Assisted
Living Facility
Development
District Amendment
Ch. 16.02;
Ch. 16.24K
1
19-02 2-19-2019 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 2.56 1
19-03 2-19-2019 Reappropriation NCM 1
19-04 3-19-2019 Signs Amendment Ch. 16.72 1
19-05 3-5-2019 Acceptance of Deed NCM 1
19-06 3-5-2019 Establish Cap Bank NCM 1
19-07 3-19-2019 Local Historians
Committee
Amendment
Ch. 2.104 1
19-08 5-21-2019 Purpose,
Administration and
Definitions
Amendment;
Collocation,
Removal and
Replacement of
Wireless Antennas
on Existing
Facilities; Schedule
of Fees Amendment
Ch. 16.02;
Ch. 16.71;
IV
1
19-09 4-2-2019 Easement NCM 1
19-10 4-2-2019 Reappropriation NCM 1
19-11 4-16-2019 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 2.56 1
BOH 19-01 4-18-2019 Motor-Driven Off-
Road Vehicles
Ch. 17.50 1
19-12 5-21-2019 Easement NCM 1
19-13 5-7-2019 Bond NCM 1
19-14 6-5-2019 Zoning Districts
Established
Amendment;
Outdoor Recreation
Zone Amendment
Ch. 16.22;
Ch. 16.26H
1
§ DL-1 CODE ADOPTION § DL-1
1.01:927
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-15 6-18-2019 General Design and
Use Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 16.64 1
19-16 5-21-2019 Reappropriation NCM 1
19-17 5-21-2019 Township
Administrator
Amendment
Ch. 2.12 1
19-18 6-5-2019 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 2.56 1
19-19 8-20-2019 Planned Residential
Development
Overlay Zone; I-1
Restricted Industrial
Zone Amendment
Ch. 16.26I;
Ch. 16.28A
1
19-20 7-16-2019 Zoning Districts
Established
Amendment; SJRR
South Junction Road
Redevelopment
District
Ch. 16.22;
Ch. 16.28D
1
19-21 7-16-2019 Towing Amendment Ch. 5.44 1
19-22 8-20-2019 Agreement NCM 1
19-23 9-3-2019 Zoning Districts
Established
Amendment; U.S.
Bronze
Redevelopment
District
Ch. 16.22;
Ch. 16.28E
1
19-24 9-3-2019 Reappropriation NCM 1
19-25 10-1-2019 Smoking
Amendment
Ch. 8.40 1
19-26 10-1-2019 Deed of Dedication NCM 1
19-27 11-6-2019 Deed of Dedication NCM 2
19-28 11-6-2019 Appropriation NCM 2
19-29 11-6-2019 Recreation
Department
Ch. 2.113 2
19-30 11-6-2019 Easement NCM 2
19-31 11-18-2019 Acquisition of
Property
NCM 2
19-32 12-3-2019 Easement NCM 2
§ DL-1 RARITAN CODE § DL-1
1.01:928
Ord.
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
19-33 12-3-2019 Board of Health
Amendment
Ch. 2.76 2
19-34 12-17-2019 Salaries NCM 2
19-35 12-17-2019 Salaries NCM 2
19-36 12-17-2019 Open Space
Advisory Committee
and Trust Fund
Amendment
Ch. 2.88 2
19-37 12-17-2019 Easement NCM 2
20-01 2-4-2020 Affordable Housing;
Growth Share
Affordable Housing
Production Repealer
Ch. 15.20;
Ch. 16.11,
reference
only
2
20-02 2-4-2020 Easement NCM 2
20-03 2-4-2020 Fee Exemptions for
Active Police, Fire
and Rescue
Members, and
Veterans
Amendment
Ch. 3.16 2
20-04 2-4-2020 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 2
20-05 2-4-2020 Easement NCM 2
20-06 2-18-2019 Purchase of Property NCM 2
20-07 2-18-2019 Purchase of Property NCM 2
20-08 3-3-2020 Street Renaming NCM 2
20-09 Pending
Adoption
20-10 3-3-2020 Wildlife
Management
Advisory Committee
Repealer
Ch. 2.112,
reference
only
2
Board of Health Ordinance List
Chapter BHOL
BOARD OF HEALTH ORDINANCE LIST
§ DL-1 CODE ADOPTION § BHOL-1
1.01:929
§ BHOL-1. Board of Health Ordinance List.
Board of Health ordinances enacted subsequent to Ord. BH 05-1 are on the
Board of Health Disposition List which follows.
Ordinance
Date Subject (Disposition)
3-23-1981 Portable chemical toilets (17.16)
10-15-1981 Swimming pool code (17.36)
12-16-1985 Adds prior code §§ BH:8-1 — BH:8-7, food and beverage
vending machine code (17.28)
12-16-1985 Adds prior code §§ BH:9-1 — BH:9-7, operation and
maintenance of food and beverage vending machines
(17.28)
11-17-1988 Adds prior code §§ BH:10-1 — BH:10-3; amends prior code
§ BH:6-4.1, and swimming pool code of New Jersey-1970 and
portable chemical toilets regulations; repeals prior code
§§ BH:1-2.3, BH:2-4, BH:4-8, BH:5-5, BH:7-5(1)(a) and
BH:9-2, application, license and permit fees (17.04, 17.32,
17.36, 17.44)
10-18-1990 Amends prior code §§ BH:4-1 — BH:4-9, sewage disposal
systems (17.12)
7-17-1997 Adds prior code §§ BH:11-1 — BH:11-4, permeability and
soil log testing (17.40)
03-1 Amends § 17.44.030
04-1 Amends § 17.44.030
04-2 Amends § 17.44.030
04-3 Amends § 17.44.030
04-4 Grease Trap
05-1 Repeals Grease Trap
Board of Health Disposition List
Chapter BHDL
BOARD OF HEALTH DISPOSITION LIST
§ BHDL-1. Board of Health Disposition List.
This Board of Health Disposition List contains ordinances enacted by the
Board of Health subsequent to 2005 and indicates for each its location
within the Code or the reason for its exclusion. Ordinances which are not
general and permanent in nature are considered non-Code material (NCM).
§ BHOL-1 RARITAN CODE § BHDL-1
1.01:930
Ordinances from 1981 through 2005 are on the Board of Health Ordinance
List which precedes this Disposition List.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
BOH 18-1 2-15-2018
Applications, Licenses, Permits
and Fee Schedule Ch. 17.44
BOH 18-2 2-15-2018
Individual Sewage Disposal
System Amendment Ch. 17.12
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
BOH 19-01 4-18-2019 Motor-Driven Off-
Road Vehicles
Ch. 17.50 1
§ BHDL-1 CODE ADOPTION § BHDL-1
1.01:931