Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Village Council
[Adopted 10-13-1992 as Ord. No. 2375]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Village of Ridgewood
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Village Council of the
Village of Ridgewood, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 269, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Village of Ridgewood," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
A. As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE, THE CODE or THIS CODE — The Code of the Village of
Ridgewood, New Jersey.
COUNCIL, VILLAGE COUNCIL — The Village Council of the Village of
Ridgewood.
COUNTY — The County of Bergen in the State of New Jersey.
MONTH — A calendar month.
NUMBER — A word importing the singular number only may extend
and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person
and thing.
ORDINANCE — Includes, but is not limited to, this Code and all
ordinances amendatory and supplementary thereof.
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, any
corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON — Shall extend and be applied to associations, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STREET — Includes a highway, road, avenue, court, place, public lane
or alley; and it shall also be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath,
unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Village Council.
THE VILLAGE or THIS VILLAGE — The Village of Ridgewood, New
Jersey.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
§ 1-3. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
VILLAGE CLERK, CHIEF OF POLICE (OR SUCH OTHER NAMED
VILLAGE OFFICER) — The Village Clerk, Chief of Police or such other
Village officer or department respectively of the Village of Ridgewood.
WRITING or IN WRITING — Includes any representation of words,
letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
B. Rules of construction. In the construction of this Code and of all other
ordinances of the Village, the following rules shall be observed, unless
such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Village Council.
(1) Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend
and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and
corporations, as well as to males.
(2) Computation of time. In computing any period of time, the day of
the act or event after which the designated period begins to run
shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall
be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in
which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which
is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor a holiday. When a period of time
prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the
computation.
(3) Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is
permissive.
(4) Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
(5) Technical, trade or commercial words and phrases, and words and
phrases having a special or accepted meaning in the law, shall be
construed in accordance with such technical, trade, commercial or
special and accepted meaning.
§ 1-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 1-5
1:4
§ 1-5. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Village Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Village of
Ridgewood by impressing thereon the Seal of the Village, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Village, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Village of Ridgewood" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-7. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Village of Ridgewood, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Village
Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
§ 1-10. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village of
Ridgewood to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more
than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-11. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-12. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-14. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-13 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 10, 1991.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
§ 1-10 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 1-14
1:6
§ 1-15. Violations and penalties.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Village's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance or resolution relating to the regulation of vehicles and
traffic.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, whenever in this Code or in any other
ordinance or resolution or the Village or in any rule, regulation or order
promulgated pursuant to such Code or other ordinance of the Village
any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense, or whenever in such Code or in such other Village ordinance,
resolution, rule, regulation or order the doing of any act is required or
the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense, where
no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such
provision of this Code or of any other ordinance or resolution of the
Village or of any rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant to such
Code or other Village ordinance shall be punished by one or more of the
following:
(1) Imprisonment in the county jail or in any place provided by the
Village for the detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding
90 days;
(2) By a fine not exceeding $1,000; or
(3) By a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
B. Whenever any provision of the New Jersey Revised Statutes limits the
authority of the Village to punish the violation of any particular
provision of this Code or other Village ordinance or rule, regulation or
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
§ 1-16. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
order promulgated pursuant thereto to a fine of less amount than that
provided in this section or imprisonment for a shorter term than that
provided in this section, then the violation of such particular provision
of this Code or other Village ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation
or order shall be punished by the imposition of not more than the
maximum fine or imprisonment so authorized or by both such fine or
imprisonment.
C. Each day any violation of this Code or any other Village ordinance,
resolution, rule, regulation or order promulgated pursuant thereto shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense, unless otherwise provided.
D. Whenever any such fine is imposed upon any corporation, such fine and
costs and charges incident thereto may be collected in an action of debt
or in such other manner as may be provided by law.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Village Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-16B, the following sections or Articles were added or
amended: §§ 3-1, 3-3, 3-4A, 3-8, 3-35A and C, 3-38B(2)(b) and (3), 3-39E, 3-40B and E,
3-46, 3-49A, 3-52, 22-3, 22-13A, 22-15, 99-4C, 99-7B and C, 99-17B and C, 101-1, 101-4,
101-5, 101-6, 101-8, 101-9, 101-10B, 101-11, 101-13D, 103-1, 103-3, 103-11, 103-17,
103-19, 105-1, 105-6, 105-9, 105-12, 105-17B and C, 105-18B and D, 105-19B, 105-23,
105-46G and I, 107-5, 112-3, 112-5A, C, D and E, 117-1A, 117-2, 117-16, 117-18G,
117-34A, 117-38C, 117-40, 117-41B, 117-44, 117-53, 123-2, 125-3, 125-4, 125-5, 133-4C
and D, 149-1, 149-13, 149-21A, 154-7, 156-2A, 156-12, 156-13, 156-15B, 156-18B,
156-20B, 156-20C, 156-22, 156-29, 156-34, 156-41, 156-50A, 156-63, 165-1, 165-15,
165-16A, 165-17, 165-18, 165-19, 165-21, 165-25, 165-45, 165-48, 172-2, 175-10, 175-11,
175-15, 175-18D, 175-19, 190-3, 190-8E(1)(b) and (c), 190-19C, F and G, 190-20, 190-31A,
190-37A(2), 190-43, 190-46E and F, 190-52, 190-53, 190-56A, 190-62I(3)(c), 190-73F,
190-74B(11) and C(10), 190-76B, 190-79B(2), 190-82R(1)(b), 190-87C(2), 190-87C(4),
190-89C(2)(a), (d) and (e) and (6)(a), 190-96A, 190-118, 194-2, 199-2, 199-4A, 199-7,
210-3B, 210-6, 210-7, 212-7, 212-10, 212-14, 212-18, 212-20, 212-21, 212-22, Arts. VI and
VII of Ch. 212, §§ 218-6A, 238-4, 238-23, 238-24A, 238-25, 238-26, 238-34, 238-39A,
238-41B and D, 238-47, 238-50, 238-57, 241-3, 246-4, 246-11B, 246-12, 249-16,
249-45A(11) and B, 249-47A and B, 251-6, 251-8, 256-3, 256-7, 256-18, 256-22, 269-2,
269-6, 269-8C, 269-13, 269-16A, B and E(2), 269-19H and I, 269-21, 269-25E and G,
269-33B, 269-34, 269-35, 269-36, 269-37, 269-39, 269-40C and D, 269-41B and D, 269-42
and 269-47. The following sections of the 1974 Code were deleted: §§ 11-8, 23-7, 23-8,
23-9, 23-13 through 23-19, 3-2 through 3-9, 9-17, 13-16 through 13-19, Art. II of Ch. 13,
second, third and fourth unnumbered paragraphs of §§ 14-20, 16-8(g), Art. V of Ch. 16,
§§ 16-19, 17-8, 21-6 through 21-9, 25-51 through 25-55, 27-11, part of § 32-25(a),
§§ 32-25(b) and 32-34. Also deleted were original Section 10 of Ord. No. 1558 and original
Section 1.1 of Ord. No. 1914. A complete description of each change may be found in Ord.
No. 2375, which is on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 1-15 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 1-16
1:8
(1) All references to "§ 1-6 of the Village Code" are hereby amended to
read "Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, of the Village Code."
(2) All references to "Director of Buildings and Inspections" in Chapter
175, Housing Standards, are changed to "Construction Code
Official."
(3) In Chapter 190, Land Use and Development, all references to
"Building Inspector" are changed to "Construction Official" and all
references to "Chapter 291, P.L. 1975," are changed to "N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq."
(4) In Chapter 251, Swimming Pools, all references to "Building
Inspector" are changed to "Department of Buildings and
Inspections."
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 15.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 64.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
§ 1-16 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 1-16
1:10
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 3-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CHARTER — Council-Manager Plan B of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 et seq.,2 as
amended and supplemented, and any and all statutory provisions of the
state as may be lawfully applicable to the Village.[Amended 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375]
CLERK — The Village Clerk duly appointed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-89,
the Charter or any ordinance or resolution; or a deputy or assistant duly
acting in place of the Village Clerk.
DIRECTOR — The head of a department.
MANAGER — A Manager or Acting Manager duly appointed by the Council
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-89 or the Charter, or a qualified administrative
officer appointed or designated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-94 and
performing the duties of the Manager thereunder.
§ 3-2. Seal.
The Village Seal, as adopted and in use upon the effective date of this
chapter, shall continue to be the legal Seal of the Village.
§ 3-3. Office hours. [Amended 7-14-1987 by Ord. No. 2103;
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
The regular office hours for the transaction of municipal business shall be
8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday.
2. Editor's Note: This reference originally referred to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-99 et seq. (P.L. 1950, c.
210), which provision was repealed by P.L. 1981, c. 465, § 44. The disposition table now
refers to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 et seq.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:11

ARTICLE II
Village Council
§ 3-4. Meetings. [Amended 7-14-1987 by Ord. No. 2103]
§ 3-5. Annual organization.
On the first day of July following each election of Councilmen, the Council
shall organize by the election of a Mayor and adoption of such resolutions
as may be required.
§ 3-6. Mayor; Deputy Mayor; President Pro Tempore.
A. Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Village Council shall be held
in accord with the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq., as
the same may hereafter be amended. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
B. Special meetings. The Mayor, at any time, and upon written request of a
majority of the Council members, shall call a special meeting of the
Council. Special meetings shall be conducted in accord with the Open
Public Meetings Act.
C. Adjourned meetings. A meeting adjourned to a fixed time shall be
considered a continuation of the preceding meeting, and the business of
the Council shall be resumed where it was left at the last adjournment.
A. At 12:00 noon on the first day of July following each election of
Councilmen, the Council shall assemble at Village Hall, organize and
elect one of the Councilmen as Mayor. The Mayor shall be chosen by
ballot by majority vote of all members of the Council. If the members
shall be unable, within five ballots to be taken within two days of the
organization meeting, to elect a Mayor, then the member who in the last
election for members of the Municipal Council received the greatest
number of votes shall be the Mayor. Should such person decline to
accept the office, then the person receiving the next highest vote shall
be the Mayor, and so on until the office is filled.
B. At the same time as a Mayor is elected, the Council shall elect one of its
members as Deputy Mayor. The Deputy Mayor shall serve in place of
the Mayor in the event of the temporary absence or disability of the
Mayor. The Council shall elect a President Pro Tempore in the event of
the absence or disability of both the Mayor and Deputy Mayor.
C. Vacancies in the office of Mayor or Deputy Mayor shall be filled by the
Council for the remainder of the unexpired term.
D. The Mayor or other presiding officer shall:
(1) Preside at all meetings of the Council and of the Committee of the
Whole, and have a voice and vote in its proceedings.
§ 3-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-6
1:13
§ 3-7. Clerk, Deputy Clerk and Clerk Pro Tempore.
The Village Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council. In the absence of the
Clerk and of the Deputy Village Clerk, the Council shall appoint a Clerk Pro
Tempore.
§ 3-8. Informal conference meetings. [Amended 7-14-1987 by Ord.
No. 2103; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
Subject to the provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6
et seq., the Council may meet at any time in informal conference for the
consideration of any Village business.
§ 3-9. Legislation procedures.
(2) Appoint such special committees of the Council as may be required.
(3) State the question and announce the result on all matters upon
which the Council may vote.
(4) Rule on all questions of order subject to appeal to the Council.
(5) Sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted in his presence.
(6) Have such other functions, powers and duties as the Charter or the
Council, subject to the Charter, may from time to time prescribe.
A. Preparation of ordinances and resolutions. Ordinances and resolutions
shall be prepared for the consideration of the Council by the Village
Attorney upon written request of any member of the Council or of the
Manager.
B. Prior review by administrative staff. All ordinances and Village
contractual authorizations, before presentation to the Council, shall
have been approved as to form and legality by the Village Attorney or
his authorized representative and shall have been examined as to
administrative considerations by the Manager or his authorized
representative whenever administrative responsibilities may be
affected thereby. The Manager shall submit to the Council a written
memorandum concerning the administrative aspects of each such
ordinance and contractual authorization unless he shall advise the
Council that no administrative problems are involved. Each
administrative memorandum may include the specific comments and
recommendations of the Director concerned with the subject of the
memorandum.
C. Introduction for passage or approval.
(1) Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring
action by the Council shall be introduced and sponsored by a
member of the Council, except that the Manager or Attorney may
present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to
§ 3-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-9
1:14
§ 3-10. Agenda. [Amended 7-14-1987 by Ord. No. 2103]
An agenda shall be prepared by the Clerk for each regular meeting of the
Council. The Clerk shall furnish a copy of the agenda to each Councilman,
the Manager, the Village Attorney and any citizen who may request it.
§ 3-11. Call to order.
The Mayor or, in his absence, the Deputy Mayor shall call each meeting to
order. In the absence of both the Mayor and the Deputy Mayor, the Clerk
shall call the meeting to order, and those present shall select a President
Pro Tempore who shall preside during the absence of the Mayor. The Mayor
shall assume the Chair as soon as he is in attendance at any meeting which
the Council and any Councilman may assume sponsorship thereof
by moving that such ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be
adopted; otherwise, they shall not be considered.
(2) Resolutions, unless laid over by a majority vote of the Council, may
be acted upon the day of introduction or presentation.
(3) Ordinances and resolutions shall be called up for action on motion
of a member of the Council.
D. Ordinances and resolutions. After the first reading of an ordinance, it
shall be referred to the Committee of the Whole. Resolutions, which the
Village Council has determined at its premeeting conference to be
routine and which do not require discussion, shall be included under a
single section of the order of business known as the "consent agenda."
Such resolutions may be adopted upon motion and approval thereof by
vote of a majority of the Village Council. The consent agenda section of
the order of business shall be preceded by an explanatory note
substantially set forth as follows: "All matters listed under item consent
agenda are considered routine by the Village Council and will be
approved by one motion in the form listed below. There will be no
separate discussion of these items. If any member of the Village Council
wishes to discuss such an item, it shall be removed from the consent
agenda and considered separately under the resolution section of the
order of business." [Amended 11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 2382]
E. Adoption of ordinances. No ordinance may be adopted without the
affirmative vote of a majority of all the members of the Council or such
greater number of affirmative votes as the Charter may require.
F. Advertisement of ordinances. After introduction, all ordinances shall be
advertised by the Clerk in accordance with the applicable provisions of
law for public hearing at the next succeeding regular meeting of the
Council unless otherwise directed by the affirmative vote of the
majority of all members of the Council. After adoption, all ordinances
shall be advertised by the Clerk in accordance with the applicable
provisions of law therefor.
§ 3-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11
1:15
may have been called to order in his absence, and the Temporary Chairman
shall thereupon relinquish the Chair.
§ 3-12. Roll call; quorum.
§ 3-13. Order of business. [Amended 7-14-1987 by Ord. No. 2103;
11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 2382; 1-11-1994 by Ord. No. 2442]
§ 3-14. Voting.
A. At the opening of each meeting of the Council, the Clerk shall call the
roll and the names of those present shall be recorded in the minutes.
B. A majority of all the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum.
If a quorum is not present one-half (1/2) hour after the appointed time
for any meeting, those present may adjourn the meeting.
A. The order of business at each regular public meeting of the Village
Council shall be as follows:
(1) Roll call.
(2) Flag salute.
(3) Acceptance of financial reports.
(4) Approval of minutes.
(5) Petitions and oral communications from the public for a period of
time not to exceed 40 minutes. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 3551]
(6) Mayor's correspondence.
(7) Reports of the Village Manager.
(8) Proclamations.
(9) Ordinances upon first reading.
(10) Ordinances upon second reading.
(11) Resolutions.
(12) Petitions and oral communications from the public.
(13) Adjournment.
B. Workshop meetings, premeeting conferences, planning meetings and
informal conference meetings shall be discussion meetings of the
Village Council and shall not be guided by the order of business set
forth in this section.
A. The vote upon every ordinance shall be taken by roll call, and the yeas
and nays shall be entered on the minutes. The minutes of each meeting
§ 3-11 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-14
1:16
§ 3-15. Preparation and reading of minutes.
The Clerk shall, so far as practicable, prepare and distribute to the Council
the minutes of each meeting promptly after the meeting. The minutes of
any meeting may be approved without reading whenever they have been
distributed at least 24 hours prior to the time of approval.
§ 3-16. Committees.
There shall be no standing committees of the Council other than the
Committee of the Whole. The rules of the Council shall govern the meetings
of the Committee of the Whole so far as applicable. Special committees for
legislative purposes may be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to motion or
resolution. No special committee shall proceed to the consideration of any
matter referred to it unless a majority of the members of the committee
shall be present. All committee meetings shall be held at Village Hall. No
special committee shall report at the same meeting in which the matter is
referred to it except by unanimous consent of the Council.
§ 3-17. Appointments by Council.
With respect to appointments to be made by the Council, any member of
the Council may nominate as many candidates as there are offices to be
filled. The Council will consider such nominations in the Committee of the
Whole, which will report to a regular meeting of the Council. Where there
is a single office to be filled, the sense of the Council on the appointment
shall be taken as to each nominee, and the nominee receiving a majority
shall be deemed appointed. Where there is more than one office to be filled,
such as on a board, commission or authority, the same procedure shall
be followed with respect to each office separately until the total number
of appointments to be made has been completed. In the discretion of the
Chair, a group of nominations may be considered at once where there is no
apparent division in the Council as to the nominees included in the group.
Appointments may be made by the affirmative vote of a majority of those
present and voting.
§ 3-18. Rules of debate.
shall be signed by the officer presiding at such meeting and by the
Clerk.
B. When the roll is called upon any question, each Councilman shall
audibly announce his vote, and the silence of a Councilman shall
constitute an affirmative vote unless he states that he abstains.
A. The Mayor or other Chairman may move, second and debate from the
Chair and shall not be deprived of any right to vote or of any other
rights, powers or duties of a Councilman by virtue of occupying the
Chair.
§ 3-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-18
1:17
§ 3-19. Manner of addressing Council. [Amended 1-11-1994 by Ord.
No. 2442]
§ 3-20. Decorum. [Amended 5-11-2016 by Ord. No. 3532;
10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3549]
B. A member of the Council shall be entitled to the floor only upon
recognition by the Chair. Once a member has been recognized and
taken the floor, he shall not be interrupted for any reason other than a
call to order; and in such case, the Chair shall rule promptly on the
point of order and the speaker shall be allowed to proceed if he is in
order.
C. The Councilman who has made a motion shall be entitled to the
privilege of closing debate.
D. A motion to reconsider may be made by a Councilman on the prevailing
side, and such motion may be made only at the same meeting or at an
adjournment thereof as which the action was taken.
E. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided
without debate.
A. Persons other than Council members may be permitted to address the
Council in the proper order of business. A person present may, upon
recognition by the Chair, be heard either upon ordinances upon second
reading or at the time of petitions and oral communications from the
public and at such other times as the Council may, by majority vote of
those present, specifically permit. No person shall address any remark
or question to any specific Council member, nor shall any person be
permitted to address the Chair while a motion is pending. A Council
member may, through the Chair, respond to any communication or
address received pursuant to this section.
B. Except upon consent of the Council, by the majority vote of those
present, each person addressing the Council pursuant to this section
shall be required to limit his remarks to three minutes during the first
public comment period and five minutes during the second public
comment period and shall at no time engage in any personally offensive
or abusive remarks. On a hearing on ordinances on the second reading,
a person who has previously addressed the Council on the issue may be
permitted a period of no more than an additional five minutes after all
others desirous of speaking on the issue have had an opportunity to do
so, provided that the comments of the speaker are not repetitive. The
Chair shall call any speaker to order who violates any provision of this
section. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3551]
A. Any person who shall disturb the peace of the Council, make
impertinent or slanderous remarks or conduct himself in a boisterous
manner while addressing the Council shall be forthwith barred by the
presiding officer from further audience before the Council, except that
§ 3-18 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-20
1:18
§ 3-21. Filings.
The Committee of the Whole shall file with the Clerk all petitions,
resolutions or other papers considered by it on each matter referred to the
Committee. All reports to the Council and all resolutions shall be filed with
the Clerk and entered in the minutes of the Council.
§ 3-22. Form of minutes.
§ 3-23. Robert's Rules of Order.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, the proceedings of
the Council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order.
§ 3-24. Suspension of rules of procedure.
Any of the rules of procedure of the Council may be suspended by
unanimous consent of the Councilmen present, except as otherwise
provided by the Charter.
if the speaker shall submit to proper order under these rules,
permission for him to continue may be granted by a majority vote of the
Council.
B. The Police Chief shall, upon request of the Chair, designate a member of
the Department to serve as Sergeant at Arms at Council meetings. He
shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer
for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at such meeting.
A. The Clerk shall record the minutes of every meeting of the Council, and
the minutes shall contain only the formal actions of the Council by
motion, resolution or ordinance except as otherwise authorized by this
section.
B. With the consent of Council, a member may have the privilege of
including in the minutes a written abstract not exceeding 100 words of
any statement he may make before the Council.
C. In the discretion of the Clerk, other matters relating to the business or
actions of the Council may be included in the minutes to the extent
necessary to clarify the purpose or context of any recorded formal
action.
D. The text of ordinances and resolutions need not be included in the
minutes, but the signed official copies thereof shall be bound and
preserved as public record in the office of the Clerk.
§ 3-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-24
1:19

ARTICLE III
Village Manager
§ 3-25. Appointment; qualifications; residency.
The Manager shall be chosen by the Council solely on the basis of his
executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his
actual experience in or his knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the
duties of his office. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident
of the Village or state, but during his tenure of office he may reside outside
the Village only with the approval of Council.
§ 3-26. Removal.
The Manager shall serve the Council and shall be subject to removal as
provided by the Charter. A resolution of removal shall not be in order
unless and until the Manager shall have been given written notice of the
intention to offer it at least 10 days prior thereto. At least 30 days before
such removal shall become effective, the Council shall, by a majority vote
of its members, adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for the
removal. The Manager may reply, in writing, and may request a public
hearing, which shall be held not less than 20 days nor more than 30
days after the filing of such request. After such public hearing, if one is
requested, and after full consideration, the Council, by majority vote of
its members, may adopt a final resolution of removal. By the preliminary
resolution, the Council may suspend the Manager from duty, but shall in
any case cause to be paid him forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary
and his salary for the next three calendar months following adoption of the
preliminary resolution.
§ 3-27. Acting Manager.
The Manager may designate a qualified administrative officer of the Village
to perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability. In the
event of his failure to make such designation, the Council may, by
resolution, appoint an officer of the Village to perform the duties of the
Manager during such absence or disability until he shall return or his
disability shall cease.
§ 3-28. Powers and duties.
The Manager shall:
A. Be the chief executive and administrative official of the Village
government.
B. Execute all ordinances of the Village.
C. Appoint and remove a Deputy Manager, if one is authorized by the
Council, all department heads and all other officers, subordinates and
assistants for whose selection or removal no other method is provided
§ 3-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-28
1:21
§ 3-29. Authority to appoint and remove department heads.
The Manager shall appoint and may remove department heads subject to
the Charter. Whenever he deems it necessary or desirable, the Manager
may appoint an officer or employee of a department to serve temporarily
as acting head of a department. With the approval of Council, the Manager
by the Charter, except that he may authorize the head of a department
to appoint and remove subordinates in such department; and report all
appointments or removals at the next meeting thereafter of the Council.
D. Subject to the Charter, direct and supervise the various departments
through the department heads or otherwise.
E. Attend all meetings of the Council with the right to take part in the
discussions, but without the right to vote.
F. Investigate at any time the affairs of any officer or department of the
Village government.
G. Negotiate contracts for the Village subject to the approval of the
Council, make recommendations concerning the nature and location of
Village improvements and execute public improvements as determined
by the Council.
H. Supervise the investments and invested funds of the Village or in
possession of the Village in a fiduciary capacity except as otherwise
provided by law, and keep such investments and invested funds safely
invested pursuant to law.
I. Examine, review and approve all expenditures and financial
commitments of the Village government, and no such expenditure or
commitment shall be authorized without such approval.
J. Study the operation, efficiency and control of departments, functions
and activities supported by Village funds, and make recommendations
to the Council from time to time for the improvement thereof as need
appears.
K. See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Village or its
inhabitants in any statute, contract or public utility franchise are
faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violation
thereof, call it to the attention of the Council.
L. Recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may deem
necessary or expedient, keep the Council advised of the financial
condition of the municipality, make reports to the Council as requested
by it, and at least once a year make an annual report of the
administration of the Village government for the benefit of the Council
and the public.
M. Perform such other duties as may be required of the Manager by the
Charter or any ordinance or resolution of the Council.
§ 3-28 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-29
1:22
may designate himself as acting head of one or more departments, without
additional compensation.
§ 3-30. Delegation of administrative duties.
The Manager may, in his discretion, allocate, assign or delegate functions or
powers to a department head for more efficient administration of the Village
government, provided that any such delegation, allocation or assignment
shall not relieve the manager of any of his responsibilities under the Charter
or this code nor shall it be inconsistent with any express requirement of the
Charter or this code. Any such delegation shall be in writing and shall be
promptly reported to the Council and recorded in its minutes.
§ 3-31. Village property, insurance and bonds.
A. The Manager shall have custody, management and control of all Village
property which is not otherwise allocated or assigned to a department
by this code.
B. The Manager, with the approval of the Council, shall arrange for such
insurance and suretyship coverage as may be required by the Village to
protect it against risks of loss from whatever cause. All insurance
policies and official surety bonds shall be filed for safekeeping with the
Clerk.
§ 3-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-31
1:23

ARTICLE IV
Village Officers
§ 3-32. Village Auditor.
The Council shall appoint a registered municipal accountant of the state to
perform the annual audit required by law, pursuant to such form of retainer
agreement as the Council may approve.
§ 3-33. Village Attorney; Village Prosecutor.
A. Appointment and responsibilities. The Council shall appoint a Village
Attorney to serve at its pleasure under such form of retainer agreement
as the Council may approve. He shall serve as legal advisor to the
Council and the Manager; represent the Village government in
litigation; draft ordinances and resolutions upon request of the Council
or the Manager; and provide such other professional legal services as
the Council may from time to time request.
B. Village Prosecutor. [Amended 2-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2817]
(1) The Village Council shall appoint a Village Prosecutor to serve in
accord with the duties and responsibilities set forth in N.J.S.A.
2B:25-1 et seq. Candidates for the office of Village Prosecutor shall
be recommended to the Village Council by the Village Attorney. The
Village Prosecutor shall be compensated as provided by ordinance.
(2) In addition to the Village Prosecutor, the Village Council may
appoint such Assistant Village Prosecutors, not to exceed three in
number, as the Council determines are necessary to administer
justice in a timely and effective manner in the Municipal Court.
Such Assistant Village Prosecutors shall also be recommended to
the Village Council by the Village Attorney. Compensation of the
Assistant Village Prosecutors shall be as provided by ordinance.
(3) In the event that the Village Council appoints Assistant Village
Prosecutors, the Village Prosecutor shall be known as the Chief
Village Prosecutor and shall have authority over the other
prosecutors serving that court with respect to the performance of
their duties.
§ 3-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-33
1:25

ARTICLE V
Departments
§ 3-34. Functions of department heads.
Each department head, subject to the direction and supervision of the
Manager, shall:
§ 3-35. Department of Administration.
A. Exercise and discharge such functions, powers and duties as may be
allocated and assigned to the department by or pursuant to the Charter,
this code or any ordinance.
B. Direct and supervise the work of his department.
C. Organize the activities of the department and allocate and assign
functions to its employees.
D. Have such powers of appointment and removal of subordinates within
the department as may be delegated to him by the Manager pursuant to
the Charter and this code.
E. Have and exercise such other powers of a department head as may
otherwise be provided by this code.
A. Creation; Clerk to head Department. There shall be a Department of
Administration, the head of which shall be the Clerk. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
B. Deputy Village Clerk generally. Within the Department of
Administration there shall be a Deputy Village Clerk. The Deputy shall
assist the Clerk as directed, and in the event of the absence or
temporary disability of the Clerk, the Deputy shall have, exercise and
discharge the functions, powers and duties of the Clerk until the Clerk
shall return or the disability shall terminate, as the case may be.
C. Office of the Clerk. Within the Department there shall be the Office of
the Clerk, the head of which shall be the Village Clerk. The Office shall:
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
(1) Exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Municipal Clerk as prescribed by law or ordinance.
(2) Install, maintain and preserve personnel procedures, records and
services.
(3) Install and supervise such management procedures, reports and
controls as shall be approved or required by the Manager.
D. Purchasing Agent. Within the Department of Administration there shall
be a Purchasing Agent. He shall administer the purchasing provisions
of the Charter, this code and other ordinances.
§ 3-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-35
1:27
§ 3-36. Department of Finance.
E. Public information center; system for receiving and adjusting
complaints. The Department shall provide a public information center
to assist residents and visitors in need of Village services. The
Department shall also install and maintain a system for receiving and
prompt adjustment of citizen complaints as to Village services.
Whenever a Councilman receives such a complaint, he shall refer it to
the Manager for appropriate action.
F. Secretarial services. The Department of Administration shall provide
secretarial services as required by the Council and Councilmen for
official business.
A. Creation; Director. There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of
which shall be the Chief Financial Officer, as defined in N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.1 et seq., and who shall be appointed by the Village Manager.
In addition to supervising the various divisions of the Department, the
Chief Financial Officer shall: [Amended 10-10-1989 by Ord. No.
2226]
(1) Exercise effective control over the financial resources of the
Village.
(2) Coordinate and synthesize financial and management data so as to
interpret the composite financial results of operations to the
Manager and Council.
(3) Advise on developing, coordinating and carrying out financial
policies, procedures and plans.
(4) Review, analyze, evaluate and report upon program
accomplishments in financial terms, as may be required or
requested by the Village Manager.
(5) Advise and assist the Council, Manager and other management
officials by supplying financial management advice required to
make management decisions and to establish organizational goals
and objectives.
B. Division of Budget and Accounts. Within the Department there shall be
a Division of Budget and Accounts, the head of which shall be the Chief
Accountant. Subject to the direction and supervision of the Director, the
Division shall:
(1) Prepare, install and maintain or supervise a uniform system of
accounts and accounting procedures for all departments and other
agencies of local government supported in whole or in part by
Village appropriations.
§ 3-35 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-36
1:28
(2) Furnish estimates of revenues and expenditures as required for the
preparation of the Village annual budgets for operating and capital
purposes.
(3) Maintain the general accounts, books and records of the Village
and properly record therein all financial transactions of the Village
and make such reports thereof as are required by law or as may be
requested by the Manager or Council.
(4) Install and maintain an encumbrance system of budget operation to
assure that all expenditures and commitments will be confined
within the limits of available appropriations.
(5) Provide for a proper preaudit of each claim and demand upon the
Village government prior to payment.
(6) Maintain and follow such other practices and procedures as the
Manager may require for the proper administration of Village
affairs, including clear, concise and accurate reports of the
financial condition of the Village government at least monthly.
(7) Have custody of investments and invested funds of the Village or in
possession of the Village in a fiduciary capacity, except as
otherwise provided by law, and keep such funds safely invested
under the supervision and approval of the Manager.
(8) Have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the Village and the
receipt and delivery of all Village bonds and notes for transfer,
registration or exchange.
(9) Operate and control a central mail facility for the receipt, delivery,
dispatch and distribution of Village mail and the shipping and
receiving of merchandise for the Village government. [Added
3-25-1975 by Ord. No. 1563]
C. Division of the Treasury. Within the Department of Finance, there shall
be a Division of the Treasury, the head of which shall be the Treasurer.
Subject to the direction and supervision of the Director, the Division
shall:
(1) Have custody of the funds of the Village and pay and disburse
therefrom upon proper vouchers and warrants, as otherwise
provided by the Charter and this code.
(2) Maintain and operate a central payroll covering all employees paid
from Village appropriations, and including review and approval of
each payroll by the Manager.
(3) Have custody of bank records of deposits and withdrawals of
Village funds and reconcile bank statements of Village accounts.
D. Division of Collections.
§ 3-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-36
1:29
(1) Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of
Collections, the head of which shall be the Tax Collector. He shall
be appointed for the term prescribed by law. Until such time as the
appointment of a separate tax collector shall be authorized by the
Council, the Director may be appointed to serve as Tax Collector.
The Division, subject to the direction and supervision of the
Director, shall:
(a) Have, perform and exercise all of the functions, powers and
duties provided by law relating to Village tax collectors.
(b) Receive and collect all taxes levied and assessed by the Village
and all money due from any source to the Village or to any
department, board, office or agency thereof, except as may be
otherwise ordered by the Manager.
(c) Enforce the payment of delinquent taxes by such means as are
provided by law as soon as the same become delinquent, and
serve as Municipal Collector of Assessments and as Municipal
Tax Search Officer.
(d) Deposit to the credit of the Village in an authorized public
depository, to the credit of the proper account, all receipts and
collections of the Division.
(e) Operate and maintain a central switchboard for telephone
service to all Village offices other than the Police Department,
and a central duplicating service for the various offices.
[Added 3-25-1975 by Ord. No. 1563]
(2) Water rates and charges; statements of account. Subject to the
direction and supervision of the Director, the Division of Collections
shall receive and collect rates and charges for water supplied from
the water distribution system of the Village, as prescribed by
ordinance or contract. The Division shall render periodic
statements of account to each consumer or owner of premises
liable therefor, based upon meter readings provided by the Division
of Water Utility or as otherwise authorized by ordinance, but the
failure of the Division to render or deliver a statement shall not
release or abate any such water rate or charge.
(3) Fees and charges for use of Village recreational facilities. Subject
to the direction and supervision of the Director, the Division of
Collections shall receive and collect lawful fees and charges for the
use of Village recreation facilities, including Graydon Pool, and may
issue receipts, tickets, permits or badges upon payment therefor, in
accordance with the requirements of this code and other
ordinances.3
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Fees.
§ 3-36 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-36
1:30
§ 3-37. Department of Public Works.
(4) Parking meter fees. Subject to the direction and supervision of the
Director, the Division of Collections shall receive, collect and
account for parking meter fees deposited in parking meters on
public streets, parking lots and other public places.4
E. Division of Assessments. Within the Department of Finance there shall
be a Division of Assessments, the head of which shall be the Tax
Assessor. [Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 3483]
(1) The Tax Assessor shall be appointed for a term prescribed by law.
He/she shall perform and discharge all functions, powers and
duties prescribed for Tax Assessors in Title 54 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated.
(2) Under the administration and direction of the Chief Financial
Officer, the Division shall provide assistance to other departments
and the public in matters relating to assessments, and information
on real property in the Village.
A. Creation; Director. There shall be a Department of Public Works, the
head of which shall be the Director.
B. Division of Engineering. Within the Department of Public Works there
shall be a Division of Engineering, the head of which shall be the Village
Engineer. Prior to his appointment, the Village Engineer shall be a
licensed professional engineer of the state. Subject to the direction and
supervision of the Director, the Division shall:
(1) Provide professional engineering advice and assistance to the
Council, Manager and all departments, as required and within the
limits of available appropriations.
(2) Provide staff assistance to the Village Planning Board for the
review of subdivision applications and plats, master planning
studies and capital budget preparation and analysis.
(3) Have custody of all maps, charts, profiles and other delineations of
public improvements and facilities and related public utility
improvements and facilities within the Village.
(4) Maintain the Village Official Map, Tax Map and the Village Zoning
Map in a current legal status at all times.
(5) Prepare plans and specifications for public works authorized by the
Council and make such field surveys as may be required therefor.
4. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Division of Assessments, added 11-12-1973 by Ord.
No. 1504, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 9-13-2006 by Ord. No.
3016. For current provisions, see § 3-38, Department of Community Services.
§ 3-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-37
1:31
(6) Make such inspections of the work of public contractors as may be
necessary or desirable, supervise the performance of public works
contracts and certify the amounts due and payable thereunder.
(7) Provide such operating standards and maintain such engineering
data and records as may be necessary or desirable for the proper
and efficient administration of the public works facilities of the
Village other than the water system.
C. Division of Street Services. Within the Department there shall be a
Division of Street Services, the head of which shall be the
Superintendent. Subject to the direction and supervision of the
Director, the Division shall:
(1) Maintain and repair the public streets, curbs and gutters of the
Village in a safe condition for travel by pedestrians and vehicles.
(2) Install and repair the drainage facilities, storm sewers and catch
basins of the Village.
(3) Sweep and clean the streets of the Village as required, and remove
therefrom all accumulations of debris, dead animals, snow and ice.
D. Division of Parking and Traffic. Within the Department there shall be a
Division of Parking and Traffic, the head of which shall be the
Superintendent. Subject to the direction and supervision of the
Director, the Division shall:
(1) Operate and maintain public off-street parking facilities of the
Village.
(2) Install, repair and maintain parking meters of the Village.
(3) Inspect, install, repair and maintain traffic signals, lines and
markers as authorized.
(4) Inspect, install, maintain and repair fire alarm boxes and
equipment.
(5) Have such powers and duties with respect to Village-owned radio
equipment as shall be delegated by the Manager.
(6) Maintain and repair all Village-owned buildings and structures in a
good and workmanlike manner, whether by force account or under
public contract. [Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 3483]
(7) Provide office cleaning and maintenance services for all of the
various municipal offices of the Village. [Added 7-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 3483]
(8) Provide custodial and janitorial services as required for all Village
buildings and structures, within the limits of available
appropriations. [Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 3483]
§ 3-37 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-37
1:32
§ 3-38. (Reserved)5
E. Division of Central Garage. Within the Department there shall be a
Division of Central Garage, the head of which shall be the Supervising
Foreman. Subject to the direction and supervision of the Director, the
Division shall:
(1) Operate and maintain the central Village garage for vehicular
storage and repairs.
(2) Provide for the maintenance and repair of all Village-owned motor
vehicles, trucks and equipment.
(3) Provide for the maintenance and repair of all Board of Education
motor vehicles, trucks and equipment.
(4) Maintain accurate and complete records of services performed and
parts supplied, and the cost thereof, by vehicle and by service, in
such form as shall be approved by the Manager, and make periodic
reports and summaries thereof to the Manager.
F. Division of Water Pollution Control. Within the Department there shall
be a Division of Water Pollution Control, the head of which shall be the
Superintendent. Subject to the direction and supervision of the
Director, the Division shall:
(1) Operate, maintain and repair the Village sewer treatment plant and
pumping stations through the public streets and rights-of-way of
the Village and through easements granted to the Village.
[Amended 9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 2640]
(2) Operate, maintain and repair the Village sewage collection system,
including interceptors, mains, pipes and valves within Village
streets, rights-of-way and through Village property. Property
owners shall be responsible to install, maintain and repair service
connections from their buildings to the mains or other connecting
pipes of the system itself. Installation, repair and maintenance by
the property owner shall be subject to rules and regulations set
forth in the Code of the Village of Ridgewood or in accord with the
directives of the Division of water Pollution control as approved by
the Village Manager. [Amended 9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 2640]
(3) Provide sewage service to other municipalities in accordance with
intermunicipal agreements.
(4) Administer and enforce the Village ordinances regulating the use of
public and private sewers and the discharge of waters and waste
into the public sewerage system.
(5) Operate and maintain the drainage facilities, storm sewers and
catch basins of the Village with the public streets, rights-of-way and
easements of the Village. [Amended 9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 2640]
§ 3-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-39
1:33
§ 3-39. Department of Parks and Recreation.
A. Creation; Director. There shall be a Department of Parks and
Recreation, the head of which shall be the Director.
B. Division of Parks. Within the Department there shall be a Division of
Parks, the head of which shall be the Superintendent. Subject to the
direction and supervision of the Director, the Division may: [Amended
10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 2280]
(1) Care for, trim, plant and cultivate greens, shade trees and
ornamental plantings in the parks and upon other public property
owned or leased by the Village.
(2) Maintain, improve and conserve the public grounds, parks and
outdoor recreation areas of the Village.
(3) Maintain and care for the public school grounds under such
agreement as may be in effect with the Board of Education.
(4) Maintain, operate and repair the physical facilities of Graydon Pool.
C. Division of Recreation. Within the Department there shall be a Division
of Recreation, the head of which shall be the Superintendent. Subject to
the supervision of the Director, the Division shall:
(1) Plan, develop and administer public recreational areas and
facilities of the Village.
(2) Administer and operate the Graydon Swimming Pool Complex and
other athletic, sports and leisure time programs and activities of
recreational interest for children and adults.
(3) Provide programs of special interest for senior citizens and for
teenagers.
(4) Utilize such buildings, facilities and services as may be made
available by the Board of Education or by nonpublic owners for
public recreational programs and activities.
(5) Recommend to the Village Manager regulations for the use of
parks, playgrounds, open spaces and other community facilities the
Village may have or acquire for purposes of public recreation or
conservation, including, without limitation thereto, the music shell,
fieldhouses and athletic fields. [Amended 5-27-1975 by Ord. No.
1572]
D. Intergovernmental cooperation. Within the limits of available
appropriations, the Department may cooperate and participate with
other municipal, school, county, state and federal agencies in the
development, administration, financing and operation of recreation,
5. Editor's Note: Former § 3-38, Department of Community Services, added 9-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 3016, was repealed 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 3483.
§ 3-39 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-39
1:34
§ 3-40. Department of Planning.7 [Added 2-14-2007 by Ord. No.
3041]
parks and conservation programs for the benefit of the residents of the
Village.
E. Charges and fees. The Department may charge and collect for the use
of the Village reasonable registration, admission and service fees for
each person entering or using facilities, exhibitions, concerts, games or
contests sponsored or provided by the Department, as authorized by
the Council by ordinance.6 [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
F. Rules and regulations. The Department may, from time to time,
recommend to the Village Manager reasonable rules, regulations and
bylaws, not inconsistent with statute or ordinance, for the conduct of
persons using property under the jurisdiction of the Department, either
as spectator or participant, to protect the health and safety of such
persons and minimize the risk of injury to persons or property.
A. There shall be a Department of Planning, the head of which shall be the
Director, known as the “Village Planner.” Prior to his/her appointment,
the Village Planner shall be a licensed professional planner in the State
of New Jersey.
B. The Department of Planning shall:
(1) Review and process development applications under the
jurisdiction of the Village Planning Board and, where appropriate,
the Village Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(2) Attend evening meetings of the Village Planning Board and/or
Zoning Board of Adjustment as requested by the Village Manager
or to appropriately process, review and assist the respective boards
with specific development applications.
(3) Conduct the examination of the Village Master Plan as required by
the Municipal Land Use Law and/or as determined to be necessary
to satisfy all statutory requirements of the Village.
(4) Provide professional planning advice and assistance to the Council,
the Manager and all related departments, as required and within
the limits of available appropriations.
(5) Provide review, support and expertise on such other issues and
projects as may be deemed necessary by the Director and/or the
Village Manager.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Fees.
7. Editor's Note: Former § 3-40, Department of Building and Inspections, as amended
3-20-1975 by Ord. No. 1563 and 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375, was repealed 9-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 3016, For current provisions see § 3-38, Department of Community Services.
§ 3-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-40
1:35
§ 3-41. Department of Water Supply.
C. The Village Planner shall receive such compensation as provided under
such form of retainer agreement as the Council may approve. Such
agreement shall be kept on file in the Office of the Village Clerk.
D. There shall be a Secretary to the Planning Board appointed, who shall
report directly to the Village Planner. The Secretary to the Planning
Board shall: [Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 3483]
(1) Assist applicants in processing their applications to the Planning
Board and maintain all records, correspondence, files and
proceedings related to the Planning Board.
(2) Prepare and distribute meeting packets to the Planning Board
members.
(3) Prepare and submit legal advertisements, related to the Planning
Board, to the legal newspapers of the Village of Ridgewood, as
necessary.
(4) Attend evening meetings of the Village Planning Board and prepare
minutes of the meetings for approval by the Planning Board.
(5) Maintain escrow funds for the Planning Board applicants.
(6) Perform other duties, as may be assigned by the Planner or the
Village Planning Board.
A. Creation; Director. There shall be a Department of Water Supply, the
head of which shall be the Director.
B. Within the Department there shall be a Division of Water Distribution
and a Division of Water Treatment, the head of which shall be the
Superintendent or Chief Operator of each division, respectively. Subject
to the direction and supervision of the Director, or any other officer of
the utility as designated by the director, the two Divisions shall:
[Amended 1-15-2014 by Ord. No. 3402]
(1) Operate, maintain and repair the Village-owned water supply and
distribution system.
(2) Provide water service to other municipalities in accordance with
intermunicipal agreements.
(3) Install, repair, replace and maintain water meters, and provide for
the reading of meters periodically as the basis of billing and
collection of water rates and charges by the Department of
Finance.
C. Division of Solid Waste Control. Within the Department there shall be a
Division of Solid Waste Control. Subject to the direction and supervision
§ 3-40 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-41
1:36
§ 3-42. Fire Department.
of the Director, the Division shall operate and maintain the solid waste
collection and disposal system of the Village.
D. Division of Public Works. Within the Department there shall be a
Division of Public Works, separate and apart from the Department of
Public Works/Division of Engineering. Within the Division there will be
a Superintendent. Subject to the direction of the Supervisor or Director,
this Superintendent will assist in overseeing operations in the following
areas: Streets, Fleet/Central Garage, Solid Waste, Recycling, and any
other divisions as determined by management. [Added 4-13-2016 by
Ord. No. 3524]
A. Creation; Director. There shall be a Fire Department, the head of which
shall be the Director.
B. Composition of fire-fighting force. The fire-fighting force shall consist of
the Chief of the Fire Department and so many full-time paid officers and
fire fighters and part-time volunteers as may be authorized from time to
time by or pursuant to ordinance. The force shall be organized
according to such table of organization as shall be prescribed by the
Director, subject to the approval of the Manager. [Amended
12-28-1976 by Ord. No. 1615]
C. Three-platoon system. The Director shall allocate and assign the fulltime
officers and fire fighters so that their tours of active duty shall be
scheduled according to a three-platoon system, subject to the approval
of the Village Manager. [Amended 12-28-1976 by Ord. No. 1615]
D. Schedule of active duty hours. [Amended 12-28-1976 by Ord. No.
1615]
(1) There will be three platoons of equal strength, with all platoon
personnel working an average of 56 hours per week in a twentyone-
day cycle throughout the year. The system is one twenty-fourhour
tour on duty followed by one twenty-four-hour tour off duty
followed by one twenty-four-hour tour on duty followed by one
twenty-four-hour tour off duty followed by one twenty-four-hour
tour on duty followed by four twenty-four-hour tours off duty. This
schedule then repeats itself. The twenty-four-hour tours are from
8:00 a.m. one day to 8:00 a.m. the following day.
(2) Annual leave is granted on approval by the Director. One person
from each platoon is permitted on leave at one time. During a
designated summer annual leave period, which is established by
the Director, two fire fighters or one fire fighter and one officer
from each platoon may be on leave. Only one Captain may be on
annual leave at one time.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever the occasion may
require, whether due to illness, men attending training or schools
§ 3-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-42
1:37
§ 3-43. Police Department. [Amended 4-18-1991 by Ord. No. 2318]
with the approval of the Village Manager or the Chief of the Fire
Department or in any emergency or cause sufficient in the
judgment of the Director, the Director, with the approval of the
Village Manager, may by order suspend or modify for as long a
period as he may deem necessary the work-hour schedules or the
assignment of officers, fire fighters or platoons as set forth in this
section.
E. Functions generally. The Fire Department, under the direction and
supervision of the Director, shall: [Amended 12-28-1976 by Ord. No.
1615]
(1) Provide, maintain and operate an efficient organization of
personnel, apparatus, equipment and procedures to detect, control
and extinguish fires and such other emergency and rescue work as
may be necessary or advisable for the protection of life and
property.
(2) Protect and preserve property against the hazards of uncontrolled
combustion, and rescue those endangered thereby.
(3) Operate a training program to improve and increase the firefighting
information and efficiency of the force.
F. Bureau of Fire Prevention. Within the Department there shall be a
Bureau of Fire Prevention, which shall be organized and shall have such
functions, powers and duties as hereinafter established in Chapter 151,
Fire Zones, of this Code, as amended and supplemented from time to
time. [Amended 12-28-1976 by Ord. No. 1615]
G. Discipline and efficiency. Subject to the approval of the Manager, the
Director shall promulgate and from time to time revise and enforce a
manual of fire department discipline, practices and procedures for the
better administration of the work of the Department and for the
discipline and efficiency of the personnel of the Department.
[Amended 12-28-1976 by Ord. No. 1615]
H. Disciplinary hearings. Whenever the Chief is Director of the
Department, the Manager shall have power to hear and determine any
charge or charges filed against a member of the Fire Department
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-1 et seq.
A. Creation; Chief of Police. There shall be a Police Department in the
Village of Ridgewood as an executive and enforcement function of the
Village. The head of the Department shall be the Chief of Police.
B. Police force composition and organization. The police force shall exist
in a manner consistent with the Council-Manager form of government
as provided in the Faulkner Act (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-99 et seq.).8 Pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Village Manager is hereby designated as the
§ 3-42 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-43
1:38
"appropriate authority." The appropriate authority is hereby authorized
and directed to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the
government of the police force and for the discipline of its members.
C. Police Chief functions. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the police
force and directly responsible to the appropriate authority for the
efficiency and routine day-to-day operations thereof. The Chief shall,
subject to the policies established by the appropriate authority:
(1) Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the force
and its officers and personnel.
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the force.
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
(4) Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the force to be exercised under his direction
and supervision.
(5) Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed by such authority on the operation of the force
during the preceding month, and make such other reports as may
be requested by such authority.
D. Personnel. The Ridgewood Police Department shall consist of the
following positions: In addition to the Police Chief, there shall be not
more than two Captains, not more than four Lieutenants, not more than
five Sergeants and so many officers/detectives as may be authorized
from time to time by or pursuant to ordinance, with strong
consideration given to at least one officer/detective to be assigned as a
"School Resource Officer" whose duties would be established by the
Police Chief in consultation with the Village Manager and
Superintendent of the Ridgewood Public Schools. The Police Chief and
the Village Manager shall confer in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118(e) and no less frequently than annually the Manager shall
report to the Council regarding those discussions and any
recommendations for additional or subtractive Police Department staff
or rank needs. [Amended 9-10-2008 by Ord. No. 3142; 5-13-2009
by Ord. No. 3188; 3-10-2010 by Ord. No. 3243; 2-9-2011 by Ord.
No. 3277; 3-5-2014 by Ord. No. 3408]
E. Disciplinary hearings. The Village Manager, as the appropriate
authority, shall have the power to hear and determine any charge or
charges filed against a member of the police force.
8. Editor's Note: Former N.J.S.A. 40:69A-99 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 1981, c. 465. See now
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 et seq.
§ 3-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-43.1
1:39
§ 3-43.1. Department of Human Resources. [Added 7-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 3483]
§ 3-43.2. Department of Building and Inspections. [Added
7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 3483]
A. Director. There shall be a Department of Human Resources, the head of
which shall be the Director.
B. Employee benefits administration. Within the Department of Human
Resources, there shall be employee benefits administration, which shall
be the responsibility of the Accounting Assistant. The Accounting
Assistant shall report to the Director of Human Resources for this
function.
C. Payroll administration. Within the Department of Human Resources,
there shall be responsibility for payroll administration to the extent that
all FLSA regulations, policies, and contractual obligations are
consistently followed and carried out in accordance with applicable law.
A. Director. There shall be a Department of Building and Inspections, the
head of which shall be the Director who shall also have the certification
of Construction Official.
B. The Construction Official shall be appointed for a term prescribed by
law.
C. Under the administration and supervision of the Director, the
Department of Building and Inspections shall:
(1) Administer and enforce the State Uniform Construction Code in the
Village.
(2) Enforce the Land Use and Development ordinances of the Village
(See Chapter 190, Land Use and Development.);
(3) Enforce the Property Maintenance ordinances of the Village (See
Chapter 223, Property Maintenance.);
(4) Make building and other inspections, as required, to administer
and enforce the provisions of any municipal housing code or
heating code, for which there shall be such additional officers and
employees as otherwise provided by ordinance (See Ch. 175,
Housing Standards.);
(5) Make plumbing inspections for the Division of Health;
(6) Conduct and administer such other inspections and enforcement
proceedings as are authorized by the ordinance and laws under its
administration;
(7) Maintain all records, correspondence, files and proceedings of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. If the Director or Zoning Officer
§ 3-43.1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-43.2
1:40
§ 3-43.3. Division of Health. [Added 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 3483]
serves as Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, he/she shall
serve without additional compensation.
(8) Cooperative inspections. Where certain departments and divisions
are authorized and directed to provide for cooperative inspection
and enforcement of the various regulatory inspection requirements
of Village ordinances relating to buildings and structures and their
use, so far as practicable, the Department of Building and
Inspections shall coordinate all such cooperative inspections to the
fullest extent that such coordination is permitted by law.
A. Supervisor. There shall be a Division of Health, the head of which shall
be the Supervisor.
B. Under the administration and supervision of the Supervisor, the
Division shall:
(1) Have all of the functions, powers and duties of a local Board of
Health under Title 26 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, except
that as required by the Charter, the Village Council shall have and
exercise all local legislative powers under the Title.
(2) Plan and administer a comprehensive public health program or
agreement approved by the Village Council, including, without
limitation thereto, environmental sanitation, communicable disease
control, child and adult health clinics and health education,
prevention and control of drug and narcotics abuse, pest and
rodent control, lead poisoning investigations, blood-borne
pathogen training, and other services as may be authorized by the
Charter or ordinance.
(3) Administer and provide comprehensive duties of a registered
environmental health specialist, including, but not limited to,
inspection of and adherence to all sanitary requirements for retail
establishments which serve or sell food or drink products or ice;
day-care centers, nursery school and public and private school
facilities; public pools; camps; and one-day and special event
permits.
(4) Administer and enforce the Local Health Ordinance of the Village.
(5) Administer and enforce the Animal Control Ordinances of the
Village.
C. The Village Manager shall appoint a Registrar of Vital Statistics and
may appoint a Deputy Registrar of Vital Statistics, pursuant to the
Charter and particularly N.J.S.A. 26:8-1 et. seq., which offices shall
operate under the supervision and administration of the Supervisor of
the Health Division.
§ 3-43.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-43.3
1:41

ARTICLE VI
Boards, Commissions and Councils
§ 3-44. Library Board of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees of the Free Public Library, as constituted and
empowered pursuant to law, is continued.
§ 3-45. Local Assistance Board.
§ 3-46. Planning Board. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the composition, powers and duties
of the Planning Board of the Village of Ridgewood shall be as provided in
Article II of the Land Use and Development Ordinance.9
§ 3-47. Emergency Management Council. [Amended 6-26-1979 by
Ord. No. 1721]
A. Creation. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 44:8-107 et seq. and
amendments and supplements thereto, a Local Assistance Board, with
duties and powers as provided by law, to consist of five members be and
the same is hereby created. [Amended 5-9-1978 by Ord. No. 1671;
10-28-1980 by Ord. No. 1775]
B. Composition; appointment of members. The members constituting such
Local Assistance Board shall consist of five citizens of the Village, at
least one of whom shall be a woman. The members shall be appointed
by the Manager with the approval of the Council. [Amended 5-9-1978
by Ord. No. 1671; 10-28-1980 by Ord. No. 1775]
C. Compensation and terms of office of members. All members of the
Board shall serve without compensation but shall be allowed their
necessary and actual expenses. The term of one member of the Board
shall be for one year, and the terms of the remaining members of the
Board shall be for four years each, one term expiring each year.
[Amended 10-28-1980 by Ord. No. 1775]
D. Adoption of bylaws governing procedure, etc. The Local Assistance
Board is authorized and directed to adopt bylaws governing its
procedural operation, to elect a Chairman and a Secretary and to hold
regular meetings.
E. Director of Welfare. The Local Assistance Board shall appoint a Director
of Welfare, who shall be the first executive and administrative officer of
the Board. The Director of Welfare shall hold office for a term of five
years from the date of his appointment; shall perform such duties as are
provided by law; and shall be paid such salary as may be fixed by the
Local Assistance Board subject to the approval of the Council.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Land Use and Development.
§ 3-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-47
1:43
A. Generally. [Amended 12-10-1991 by Ord. No. 2344]
(1) There shall be an Emergency Management Council consisting of
not more than 15 members to be appointed by the Village Manager
in accordance with the provisions of the Charter and all applicable
state laws and regulations.
(2) The Council shall have all the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by general law, executive order, ordinance or resolution.
(3) The Mayor shall appoint an Emergency Management Coordinator
from among the residents of the Village in accord with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.1.
(4) The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be Chairman of the
Council. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall appoint a
Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator who shall serve in his
place and stead in the event of his incapacity or inability and
otherwise with such authority and duties as may from time to time
be delegated by the Emergency Management Coordinator or
granted by law.
B. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of
this section: [Amended 12-10-1991 by Ord. No. 2344]
DECLARATION OF STATE OF LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY —
A proclamation by the Emergency Management Coordinator that a
disaster has occurred or is imminent which requires activation of all or
part of the Village emergency management forces, declaring a state of
local disaster emergency to exist.
DISASTER — Any unusual set of circumstances which endangers the
health, safety or resources of the residents of the Village and which is
or may become too large in scope or unusual in type to be handled in
its entirety by regular municipal operating services.
EMERGENCY — Includes disaster and war emergency, as defined
herein, and shall exist upon proclamation by the Emergency
Management Coordinator.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL — The emergency services of
the Village shall help in carrying out basic governmental functions of
maintaining the public peace, health and safety during an emergency.
This shall include plans and preparations for protection from and relief,
recovery and rehabilitation from the effects of an emergency.
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT FORCES — The employees, equipment
and facilities of all Village departments, boards and commissions and,
in addition, all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities
contributed by or ordained from volunteer persons or agencies.
LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY — Includes any disaster or the
imminence thereof which affects the Village, but is not so severe as
to require action by the Governor or the County Disaster Control
§ 3-47 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-47
1:44
Coordinator as described in the New Jersey Civil Defense and Disaster
Control Act (N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.).
MANAGER — The Village Manager or acting chief executive of the
Village.
REGULATION — Includes plans, programs and other emergency
procedures for emergency management operation promulgated in
accordance with this chapter.
VOLUNTEER — Any person duly appointed by the Emergency
Management Coordinator and assigned to participate in emergency
management control activity serving without remuneration.
WAR EMERGENCY — Includes any disaster occurring anywhere within
the Village as the result of enemy attack or the imminent danger
thereof.
C. Emergency operations plan. The Village shall prepare a written
emergency operations plan with all appropriate annexes necessary to
implement the plan. The emergency operations plan shall conform to all
relevant federal and state statutes, rules and regulations concerning
emergency operations and shall include the identification of significant
hazards affecting the jurisdiction. The plan shall be based upon
planning criteria, objectives, requirements, responsibilities and
concepts of operation for the implementation of all necessary and
appropriate protective or remedial measures to be taken in response to
an actual or threatened emergency as determined by the State Director
of Emergency Management. [Amended 12-10-1991 by Ord. No.
2344]
D. Duties and powers of the Municipal Emergency Management
Coordinator. [Amended 12-10-1991 by Ord. No. 2344]
(1) The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be responsible for
planning, activating, coordinating and the conduct of emergency
management operations within the municipality.
(2) Whenever, in the opinion of the Municipal Emergency Management
Coordinator, a disaster has occurred or is imminent, the Municipal
Emergency Management Coordinator shall proclaim a state of local
disaster emergency within the municipality. The Municipal
Emergency Management Coordinator, in accordance with the
regulations promulgated by the State Director of Emergency
Management, shall be empowered to issue and enforce such orders
as may be necessary to implement and carry out emergency
management operations and to protect the health, safety and
resources of the residents of the municipality.
E. At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this section shall be in effect, they shall
supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar
as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. This section is adopted to
§ 3-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-47
1:45
§ 3-48. Municipal Court.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq.,10 the Municipal Court of the Village is
hereby established.
§ 3-49. Parks, Recreation and Conservation Board.11 [Added
9-25-1973]
complement the New Jersey Civil Defense and Disaster Control Act
(N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.) and regulations promulgated thereunder
and must be read and interpreted in conjunction therewith.
A. There is hereby created the Parks, Recreation and Conservation Board
of the Village of Ridgewood, to consist of seven members, with terms
for three years and until a successor is appointed. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375; 6-13-2001 by Ord. No. 2742]
B. Said Parks, Recreation and Conservation Board is hereby charged with
the following duties and responsibilities:
(1) To recommend the establishment of and to review and monitor new
programs.
(2) To recommend rules for the use of facilities.
(3) To recommend user fee structures for facilities and the application
of proceeds.
(4) To determine needs and recommend uses of present public
properties for recreational purposes.
(5) To determine needs and recommend uses of facilities and
equipment.
(6) To monitor recreational facilities.
(7) To determine needs and recommend uses for new and expanded
facilities and equipment.
(8) To determine appropriate means to publicize all community
recreation programs.
(9) To coordinate community recreation programs.
(10) To recommend marking of walk paths and open areas and to
publicize them.
(11) To determine conservation desires of residents and to recommend
implementing procedures.
10.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 1993, c. 293. See now N.J.S.A.
2B:12-1 et seq.
11.Editor's Note: For provisions regarding the Frank Kasschau Memorial Shell, see Art. III of
Ch. 212, Parks and Recreation Areas.
§ 3-47 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-49
1:46
(12) To develop and update a long-range Master Plan for recreation.
§ 3-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-49
1:47

ARTICLE VII
Personnel
§ 3-50. Management.
§ 3-51. Dual appointments.
The Manager may appoint the same person to serve as head of two or more
departments; and a department head may also be appointed by the Manager
to serve as head of a division within his department. The Manager may
appoint a division head to serve as the head of two or more divisions or
as Purchasing Agent, so long as the functions, powers and duties of such
appointments are not inconsistent.
§ 3-52. Surety bonds. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
Every officer or employee of the Village shall, before entering upon the
duties of his office or position, execute and deliver such official surety
A. Merit system. All appointments and promotions in the civil service of
the Village shall be made according to merit and fitness in accordance
with the requirements of the Constitution, statutes and applicable
regulations of the state.
B. Personnel rules and policies. The Manager shall prepare and administer
a system of personnel rules and policies, subject to approval by the
Council and to the requirements of the Civil Service Law and
regulations. Such rules and policies may be approved by resolution and
shall include provision for:
(1) The classification of all Village positions, based on the duties,
authority and responsibility of each position, with adequate
provision for reclassification of any position whenever warranted
by changed circumstances.
(2) A pay plan for all Village positions.
(3) The policies and procedures regulating reduction in force and
removal of employees.
(4) The hours of work, attendance regulations and provisions for sick
and vacation leave.
(5) The policies and procedures governing persons holding provisional
appointments.
(6) The policies and procedures governing employee discipline and
grievances.
(7) Policies regarding in-service training programs.
(8) Other practices and procedures necessary or desirable to the
administration of a sound personnel system.
§ 3-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-52
1:49
bond as may be required by law and in such amount as may be fixed by
ordinance of the Council, binding him to the Village in its corporate name
and conditioned upon the true and faithful performance of his duty. Such
bonds shall be secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business
in this state, and the premium therefor shall be paid by the Village. Each
such bond shall be approved by the Attorney as to form and sufficiency, and
nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the use of one or more
blanket bonds or position schedule bonds when so approved.
§ 3-53. Conflicts of interest; penalties.
A. A Village officer or employee, elected or appointed, paid or unpaid,
shall not:
(1) Be interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract with the Village
for work done or for materials or supplies furnished to the Village
or to any contractor or other person furnishing the same, nor shall
he participate in any profits of such contractor or other person or
receive any compensation, commission, gift or other reward for his
services except the salary or fees established by law or by
ordinance or resolution of the Council.
(2) Accept or solicit anything of value as consideration for or in
connection with the discharge of his official duties other than the
fee or compensation prescribed pursuant to law.
(3) Engage in any business or transaction or accept any private
employment or commitment or have any financial or other personal
interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper
discharge of his official duties in the public interest or which would
tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the
performance of his official duties.
(4) Accept any gift or gratuity, whether in the form of service, loan or
promise or in any other form, from any person, firm or corporation
which would tend to influence him in the discharge of his official
duties.
B. No officer or employee shall represent, either directly or indirectly,
private interests before the Council or before any board, commission or
agency of the Village, nor shall any officer or employee represent or be
employed by private interests in any action or proceedings against the
interest of the Village in any litigation to which the Village is a party.
C. Violations.
(1) Any officer or employee who violates any provision of this section,
upon conviction thereof in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall
be subject to the maximum penalties authorized by N.J.S.A.
40:49-5.
§ 3-52 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-53
1:50
§ 3-54. Work schedules; overtime.
§ 3-55. Filling of vacancies.
§ 3-56. Salaries and compensation.
The compensation of all officers and employees shall be in such amount and
at such rates as shall be prescribed by the salary ordinance.13 Department
heads and division heads shall receive no overtime compensation nor
compensatory time off.
(2) In addition, any officer or employee who violates any provision of
this section may be suspended without pay or removed in the
discretion of the appointing authority.
D. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to any provisions of
the Charter or other statutes dealing with similar subject matter.
A. The days and hours of work of individual employees shall be assigned
and scheduled by the respective department heads, subject to the
approval of the Manager, so that public business may be conducted
without interruption and municipal services provided as conditions may
require during the regular business hours of the Village government
and during such emergencies as may arise.
B. Overtime work shall be scheduled only when it is necessary to meet
urgent public operating requirements, upon approval of the Manager or
such other person as he may designate, in writing.
A. In the event of the temporary absence or disability of any administrative
officer or employee or in the event of a vacancy in any office, the
Manager or Acting Manager may designate a qualified person to serve
in such office temporarily in an acting capacity, and any such appointee
shall have all the functions, powers and duties of an incumbent until
such absence or disability terminates or such vacancy is filled by
appointment.
B. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Manager, the Council may
appoint a qualified person to serve temporarily, for a stated duration, as
Manager or Acting Manager until such vacancy is filled by permanent
appointment.12
12.Editor's Note: A listing of position titles, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
13.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file at the Village offices.
§ 3-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-56
1:51

ARTICLE VIII
Residency Requirements
[Added 8-9-1983 by Ord. No. 1898; amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2647; 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 3429; 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 3434;
4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 3470]
§ 3-57. Required residency.
§ 3-58. Eligible applicants.
Applicants eligible for appointment to an entry-level position of employment
in the titles of police officer and firefighter in the Police and Fire
Departments in the classified civil service shall be limited to residents of the
Village of Ridgewood.
§ 3-59. Alternative hiring.
A. All officers and employees of the Village of Ridgewood initially
employed or appointed in the Police and Fire Departments with the
entry-level titles of police officer and firefighter, from and after the
effective date of this article, shall be bona fide residents of the Village of
Ridgewood.
B. Any officers and employees who are otherwise exempted by law or hold
classified titles, which include both competitive and noncompetitive
titles, other than the entry-level titles of police officer and firefighter,
within the Police and Fire Departments, shall not be subject to this
regulation.
C. A "bona fide resident," for the purposes of this article, is a person
having a permanent domicile within the Village of Ridgewood which has
not been adopted with the intention of again taking up or claiming a
previous residence acquired outside of the Village of Ridgewood's
boundaries.
A. Whenever the governing body or appointing authority shall determine
that there cannot be recruited a sufficient number of qualified
Ridgewood residents for the entry-level titles of police officer and
firefighter in the Police and Fire Departments, the Village shall
advertise for other qualified applicants. The Village or the hiring
authority thereof shall thereupon classify all qualified applicants for
such positions or employments so determined in the following manner:
(1) Residents of Bergen County;
(2) Residents of the State of New Jersey.
B. In the case of classified titles, which include both competitive and
noncompetitive titles and employments other than the entry-level titles
of police officer and firefighter within the Police and Fire Departments,
the Village shall advertise for qualified applicants. The Village shall
§ 3-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-59
1:53
§ 3-60. Required residency for civilian titles. [Added 10-10-2018 by
Ord. No. 3672]
§ 3-61. Eligible applicants - civilian titles. [Added 10-10-2018 by
Ord. No. 3672]
Applicants eligible for appointment to a position of employment for
competitive or noncompetitive civilian titles in the classified civil service
shall be limited to bona fide residents of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 3-62. Alternative hiring - civilian titles. [Added 10-10-2018 by
Ord. No. 3672]
open all classified titles (both competitive and noncompetitive), other
than the entry-level titles of police officer and firefighter, to residents of
the State of New Jersey, with no other residency requirements.
C. No current nonresident officer or employee shall be required to become
a bona fide resident of the Village of Ridgewood as a condition of his/her
continued employment.
D. Employment in the Fire Department shall be governed specifically by
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-10.1a. Employment in the Department
of Police shall be governed specifically by the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-123.1a.
A. All officers and employees of the Village of Ridgewood initially
employed or appointed in competitive or noncompetitive civilian titles
from and after the effective date of this article shall be "bona fide
residents" of the Village of Ridgewood.
B. Any officers and employees who are otherwise exempted by law shall
not be subject to this regulation.
C. A "bona fide resident," for the purposes of this article, is a person
having a permanent domicile within the Village of Ridgewood which has
not been adopted with the intention of again taking up or claiming a
previous residence acquired outside of the Village of Ridgewood's
boundaries.
D. "Civilian titles" are all titles within the Village of Ridgewood, except
those titles which pertain specifically to the titles held by sworn Police
Department and Fire Department personnel.
A. Whenever the Village Manager, as the hiring authority, shall determine
that there cannot be recruited a sufficient number of qualified bona fide
Ridgewood residents for available specific positions or employments in
competitive or noncompetitive civilian titles, the Village shall advertise
for other qualified applicants. The Village Manager, as the hiring
authority of the Village of Ridgewood, shall thereupon classify all
qualified applicants for such positions or employments so determined in
the following manner:
§ 3-59 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 3-62
1:54
§ 3-63. Exceptions - civilian titles. [Added 10-10-2018 by Ord. No.
3672]
Whenever the Village Manager, as the hiring authority of the Village of
Ridgewood, shall determine there are certain specific competitive or
noncompetitive civilian positions and employments, requiring special talent,
skills or certifications which are necessary for the operations of the Village
or required by state statute and which are not likely to be found among
the bona fide residents of the Village of Ridgewood, such competitive or
noncompetitive civilian positions or employment so determined shall be
filled without reference to residency.
(1) Residents of Bergen County.
(2) Residents of counties contiguous to Bergen County.
(3) Residents of the State of New Jersey.
B. No current nonresident employee shall be required to become a bona
fide resident of the Village of Ridgewood as a condition of their
continued employment.
§ 3-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-63
1:55
Chapter 15
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
§ 15-1. Authority, duty and scope.
§ 15-2. Civil proceedings.
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the Village of Ridgewood shall, upon
the request of any present or former official, employee or appointee of
the Village, provide for indemnification and legal defense of any civil
action brought against said person or persons arising from an act or
omission falling within the scope of their public duties.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the Village's duty and authority to
defend and indemnify shall extend to a cross-claim or counterclaim
against said person.
C. The terms of this chapter and the definitions of "official," "employee"
and "appointee" are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the
purposes of this chapter, except that these terms shall not mean any
person who is not a natural person; any person while providing goods or
services of any kind under any contract with the Village; any person
while providing legal or engineering services for compensation, unless
said person is a full-time employee of the Village; and any person who
as a condition of his or her appointment or contract is required to
indemnify and defend the Village and/or secure insurance. [Amended
7-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2835]
D. The Village may indemnify a person for exemplary or punitive damages
resulting from that person's civil violation of state or federal law if, in
the opinion of the Village Council, the acts committed by the person to
be indemnified upon which the damages are based did not constitute
actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an intentional wrong.
[Amended 12-10-1991 by Ord. No. 2340]
A. The Village shall provide for the defense of and indemnify the defendant
or defendants in a civil action if the person or persons involved:
(1) Acted or failed to act in a matter in which the Village has or had an
interest.
(2) Acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or
authorized by law.
(3) Acted or failed to take action in good faith.
§ 3-63 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 15-2
15:56
§ 15-3. Proceedings other than civil actions.
In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the
Village may provide for the defense of a present or former official, employee
or appointee if the Village Council concludes that such representation is in
the best interest of the Village and that the person to be defended acted or
failed to act in accord with the standards set forth in § 15-2 of this chapter.
§ 15-4. Exclusive control by Village.
Whenever the Village provides for the defense of any action set forth herein
and as a condition of such defense, the Village may assume exclusive control
over the representation of such person defended, and such person shall
cooperate fully with the Village.
§ 15-5. Provisions for defense.
The Village may provide for the defense pursuant to this chapter by
authorizing the Village Attorney to act in behalf of the person being
defended or by employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the
Village's right under any appropriate insurance policy which requires the
insurer to provide the defense.
Chapter 18
GREEN RIDGEWOOD COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
Garbage, rubbish, refuse and recycling — See
Ch. 165.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Soil removal — See Ch. 246.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 260.
B. The Village may refuse to provide for the defense and indemnification of
any civil action referred to herein if the Village Council determines that:
(1) The act or omission did not occur within the scope of a duty
authorized or imposed by law;
(2) The act or failure to act was the result of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice of the person requesting defense and
indemnification; or
(3) The defense of the action or proceeding by the Village would create
a conflict of interest between the Village and the person or persons
involved.
§ 15-2 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 18-1
15:57
§ 18-1. Establishment; supersession.
There is hereby created an advisory board of the Village of Ridgewood
entitled the "Green Ridgewood Committee." This Committee established
by ordinance shall supersede the Ridgewood Environmental Advisory
Committee previously constituted by Ordinance No. 2441, and the
amendments made thereto.
§ 18-2. Duties and responsibilities.
The Committee is hereby charged with the following duties and
responsibilities:
§ 18-3. Organizational meeting; minutes.
Upon adoption of this chapter and appointment of its members, the
Committee shall hold an organizational meeting. Minutes of the meetings
shall be kept, transcribed and made available to the Village Council,
Planning Board and such other Village officials as the Village Manager shall
direct.
§ 18-4. Composition; terms; alternate members.
A. The Committee shall assist the Village Council in long-range planning
with respect to environmental concerns.
B. The Committee shall anticipate environmental problems. As these
problems are identified by the Committee, the Committee shall study
each particular problem, researching applicable technology and
sources of funding and recommend solutions to the Village Council.
C. The Committee shall have the ongoing responsibility to study and
recommend to the Council solutions to problems concerning solid waste
management, open space preservation, flood plain development,
stream channelization and rehabilitation, air pollution control, noise
control, soil and landscape protection and the protection of flora and
fauna.
A. The Committee shall consist of 10 regular members, all of whom shall
be persons with environmental training and/or experience and who,
with the exception of the staff member, shall be residents of the Village
of Ridgewood, appointed by the Village Council. The Village Council
shall appoint one member from each of the following three categories,
each of whom shall serve for a one-year term: [Amended 9-11-2019
by Ord. No. 3739]
(1) Village Council;
(2) Ridgewood Board of Education;
(3) Parks, Recreation, and Conservation Board.
§ 18-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 18-4
15:58
§ 18-5. Educational opportunities; membership in state association.
Members of the Committee shall avail themselves of all opportunities for
education concerning environmental issues such as courses, seminars and
subscriptions. Membership in the Association of New Jersey Environmental
Commissions (ANJEC) shall be required.
Chapter 22
FINANCE AND PURCHASING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
B. There shall be six citizen members of the Committee appointed by the
Village Council, each for a term of three years, except as concerns the
initial Committee. The initial Committee shall include six citizen
members, two of whom shall be appointed for three years, two of whom
shall be appointed for two years, and two of whom shall be appointed
for one year. The terms for the members shall terminate on December
31 of each year. [Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3739]
C. The Chairperson of the Committee shall be elected from amongst the
membership on an annual basis and shall not be a Village Council
member. [Amended 7-16-2014 by Ord. No. 3422
D. The 10th member of the Committee shall be a member of the Village
staff appointed by the Village Manager, to serve at the Village
Manager's pleasure.
§ 18-4 FINANCE AND PURCHASING § 18-5
22:59

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 22-1. Contracts authorized.
Within the limits of available appropriations in accordance with the law,
the Manager is authorized to negotiate contracts and other legally binding
municipal obligations of the Village upon approval of the Council. Any such
document shall be signed by the Mayor and Manager, attested by the Clerk
or Deputy Clerk and approved by the Village Attorney for legal form and
sufficiency. Purchase orders, for which a formal contract is not required by
the Charter, may be executed by the Manager or Purchasing Agent without
further approval.
§ 22-2. Award of contracts.
All contracts for which competitive public bidding is required shall be
awarded by the Council after recommendation by the Manager and within
the time and in the manner permitted by the Charter. At such meeting as
any contract for materials or supplies for which bids were received pursuant
to § 22-13B hereof is awarded, the tabulation of such bids shall be entered
upon the minutes thereof immediately following such award.
§ 22-3. Bond issues and notes. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
§ 22-4. Monthly reports.
The Chief Financial Officer shall present to the Council once each month
a summary of the financial transactions of the Village since the next
preceding report.
A. Except as may otherwise be provided by ordinance adopted pursuant to
the Local Bond Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq., the Chief Financial Officer
is designated to sell and award bonds in accordance with the advertised
terms of public sale. He shall report, in writing, to the Council at the
next meeting thereof as to the principal amount, interest rate and
maturities of the bonds sold, the price obtained and the name of the
purchaser.
B. Tax and bond anticipation notes may be issued and sold in accordance
with the Local Bond Law, provided that the Chief Financial Officer shall
solicit and record as a permanent record in his office informal bids on
the interest rate before any such sale, and the notes shall be issued and
sold to the lowest bidder wherever practical.
C. The Chief Financial Officer shall administer the Village debt and the
receipt and delivery of bonds and notes for transfer, registration or
exchange, subject to the provisions of the Local Bond Law.
§ 22-1 FINANCE AND PURCHASING § 22-5
22:61
§ 22-5. Bills, claims and demands.
No bill or claim shall be paid unless it contains a detailed statement of the
items or demand, specifying particularly how the bill or demand is made
up, and a certification of the party claiming payment that the bill is correct;
nor shall any bill, claim or demand be paid unless the voucher on which
it is presented carries a certification of a department head or of his duly
designated representative, having personal knowledge of the facts that the
goods have been received by or the services rendered to the Village.
§ 22-6. Audit, warrant and payment of debt.
§ 22-7. Annual audit.
The Council shall provide, by resolution, for the appointment of a registered
municipal accountant to make and file an annual post-audit of the financial
transactions of the Village in accordance with the rules and requirements of
the State Division of Local Finance.14
A. All bills, claims and demands against the Village shall be deemed
approved or disapproved by the Council in accordance with the action
under this section. A voucher on a form prescribed or approved by the
Manager shall be presented for each bill, claim or demand and shall be
paid only upon the audit and approval of the Director of Finance.
Disbursement shall be made by a combination warrant-bank check or
draft warranted and signed by the Manager and countersigned by the
Director of Finance and Treasurer, except that payroll checks may be
signed by the Treasurer alone upon warrant of the Manager for a total
payroll.
B. The Director of Finance shall prepare for each regular meeting of
Council, for presentation by the Manager, a list of all bills, claims and
vouchers which have been paid through the close of business on the day
preceding the meeting and since the last list was compiled. A copy of
such lists shall be furnished to each Councilman and filed with the Clerk
as a public record open to inspection.
14.Editor's Note: Former Section 11-8 of the 1974 Code, which immediately followed this
section, regarding exemption of personal property from taxation, was deleted 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375.
§ 22-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 22-7
22:62
ARTICLE II
Budgets
§ 22-8. Annual budget required.
§ 22-9. Preparation.
§ 22-10. Form and contents.
A. An annual budget and capital budget shall be prepared, considered and
adopted according to the requirements of the Local Budget Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.
B. In addition, the Manager shall follow such procedures and submit to the
Council such additional information and recommendations as are
required by the Charter or this article or as he may deem desirable.
A. The Village budget shall be prepared by the Manager. During the month
of November in each year, the Manager shall require all department
heads to submit requests for appropriations for the ensuing budget
year and to appear before him at public hearings which shall be held
during that month on the various requests.
B. The Manager shall refer to the Planning Board the various requests for
expenditures for capital purposes, together with such information and
comment as he may deem relevant.
C. He shall also prepare, in consultation with the Planning Board, a
proposed general improvement program and capital budget in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:4-43 through 40A:4-45
and the regulations of the Local Finance Board thereunder.
D. The Planning Board, prior to August 15 in each year, with the assistance
of the Manager, shall prepare and present to the Council the Board's
recommended general improvement program for the ensuing six years.
A. The budget document submitted by the Manager to the Council shall be
in such form as is required to satisfy the Local Budget Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:4-1 et seq., and administrative regulations thereunder.
B. With reference to the general improvement program, there shall be
included in the budget such projects and outlays as the Manager may
recommend for the current year, together with their explanation and
justification.
C. With reference to proposed Village functions expenditures, the budget
document shall include statements of the cost of performance of
functional programs and activities in terms of quantitative countable
units of work, to the extent that the Manager may determine to be
feasible and pertinent.
§ 22-8 FINANCE AND PURCHASING § 22-10
22:63
§ 22-11. Council action.
After public hearing and such revision as it may deem desirable, the Council
will approve and adopt the budget in accordance with the Local Budget Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.
§ 22-12. Operation.
Budget appropriations shall be controlled by an encumbrance system which
shall be prescribed or approved by the Manager. In consultation with the
Council, the Manager shall establish quarterly or such other periodic
allotments of appropriations as he may deem desirable. Each department
shall plan and administer its work program within the limits of such
allotments, provided that the same shall be in accordance with the law and
no commitments shall be incurred in excess of any such allotment except
upon specific written authorization of the Manager.
D. The budget document shall also include supplementary detailed
analysis of expenditures and revenues required for effective
consideration of the recommendations, together with such explanations
of the relationships of planning, programming and budgeting as may be
appropriate to the particular budget.
§ 22-10 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 22-12
22:64
ARTICLE III
Purchasing
§ 22-13. Procedure.
A. All purchases of any supplies, materials or equipment or contractual
services (other than professional services) for any department shall be
made by the Purchasing Agent pursuant to a written requisition from
the head of the department whose appropriation shall be charged and
the Chief Financial Officer's certification that a sufficient
unencumbered balance of the appropriation is available to pay therefor.
All such purchase contracts shall conform to applicable requirements of
state statutes for competitive bidding, and all advertisements therefor
shall be made, subject to the approval of the Manager, by the Clerk in
accordance with the applicable provisions of law governing such
advertisements. Wherever economies can be effected, the Manager
may purchase materials, supplies or equipment pursuant to a contract
or contracts entered into with the county or on behalf of the state or of
one or more municipalities by the State Division of Purchase and
Property, as authorized by law. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
B. For purchases of materials or supplies as are now or may from time to
time be defined in the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et
seq. (P.L. 1971, c. 198), the cost or price of which shall exceed in the
aggregate the maximum amount for which such purchases may be
made without public advertising for bids and bidding therefor, the
procedure shall be as follows:
(1) All advertisements for bids shall be made in accordance with all
applicable provisions of the Charter and Code.
(2) Bids may be received by mail in an envelope addressed in
accordance with the appropriate specifications to the Deputy
Village Clerk, Village Hall. All bids shall be sealed and shall remain
sealed until their public receipt.
(3) At the time and place designated in the advertisement for bids, the
Purchasing Agent shall publicly receive the bids and thereupon
immediately proceed to unseal them and announce the contents to
such members of the public and parties bidding or their agents as
may be present. No bids shall be received after the time designated
in the advertisement.
(4) After public receipt, a tabulation of all bids, including prices and
terms, shall be prepared for entry upon the minutes of the Council
and distributed in accordance with the Manager's direction. Bids
shall thereupon be referred to the appropriate department, board
or body for recommendations to the Manager. In addition, the
Purchasing Agent shall make such recommendation as to such bids
as the Manager from time to time may require. The Manager shall
§ 22-13 FINANCE AND PURCHASING § 22-13
22:65
§ 22-14. Emergency purchases.
The Manager shall establish a procedure for the purchase of any item or
items required for the immediate protection of the public health, safety,
morals or welfare which will permit such emergency purchases to be made
for specific purposes in a manner other than that prescribed by this article.
§ 22-15. Purchases by quotation. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
Where purchases in excess of $1,000 are made without competitive bidding,
the Purchasing Agent shall obtain, wherever possible, at least three
informal price quotations for the item or items to be purchased and shall
record and maintain such quotations in his office as a public record.
Wherever circumstances permit, the purchase shall be made from the
lowest of such quotations received from a responsible bidder.
§ 22-16. Standards and tests.
The Manager shall establish or approve uniform standards for requisitions
and purchases. The Purchasing Agent shall control the delivery of all
supplies, materials and equipment and other items purchased and shall
make or cause to be made proper test checks and inspections thereof.
The Purchasing Agent shall ascertain whether the supplies, materials,
equipment and other items purchased comply with the specifications and
shall cause laboratory or other tests to be made whenever, in the opinion
of the department head, it is necessary to determine whether the materials,
supplies or equipment furnished are of the quality and standard required.
thereafter submit his recommendation to the Council for award
pursuant to the provisions of § 22-2.
§ 22-13 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 22-16
22:66
Chapter 26
GREEN TEAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Advisory Committee — See Ch.
18.
Open Space, Recreation, Farmland and
Historic Preservation Committee — See Ch.
55.
§ 26-1. Establishment.
§ 26-2. Purpose. [Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3740]
The general purposes for the Green Ridgewood Committee, Green Team
subcommittee, shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 26-3. Membership; terms of office.
A. The Ridgewood Green Team, a group of residents dedicated to the
sustainability of the Village of Ridgewood, is hereby established as an
advisory committee to the Ridgewood Village Council.
B. The Ridgewood Green Team shall be a subcommittee of the Green
Ridgewood Committee. [Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3740]
A. Facilitating the successful completion of the requirements for
certification of Sustainable Jersey and pursue the goals and objectives
of Sustainable Jersey.
B. Educating and encouraging all Village residents, employees, and
businesses to participate in green initiatives.
C. Collaborating with public and private green teams and green
committees to ensure the replication of best practices and to ensure a
coordinated effort in the Village of Ridgewood and its neighboring
communities.
A. The Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood shall appoint nine
members to serve as the Ridgewood Green Team. This membership
shall include three members of the Green Ridgewood Committee, and
one member of the staff of the Village of Ridgewood, all of whom shall
be voting members. [Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3740]
B. The Ridgewood Green Team shall elect from among its members a
Chair. [Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3740]
C. A member of the Village Council shall be appointed as a liaison to the
Ridgewood Green Team, who shall be a voting member. [Amended
9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3740]
§ 22-16 FINANCE AND PURCHASING § 26-3
22:67
§ 26-4. Meetings.
The Ridgewood Green Team shall meet at least quarterly. Additional
meetings of the Ridgewood Green Team may be scheduled by the Chair at
his/her discretion.
Chapter 29
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 29, Historic Preservation Commission, adopted
5-9-1994 by Ord. No. 2460, was repealed 4-12-2017 by Ord. No.
3591.]
Chapter 31
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Condominium conversion — See Ch. 123. Housing standards — See Ch. 175.
§ 31-1. Participation in Bergen County Housing Authority.
The Village of Ridgewood desires to participate in the area of operations of
the Housing Authority of Bergen County throughout its territorial boundary
and the jurisdiction of its governing body for the purpose of providing senior
citizen housing and does hereby consent to its inclusion in the area of
operation of said Housing Authority.
D. The Ridgewood Green Team members shall be residents of the Village
of Ridgewood, with the exception of the staff member, who may or may
not be a resident of the Village of Ridgewood.
E. The term of office of the members of the Ridgewood Green Team shall
be for staggered three-year terms. Initially, three members, one of
which shall be a member of the Green Ridgewood Committee, shall be
appointed to a three-year term; three members, one of which shall be a
member of the Green Ridgewood Committee, shall be appointed to a
two-year term; and two members, one of which shall be a member of the
Green Ridgewood Committee, shall be appointed to a one-year term.
The terms for the members shall terminate on December 31 of each
year. [Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3740]
F. The staff member and the Village Council liaison shall each be
appointed for one-year terms.
§ 26-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 31-2
31:68
§ 31-2. Authority and modifications.
The authority hereby granted shall be limited to implementation of the
leased housing program of Section 23 of the United States Housing Act of
1937 as amended [42 U.S.C. § 1421(b)], and modified as follows:
§ 31-3. Compliance with other provisions.
Any housing hereinafter utilized for the purposes authorized by this chapter
shall comply in all respects with the zoning ordinances, building and
sanitary codes15 and all other applicable ordinances of the Village of
Ridgewood as amended from time to time; provided, however, that this
section shall not be construed to prevent a proper application for a variance
or variances or an appeal from any such ordinance or code.
§ 31-4. Nonseverability.
This chapter shall not be deemed severable.
§ 31-5. Copies to be forwarded.
The Village Clerk is hereby directed to forward a certified copy of this
chapter, when it becomes effective, for filing to the Secretary, Bergen
County Housing Authority.
Chapter 32
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development — See Ch. 190. Fees to fund affordable housing
activities — See Ch. 145, § 145-8.
A. No lease shall be negotiated and/or renewed for a period in excess of
three years; and
B. In addition to the eligibility requirements otherwise established by law,
no person shall be deemed a qualified senior citizen eligible to become
a tenant pursuant to said leased housing program unless a resident of
the Village of Ridgewood for 10 consecutive years immediately
preceding the execution of a lease agreement with the Bergen County
Housing Authority and whose total assets, jointly with spouse or
otherwise, do not exceed $15,000.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Land Use and Development; Ch. 125, Construction Codes,
Uniform; and Ch. 172, Health and Sanitation.
§ 31-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 32-1
31:69
§ 32-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Village of Ridgewood's responsibility to
assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act of 1985.
§ 32-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Village of Ridgewood to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING PLAN — That plan required and approved by
COAH for the marketing of affordable housing units in the Village.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:94-7.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DCA — The New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
FAIR SHARE PLAN — That plan that describes the projects, strategies and
the funding sources, if applicable, by which the Village proposes to address
its affordable housing obligation as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:94-2.4, and also
includes the ordinances necessary to implement that plan, and addresses
the requirements of the substantive rules of COAH.
HOUSING REGION — That geographic area, determined by COAH, within
which the Village is located and which is used by COAH for various purposes
related to the need for and cost of affordable housing, and within which
affordable housing units are to be marketed. At the time of the adoption
of this chapter, the Village of Ridgewood is located within the Northeast
Housing Region, consisting of the counties of Bergen, Hudson, Passaic and
Sussex.
LOW-INCOME — Fifty percent or less of the median gross household
income for households of the same size within the housing region in which
the household is located, based upon the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development's (HUD's) Section 8 Income Limits (uncapped),
averaged across counties for COAH's housing regions.
MODERATE-INCOME — More than 50% but less than 80% of the median
gross household income for households of the same size within the housing
region in which the household is located, based upon the U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development's (HUD's) Section 8 Income Limits
(uncapped), averaged across counties for COAH's housing regions.
§ 32-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 32-2
31:70
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the Village
Council with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 32-3. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Village of
Ridgewood.
B. Subject to the approval of COAH, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall
be appointed by the Village Council and may be a full- or part-time
municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Village of
Ridgewood, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out, exclusive of Subsection C(6), which may be contracted
out:
(1) Serving as the Village of Ridgewood's primary point of contact for
all inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Village of
Ridgewood's Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the Village of Ridgewood as described in
Subsection F below.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the Village of Ridgewood may contract
with or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency
charged by the Village Council, which entity shall have the
responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the
Village of Ridgewood, except for those responsibilities which may not
be contracted out pursuant to Subsection C above. If the Village of
Ridgewood contracts with another entity to administer all or any part of
the affordable housing program, including the affordability controls and
Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall
oversee and supervise the contracting administrative agent.
§ 32-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 32-3
31:71
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the Village Council at
the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison. The
Council may, to the extent permitted by § 145-8F(1) and (2) and as
funds are available, pay such compensation from the Village's
affordable housing trust fund created as a repository for mandatory
development fees for affordable housing pursuant to § 145-8E.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall have the following powers
and duties, except where such powers and duties are delegated
specifically to an approved administrative agent as part of a contract:
(1) Affirmative marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Village of Ridgewood and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Village of Ridgewood when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
§ 32-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 32-3
31:72
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(5) Processing requests from unit owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air-conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
§ 32-3 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 32-3
31:73
Chapter 55
OPEN SPACE, RECREATION, FARMLAND AND HISTORIC
PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic Preservation Commission — See Ch.
29.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 212.
§ 55-1. Establishment.
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(g) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The Administrative Agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
A. There is hereby established an Open Space, Recreation, Farmland and
Historic Preservation Committee (hereinafter referred to as the
"Committee"). The Committee shall be comprised of nine members
appointed by the Village Council. The term of each member appointed
shall be for one year, which shall be a calendar year. The term, however,
of each first appointee to the Committee shall terminate on December
§ 32-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 55-1
55:74
§ 55-2. Officers; meetings.
§ 55-3. Powers and duties.
The Committee shall:
31, 2002. In constituting the Committee, the Village Council shall
select:
(1) One Class IV member of the Planning Board;
(2) One member of the Village Council;
(3) One member of the Parks, Recreation and Conservation Board;
(4) One member of the Sports Council;
(5) The Director of Village Parks and Recreation; and
(6) Four residents of the Village.
B. In the event of a vacancy during the term of any member of the
Committee, the vacancy shall be filled for the member's unexpired
term.
A. The Village Council shall initially designate one of the members as
Chairperson and the Committee shall select a Secretary. Thereafter, in
subsequent years, the Committee shall annually select a Chairperson
and Secretary.
B. The Chairperson shall, upon his or her appointment, call an initial
meeting of the Committee within 20 days thereafter. The Committee
shall be authorized to establish its own rules and regulations and
meetings schedule in cooperation with and coordinated by the Village
Manager.
A. Meet on a schedule to be set by it and preferably monthly to formulate
the Open Space and Recreation Plan, which shall become part of the
Village Master Plan;
B. Assist and advise the Planning Board in the preparation and
amendment of the Village of Ridgewood Open Space and Recreation
Plan, as well as the relationship of the Open Space and Recreation Plan
with other Master Plan Elements;
C. Encourage maximum public participation in its work. It is charged to:
(1) Develop and present to the Planning Board and to the Village
Council a clear understanding of the importance of maintaining
open space resources in order to define a vision for the role of open
space in the Village of Ridgewood;
(2) Identify specific types of open space to be included in the Village's
open space program;
§ 55-1 OPEN SPACE, RECREATION, FARMLAND AND § 55-3
55:75
§ 55-4. Dedicated tax.
There is hereby established for the year 2002 and subsequent years a
$0.005 per $100 valuation tax, which shall be dedicated specifically for
the acquisition, development and maintenance of property and lands for
recreation and conservation purposes; acquisition and preservation of
farmland and historic properties; and payment of debt services for purposes
allowed in accordance with law. (N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.1 et seq.)
(3) Develop criteria for identifying and prioritizing open spaces to be
acquired or maintained;
(4) Identify options for the acquisition and conservation of open
spaces.
D. Be authorized to propose alternate funding mechanisms for acquiring
appropriate public interest in open space resources and shall develop a
detailed checklist for reviewing possible acquisitions of open space or
conservation easements;
E. Prepare an ongoing system for monitoring properties, particularly
threatened parcels, within the Village to insure their eventual
incorporation into the reserved open space inventory;
F. Develop an annual budget based upon the goals and objectives of the
Open Space Preservation Plan and advise the Village Council in seeking
the necessary funding resources for the implementation of the Open
Space Preservation Plan;
G. Advise the Village Council of the amount of resources required to
support the program on an annual basis;
H. Review probable acquisitions and work with the Village Council and the
Village Finance Department to seek outside funds and prepare grant
applications;
I. Coordinate activities with similar committees in neighboring
communities;
J. Build support with community organizations for an open space
preservation program, maintain an educational program to inform
landowners, young adults and children of the merits and importance of
stewardship, the economic benefits of open space planning and the
various tools that are available to implement the plan;
K. Make recommendations to the Planning Board and to the Village
Council for the implementation of the Committee's actions;
L. Be authorized to do and perform such acts and make such
recommendations to the Planning Board and the Village Council
consistent with the Municipal Open Space, Recreation, Farmland and
Historic Preservation Act and the purposes of this chapter.
§ 55-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 55-5
55:76
§ 55-5. Use of funds.
The funds derived from this dedicated tax shall be maintained in a separate
fund account and should be utilized only for the purposes authorized
pursuant to this chapter and the Act referred to in § 55-4 hereof.
§ 55-6. Tax to be shown as separate line item.
The dedicated tax established by § 55-4 herein shall be shown as a separate
line item on each property owner's tax bill and not as a part of the municipal
tax rate, in that it is to be a dedicated tax for the purpose set forth above.
Chapter 64
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 15.
§ 55-5 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 55-6
64:77

ARTICLE I
Payroll
§ 64-1. Payroll account.16
The Director of the Department of Finance of the Village is hereby
authorized to open an account in the bank or depository as the Council may,
from time to time by resolution, designate.
§ 64-2. Endorsement of checks.
The directors of the respective departments are authorized to endorse
the semimonthly checks for their respective departments to the special
account to be known as the "payroll account," and the Village Clerk or
Director of the Department of Finance is authorized to sign checks on such
special account known as the "payroll account" made out to the individual
employees shown on the Village payroll.
§ 64-3. Employee to acknowledge receipt of check.
The Village employee receiving such check drawn on such payroll account
shall, upon receipt of the same, sign the payroll sheet or voucher
acknowledging receipt of such check.17
16.Editor's Note: Former sections 23-1 through 23-6 of the 1974 Code were moved to Ch. 3,
Administration of Government. Sections 23-7, 23-8 and 23-9, which immediately preceded
this section, regarding titles and salaries, were deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
17.Editor's Note: Former sections 23-13 through 23-19 of the 1974 Code, regarding various
salaries, were deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No 2375.
§ 64-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 64-3
64:79

ARTICLE II
Civil Service
§ 64-4. Applicability; construal of provisions.
§ 64-5. Classification.
§ 64-6. Changes in specifications.
All departmental requests for additions to or changes in the specifications
involving either the classification or compensation schedules, together with
full reporting of maintenance requests, shall be first presented to the
Village Manager, who shall, as he deems proper, forward the requests,
together with his recommendations, to the State Department of Civil
Service for investigation and consideration. No reclassifications, changes in
compensation schedules or maintenance allowances shall be effective until
they have received the approval of both the Village Manager and the State
Department of Civil Service.
A. The specifications herein provided shall apply to all existing authorized
offices, positions and employments or such as have been established or
created in the classified civil service in the Village and shall supersede
all groupings of employments not consistent thereto and shall be
applied subject to the conditions in these regulations.
B. The specifications herein provided shall not in themselves be construed
to define or prescribe the organization or procedure under which
employees shall work, nor to limit or restrict the responsible
administrative officials in exercising supervision or assigning such
other duties as may be in the interest of good administration or
necessary in case of emergency, nor shall it limit or restrict such
officials from transferring employees from one department to another
or causing an employee to work in more than one department, provided
that this article shall not be interpreted as authorization to assign,
detail or transfer an employee to a position involving duties of an
essentially different character.
A. The standard titles as set forth in Schedule 118 shall be applied to all
existing offices, positions and employments in the classified civil service
of the Village. Changes in titles shall not alter or affect the salaries of
the present incumbents of offices or positions so rearranged.
B. The standard title shall be used to designate positions in all reports to
the State Department of Civil Service, department records and all
payrolls or accounts of salaries and wages of all departments,
institutions and commissions submitted to the State Department of Civil
Service for check and certification.
18.Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is on file in the Village offices.
§ 64-4 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 64-7
64:81
§ 64-7. Procedure for creation of new positions.
When new positions are to be created, there shall be submitted by the
department head through the Village Manager to the State Department of
Civil Service a statement of the duties, qualification requirements and other
matters affecting the proper classification, title, grade and compensation
and the necessity for the creation of such position. No office or employment
shall be considered new unless the duties thereof are found to be
substantially different from those of every other existing position in the
classified service of the Village. When the State Department of Civil Service
shall find that an office or employment is in fact new or that the requested
changes affecting any existing position should be made, it shall so classify
such position under the appropriate service, grade and title, and it shall
become a part of the classification of the Village upon approval by the
Village Manager and the State Department of Civil Service.
§ 64-8. Appointments.
§ 64-9. Position advancement.
A. Appointments to newly created or vacant offices or employments shall
be made at the lowest rate within the standard range of compensation
for such office or employment. In cases of promotion where the
employee to be promoted is receiving compensation equal to or greater
than the minimum rate established for the position to which promotion
is to be made, appointment shall be made at the nearest next salary rate
higher than the compensation received by such employee.
B. All new employees shall be appointed at the minimum rate established
for such position.
A. Advancement to the next higher rate within the range of compensation
provided for a particular position shall be conditional upon service at
each rate for at least the period specified in the schedules19 or later
determined upon by the Village Manager and upon satisfactory
efficiency in the performance of the specified duties.
B. Nothing in this article, the rules of the State Department of Civil
Service or the action of the Village Council in adopting the classification
and salary standardization plan shall be construed to mean that it shall
be mandatory upon the head of the department, institution or
commission to advance an officer or employee to the next higher rate
within the range of compensation provided for the position merely
because such officer or employee has served at the lower salary rate for
a certain period of time.
C. Promotions from one class to the next higher class of positions in the
classified civil service shall involve a change of duties and shall be made
only when a vacancy has been created by resignation, transfer, death or
19.Editor's Note: The schedules are on file in the Village offices.
§ 64-7 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 64-9
64:82
§ 64-10. Compensation advancement.
dismissal or when the needs of the service require additional employees
in the higher position.
A. Advance in compensation from rate to rate within the range for each
position shall be made at such periods as may be determined upon by
the Village Manager for all others and employees who are eligible for
advancement after the completion of the designated period of
satisfactory service. Unless otherwise provided, proof of satisfactory
and meritorious service shall be established for all employees in the
classified civil service through efficiency records of the departments
which shall be kept in accordance with existing laws, rules and
regulations and in the form approved by the State Department of Civil
Service.
B. Where efficiency records are kept in an office in accordance with the
Civil Service Act,20 no advancement in salary shall be granted to an
employee whose average net efficiency for the six months preceding the
date of request for advancement in salary is less than 75%.
C. An increase above the maximum salary rate of an existing position shall
not be made except in case of increased duties or responsibilities which
actually involve a change of position or until changes in the prevailing
compensation schedule for the position or positions in question are
made as provided in § 64-6.
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et seq.
§ 64-9 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 64-10
64:83
Chapter 67
POLICE SERVICES
§ 64-10 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 64-10
67:84
ARTICLE I
Indemnification of Village by Utility Companies
[Adopted 8-10-1993 by Ord. No. 2421]
§ 67-1. Indemnification and coverage required.
The Village Manager is hereby authorized and directed to require utilities
or other companies operating within the Village of Ridgewood to indemnify
the Village and to provide coverage for worker's compensation, employer's
liability, comprehensive general liability, including completed operations,
contractual liability and motor vehicle liability when police details are
utilized for traffic controls or other safety services in behalf of utilities or
other companies.
§ 67-2. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Village Manager is hereby authorized and directed to formulate and
require execution of an agreement between the Village of Ridgewood and
the utilities or other companies to fulfill the policy hereby established by the
Council of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 67-1 POLICE SERVICES § 67-2
67:85
Chapter 70
PUBLIC DEFENDER, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145.
§ 70-1. Statutory authority.
The State of New Jersey has adopted an act requiring each municipality
in the State of New Jersey to appoint and provide for a Municipal Public
Defender in accord with the terms of the act codified at N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et
seq. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the mandate provided in the state
statute.
§ 70-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INDIGENT DEFENDANT — A person who is entitled to be represented by
a Municipal Public Defender pursuant to this chapter and who does not
have the present financial ability to secure competent legal representation
as determined by this chapter and the act.
MUNICIPAL COURT — The Municipal Court of the Village of Ridgewood.
MUNICIPAL PUBLIC DEFENDER — A person as defined in this chapter
appointed to represent indigent defendants in proceedings over which the
Municipal Court has jurisdiction.
§ 70-3. Office created.
There is hereby created in the Village of Ridgewood the office of Municipal
Public Defender pursuant to the authority and requirements of N.J.S.A.
2B:24-1 et seq.
§ 70-4. Qualifications; term; appointment.
The Municipal Public Defender shall be an attorney at law of the State
of New Jersey in good standing and shall serve for a term of one year
from the date of appointment and may continue to serve in office pending
reappointment or appointment of a successor. The term of the Municipal
Public Defender initially appointed shall terminate on December 31 of
the year in which the Municipal Public Defender is first appointed. The
Municipal Public Defender shall be appointed by the Village Council.
§ 67-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 70-5
70:86
§ 70-5. Removal.
The Municipal Public Defender may be removed from office in accord with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:24-4.
§ 70-6. Compensation.
The Municipal Public Defender shall receive compensation as determined
either in the Salary Ordinance of the Village of Ridgewood or by
professional contract with the Village of Ridgewood, or both, as determined
by the Village Council.
§ 70-7. Temporary replacement.
In the event of a vacancy in the office of Municipal Public Defender or in
the event that the Municipal Public Defender is temporarily unavailable or
in the event a finding of conflict of interest precludes a Municipal Public
Defender from representing an indigent defendant, the Municipal Court
shall appoint a qualified attorney to represent the indigent defendant. The
attorney so appointed shall be paid at the same rate as has been established
for payment to the Municipal Public Defender.
§ 70-8. Eligibility.
Eligibility for services of the Municipal Public Defender shall be determined
by the Municipal Court on the basis of need of defendant as provided in
N.J.S.A. 2B:24-9 et seq.
§ 70-9. Lien.
The Village shall have a lien on any property to which the indigent
defendant shall have an interest or acquire an interest for an amount
equal to the reasonable value of the services rendered to the defendant
pursuant to this chapter as calculated at the same rate as the office of Public
Defender bills clients at that time.
§ 70-10. Notice to be filed.
The Village Attorney is hereby authorized to file a notice setting forth
services rendered to an indigent defendant and the reasonable value
thereof with the Clerk of the Superior Court.
§ 70-11. Application fee. [Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 2633]
Any person applying for representation by the Municipal Public Defender or
court-approved counsel shall pay to the Village of Ridgewood an application
fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, said fee to be fixed by the Municipal
Court Judge, all pursuant to the regulations set forth in N.J.S.A. 2B:24-17.
§ 70-5 PUBLIC DEFENDER, MUNICIPAL § 70-12
70:87
§ 70-12. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication as
required by law subject, however, to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et
seq.
Chapter 75
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 64.
§ 70-12 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 70-12
70:88
ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 314921]
§ 75-1. Eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 75-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
A. Mayor and Council;
B. Village Manager;
C. Director of Operations;
D. Village Engineer;
E. Director of Public Works (without CPWM);
F. Village Prosecutor;
G. Village Court Judge;
H. Director of Community Services;
I. Director of Parks and Recreation;
J. Director of Emergency Management;
K. Court Administrator;
L. Director of Welfare;
M. Director of Fire.
A. Tax Collector;
B. Chief Financial Officer;
C. Construction Code Official;
D. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
E. Tax Assessor;
F. Village Planner;
21.Editor's Note: This article also provided that it applies to employees hired subsequent to
7-1-2007.
§ 75-1 PUBLIC DEFENDER, MUNICIPAL § 75-2
70:89
§ 75-3. Applicability of other provisions.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 75-4. Filing of article.
A copy of this article shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
G. Village Clerk;
H. Licensed Uniform Sub-code Inspector;
I. Certified Public Works Manager.
§ 75-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 75-4
70:90
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 99
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145. Fire prevention — See Ch. 149.
§ 75-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 75-4
99:91

ARTICLE I
Police Panel Alarms
[Adopted 2-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1785]
§ 99-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are twofold, as follows:
§ 99-2. Scope and applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to alarm businesses and to any
person who operates, maintains or owns any alarm device, dial alarm or
local alarm designed to produce a visual or audible signal of an emergency
and designed to summon or alert the police or other municipal agencies in
response thereto.
§ 99-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The approved panel installed in accord with the
directions of the Department of Police for the purpose of giving visual or
audible response to alarm systems installed within the Village of Ridgewood
and connected to said alarm console. The alarm console shall be installed,
operated and maintained at such place in the Department of Police
headquarters or in such other place as the Director of Police shall designate.
Said alarm console shall be of such design, capacity, size, power, utility,
efficiency and quality as the Director of Police shall specify. Said alarm
console shall be furnished, installed, operated and maintained and kept
in good working order exclusively by and at the sole cost and expense of
the licensee who shall, in consideration of said exclusive license, have the
privilege of installing, operating and maintaining the alarm console and
have the use and occupancy of the area designated by the Director of Police.
ALARM SYSTEM — Equipment or a device or an assembly of equipment and
devices to signal the presence of an emergency or hazard requiring urgent
attention and to which the Department of Police or other municipal agency
may be expected to respond. In this article, the term "alarm system" shall
include the terms "alarm device," "local alarm," and "dial alarm."
A. To provide standards and regulations for various types of intrusion,
burglar and other emergency alarm equipment which produce a visual
or audible signal or function by direct line, radio or telephone or by any
other means and require a response by the Department of Police or
other municipal agencies.
B. To provide for the installation in the headquarters of the Department of
Police or such other place(s) as may be designated by the Director of
Police of an alarm console, as herein defined.
§ 99-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 99-3
99:93
DEPARTMENT OF POLICE — The Department of Police of the Village of
Ridgewood.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — The designated representative of the
Director of Police to perform a function required or permitted by this article
under the supervision of the Director of Police and who shall be a member
of the Ridgewood Police Department.
DIAL ALARM — Any type of alarm system using telephone lines transmitting
an alarm directly through the police switchboard providing warning to
intrusion or other peril.
DIRECTOR OF POLICE — The Director of Police of the Village of Ridgewood
or his designated representative.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm or signal of an alarm actuated by inadvertence,
negligence or intentional or unintentional act of a person other than an
intruder, and including, as well, alarms caused by mechanical failure,
malfunctioning or improper installation of the alarm system and related
equipment but not including alarms created by mechanical failure,
malfunctioning or improper installation of the alarm console.
LICENSEE — The person who holds the exclusive license to install, operate
and maintain the alarm console pursuant to the provisions of this article.
PERMITTEE — Any person who owns an alarm device who has obtained a
permit according to the provisions of this article. All permits shall be issued
and fees paid therefor on a calendar-year basis, renewable on January of
each succeeding year.
PERSON — Any natural person or individual or any firm, partnership,
association, limited partnership, sole proprietor ship, corporation or any
other business entity.
VILLAGE MANAGER — The Village Manager of the Village of Ridgewood.
WRITTEN NOTICE — By certified mail, return receipt requested.
§ 99-4. Dial alarms; fees.
No dial alarm shall be permitted unless it shall have first been registered
with the Director of Police, as hereinafter required, and approved by the
Director of Police after approval thereof by the New Jersey Bell Telephone
Company and a test conducted by the alarm owner or on his/her behalf.
A. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial a separate special number to be
provided by the Director of Police. No dial alarm shall be coded to dial
the general police number.
B. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected to allow a call to
police headquarters in the event of a false alarm.
C. The owner of each dial alarm system shall pay to the Village of
Ridgewood a fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, to cover the cost of
registration and testing and to amortize the cost of the special
§ 99-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 99-4
99:94
§ 99-5. Registration required.
No person shall install, operate or maintain any alarm system unless the
system has been registered with and approved by the Director of Police.
telephone line or lines required in police headquarters. Said annual fee
may be amended hereafter by ordinance of the Village Council. The
annual fee shall be due and payable to the Village of Ridgewood upon
installation of any dial alarm system or, in the case of a dial alarm
system in existence at the time of the effective date of this article,
within 30 days after the effective date. [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
D. Owners of dial alarms shall be governed by the false alarm procedures
and penalties set forth in this article.
E. If any person has any dial alarm in existence at the time of the effective
date of this article, it shall be reprogrammed within 30 days of said
effective date to comply with this article.
F. If any dial alarm hereafter shall be found to be dialing the general
police number rather than the special number, the Director of Police
shall send the person in whose name the telephone is listed a written
notice requiring compliance with this article. If the occupant or
telephone subscriber fails to comply within 30 days after service of said
notice, said failure shall constitute a violation of this article, and the
person shall be liable to the penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, of the Village Code. Each and every day that this
article is not complied with shall constitute a separate offense.
G. The contents of a dial alarm message shall be clear and intelligible and
in the format approved by the Director of Police. No such message shall
be transmitted more than three times as a result of a single stimulus of
the mechanism. Messages shall not exceed 15 seconds, and the time
gap between each shall not exceed 10 seconds.
H. The sensory mechanism of dial alarms shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and to not be actuated by impulses due to
pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind, noises,
rattling or vibration of doors or windows or other forces unrelated to
general alarms.
I. All components of dial alarms shall be maintained by the owner in good
repair. On failure to comply with the operational requirements of this
article, the Director of Police shall require that such dial alarm be
disconnected until such time as compliance with the requirements are
reestablished. If upon written notice from the Director of Police the
owner of a dial alarm shall fail to disconnect said alarm within 10 days,
such action shall constitute a violation of this article, and said person(s)
shall be liable for the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, of the Village Code.
§ 99-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 99-5
99:95
§ 99-6. Issuance of specifications.
Upon adoption of this article, the Director of Police shall issue written
specifications covering the alarm console hereinbefore defined. The Village
Clerk shall cause to be published an advertisement inviting sealed bids for
the installation, operation, maintenance and fees for the alarm console in
accordance with this article and the specifications of the Director of Police.
Said bids shall be in a form prescribed by the Village Clerk.
§ 99-7. False alarms; fees.
A. A dial system shall be deemed registered when the annual fee has been
remitted to the Village of Ridgewood and a permit has been issued by
the Director of Police.
B. A local alarm system shall be deemed registered when the occupant of
the building in which the alarm is installed has filed an approved
registration form with the Director of Police.
C. All permittees are required to register their alarm, no matter what the
type, with the Director of Police on a form which shall include the name,
type and location of the device; the name, address and twenty-four-hour
telephone number of the alarm installer or person responsible for its
maintenance; a list of persons to be contacted in the event of an alarm;
the person responsible to remit any fees or fines assessed under this
article, and all other information as may be required by the Director of
Police.
D. No further registration will be required unless a change occurs in the
information previously submitted with respect to any alarm system. It
shall be the duty of the occupant of a building served by an alarm
system to notify the Director of Police within 10 days of any change in
the registration information by completing a new registration form.
Failure to comply with these provisions will be deemed a violation of
this article and subject the violator to the penalties contained in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, of the Village Code.
E. Each permittee shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the Village
of Ridgewood, its agents, servants and employees from and against all
claims, suits, damages, costs, losses and expenses and to release the
Village of Ridgewood, its agents, servants and employees from any and
all liability or damages in any way resulting from or arising out of or
connected with the installation, operation or maintenance of the alarm
system or any act or omission connected therewith.
A. In the event of the occurrence of three false alarms in a calendar year,
the alarm user shall, within three days after written notice to do so,
complete a written report to the Director of Police setting forth the
cause of the false alarms, the corrective action taken, a statement as to
whether the alarm system has been inspected by an alarm service
§ 99-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 99-7
99:96
§ 99-8. Testing.
Any person testing an alarm system covered by the provisions of this article
shall notify police headquarters immediately prior to and after the testing
is completed. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation herein and subject
a person to such penalties as may be set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, of the Village Code.
§ 99-9. Miscellaneous regulations.
company and such other information as the Director of Police may
reasonably require.
B. Service fees. [Amended 8-12-1986 by Ord. No. 2053; 3-28-1989 by
Ord. No. 2203; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
(1) A written notice by the Director of Police shall be given upon the
second occurrence of a false alarm in a calendar year, and
thereafter, a service fee shall be assessed against the alarm user as
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
(2) The service fee shall be payable to the Village of Ridgewood within
30 days of service of a written notice thereof.
C. In addition to the service fee, if the third or subsequent false alarms
have resulted due to the failure of the alarm system user to take
corrective measures to have the alarm comply with this article, the
owner of said alarm system shall disconnect the alarm system within 10
days after written notice from the Director of Police. Upon failure to
disconnect after due notice, the alarm system owner shall be subject to
the penalties contained in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, of
the Village Code. Each and every day said owner shall fail to comply
shall constitute a separate offense. Failure to remit the required service
fee or misuse of the permitted number of false alarms will result in the
disconnection of the alarm system from the alarm console at police
headquarters after written notice to the alarm system owner or user.
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
A. Every permittee shall, by acceptance of the permit, be deemed as
having consented to inspection of the premises on which said alarm
devices are located at reasonable hours by the Director of Police or his
designated representative.
B. Any authorized equipment may be disconnected by the Director of
Police or his designated representative for noncompliance with this
article. Maintaining or installing unauthorized equipment shall be a
violation of this article, and the person(s) responsible shall be subject to
such penalties as are set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
I, of the Village Code.
C. Any licensee for the alarm console and any permittee utilizing the
services of any alarm company shall provide for a representative to be
§ 99-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 99-9
99:97
§ 99-10. Rule-making authority.
The Director of Police shall from time to time promulgate rules and
regulations supplementing this article in order to provide for the efficient
management of the same. Said rules shall be subject to the approval of the
Village Manager.
on call at all times, and such repair service shall be provided
immediately, when necessary, after notification by the Department of
Police of any malfunction of any equipment or false alarms.
D. In addition to the penalties herein otherwise set forth, the Director of
Police may revoke any license or permit upon 10 days written notice
when the Director of Police has determined that the alarm owner or
permittee has failed to make the proper repairs and has failed to
comply with this article.
E. Any alarm sounding an audible signal shall have built into its
mechanism a device that shall automatically shut off the audible signal
within 30 minutes.
§ 99-9 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 99-10
99:98
ARTICLE II
Fire Panel Alarms and Gamewell Master Box Systems
[Adopted 8-27-1985 by Ord. No. 2004; amended 4-23-1992 by Ord.
No. 2357]
§ 99-11. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to:
§ 99-12. Scope and applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to alarm businesses and to any
person who operates, maintains or owns any alarm device, dial alarm or
local alarm designed to produce a visual or audible signal of an emergency
and designed to summon or alert the fire or related municipal agencies in
response thereto.
§ 99-13. Definitions; fees.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The approved panel installed in accord with the
directions of the Department of Fire for the purpose of giving visual and/or
audible response to alarm systems installed within the Village of Ridgewood
and connected to said alarm console. The alarm console shall be installed,
operated and maintained in the Department of Fire headquarters or in
such other place as the Director of Fire shall designate. The alarm console
shall be of the design, capacity, size, power, utility, efficiency and quality
as the Director of Fire and Electrical Subcode Official shall specify. The
alarm console shall be furnished, operated, maintained and kept in good
working order exclusively by the Village of Ridgewood Fire Department
or its designated representative. A fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees,
payable January 1 of each year, shall be required to connect to the alarm
console. Installation of a connector to the alarm console shall be the
responsibility of the permittee.
ALARM SYSTEM — Equipment or device or an assembly of equipment and
devices to signal the presence of an emergency or hazard requiring urgent
attention.
A. Provide standards and regulations for various types of fire, smoke and
other emergency alarm equipment which produce a visual or audible
signal or which function by direct line, radio or telephone or by any
other means and require a response by the Department of Fire or
related municipal agencies.
B. Provide for the installation in the headquarters of the Department of
Fire or such other place(s) as may be designated by the Director of Fire
of an alarm console, as herein defined.
C. Ensure that only approved-type alarm systems are installed.
§ 99-11 ALARM SYSTEMS § 99-13
99:99
APPROVED ALARM OR TYPE — Any type alarm that has been approved by a
nationally recognized testing agency, e.g., Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.,
Factory Mutual, BOCA or NFPA.
DEPARTMENT OF FIRE — The Department of Fire of the Village of
Ridgewood.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — The representative of the Director of
Fire designated to perform a function required or permitted by this article
under the supervision of the Director of Fire, who shall be a member of the
Ridgewood Fire Department.
DIAL ALARM — Any type of alarm system using telephone lines transmitting
an alarm directly through the fire switchboard providing warning of fire or
other peril.
DIRECTOR OF FIRE — The Director of Fire of the Village of Ridgewood or
his designated representative.
GAMEWELL CONSOLE —
The approved panel and digitizer as part of the existing Gamewell
system that is installed in accord with the direction of the Department
of Fire for the purpose of receiving visual and/or audible response to
alarm systems installed within the Village of Ridgewood and connected
to the Gamewell system operated and maintained in the Department
of Fire headquarters. This system is designed and sized in accordance
with NFPA and National Electrical Code standards approved by the
Village Subcode Officials and the Director of Fire. This system is
furnished, operated, maintained and kept in good order by the Village
of Ridgewood Fire Department or its designated representative. All
subscribers to this system shall be assigned a master box owned and
maintained by the Village of Ridgewood. The subscriber, hereafter
called the "permittee," shall be assigned an interior box number as
assigned by the Director of Fire.
A.
An annual fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, payable January 1
of each year, shall be required to connect to the Gamewell system. In
addition to the annual fee, a one-time installation fee as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees, shall be paid to the Village upon installation of the
connector. Included in the annual fee are four resets for other than fire
drills and scheduled system activations. Each additional reset is to be
charged to the subscriber at the rate as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
Installation of a permittee to the system shall be the responsibility of
the permittee from the master box to this equipment. In addition to
the annual fee, a one-time installation fee as sets forth in Chapter 145,
Fees, shall be paid to the Village upon installation of the permittee.
Final hookup and testing will be coordinated through the Fire
Department.
B.
§ 99-13 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 99-14
99:100
§ 99-14. Dial alarms.
No dial alarm shall be permitted unless it shall be of an approved type and
meet the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code and State of New
Jersey Fire Prevention Code, as hereinafter required.
§ 99-15. Compliance required.
No person shall install, operate or maintain any alarm system unless the
system has complied with the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code
and New Jersey State Fire Prevention Code.
A. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial separate special numbers to be
provided by the Director of Fire. No dial alarm shall be coded to dial the
general fire emergency number or business numbers.
B. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected to allow a call to
fire headquarters in the event of a false alarm.
C. Owners of dial alarms shall be governed by the false alarm procedure
and penalties set forth in this article.
D. If any person has any dial alarm in existence at the time of the effective
date of this article, it shall be reprogrammed within 30 days of said
effective date to comply with this article.
E. If any dial alarm hereafter shall be found to be dialing the general fire
number rather than the special number, the Director of Fire shall send
the person in whose name the telephone is listed a written notice
requiring compliance with this article. If the occupant or telephone
subscriber fails to comply within 30 days after service of said notice,
said failure shall constitute a violation of this article, and the person
shall be liable to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, of the Village Code. Each and every day that this
article is not complied with shall constitute a separate offense.
F. The contents of a dial alarm message shall be clear and intelligible and
in the format approved by the Director of Fire. No such message shall
be transmitted more than three times as a result of a single stimulus of
the mechanism. Messages shall not exceed 10 seconds.
G. All components of dial alarms shall be maintained by the owner in good
repair. On failure to comply with the operational requirements of this
article, the Director of Fire shall require that such dial alarm be
disconnected until such time as compliance with the requirements are
reestablished. If upon written notice from the Director of Fire the
owner of a dial alarm shall fail to disconnect said alarm within 10 days,
such action shall constitute a violation of this article, and said person(s)
shall be liable for the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, of the Village Code.
§ 99-14 ALARM SYSTEMS § 99-15
99:101
A. The Uniform Construction Code Electrical and Fire Permit Form shall
be required prior to any installation.
B. An alarm system shall be deemed registered when the Form F.D. 100
and/or F.D. 100-5 Renewal Form and the annual fee, as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees, has been remitted to the Village of Ridgewood and
all requirements of the Uniform Construction Code and the New Jersey
State Fire Prevention Code have been complied with.
C. All alarm systems shall have a final inspection by the Fire Subcode
Official and the Electrical Subcode Official.
D. All permittees are required to register their alarms, no matter what the
type, with the Director of Fire on Form F.D. 100, which shall include the
name, type and location of the device; the name, address and twentyfour-
hour telephone number of the alarm installer or person
responsible for its maintenance; the name, address and telephone
number of one or more persons to be contacted in the event of an alarm
and of the person responsible to remit any fees or fines assessed under
this article; and such additional information as may be required by the
Director of Fire.
E. No further registration will be required unless a change occurs in the
information previously submitted with respect to any alarm system. It
shall be the duty of the occupant of a building served by an alarm
system to notify the Director of Fire within 10 days of any change in the
registration information by completing a new registration form. Failure
to comply with these provisions will be deemed a violation of this article
and subject the violator to the penalties contained in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I, of the Village Code.
F. Each permittee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Village of
Ridgewood, its agents, servants and employees from and against all
claims, suits, damages, costs, losses and expenses and to release the
Village of Ridgewood, its agents, servants and employees from any and
all liability or damages in any way resulting from or arising out of or
connected with the installation, operation or maintenance of the alarm
system or any act or omission connected therewith.
G. Mandatory Gamewell system connections. It shall be a requirement of
the Village of Ridgewood that all target and high life hazard
occupancies, to include all nursing homes, hospitals, lumberyards,
high-rise occupancies, theaters and places of public assembly, as
determined by the Director of Fire or his designee, shall be connected
to the Gamewell system. The purpose of this requirement is to provide
prompt notification for alarms of fire as required to protect life and/or
property in high hazard occupancies within the Village.
§ 99-15 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 99-16
99:102
§ 99-16. Issuance of specifications.
Upon adoption of this article, the Director of Fire shall issue written
specifications covering the alarm console hereinbefore defined. The Village
Clerk shall cause to be published an advertisement inviting sealed bids for
the purchase and installation of the alarm console in accordance with this
article and the specifications of the Director of Fire. Said bids shall be in a
form prescribed by the Village Clerk.
§ 99-17. False alarms; fees.
§ 99-18. Testing.
Any person testing an alarm system covered by the provisions of this article
shall notify fire headquarters immediately prior to and after the testing is
completed. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation herein and subject
a person to such penalties as may be set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, of the Village Code.
A. In the event of the occurrence of two false alarms in a calendar year, the
alarm user shall, within three days after written notice to do so,
complete a written report to the Director of Fire setting forth the cause
of the false alarms, the corrective action taken, a statement as to
whether the alarm system has been inspected by an alarm service
company and such other information as the Director of Fire may
reasonably require.
B. Service fees. [Amended 3-28-1989 by Ord. No. 2203; 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375]
(1) A written notice by the Director of Fire shall be given upon the
second occurrence of a false alarm in a calendar year; thereafter, a
service fee shall be assessed against the alarm user as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees.
(2) Service fees shall be payable to the Village of Ridgewood within 30
days of service of a written notice thereof.
C. In addition to the service fee if the third or subsequent false alarms
have resulted due to the failure of the alarm system user to take
corrective measures to have the alarm comply with this article, the
owner of said alarm system shall disconnect the alarm system within 10
days after written notice from the Director of Fire. The failure to
disconnect the alarm system after due notice shall subject the owner to
the penalties contained in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, of
the Village Code. Each and every day said owner shall fail to comply
shall constitute a separate offense. Failure to remit the required service
fee or misuse of the permitted number of false alarms will result in the
disconnection of the alarm system from the alarm console at fire
headquarters after written notice to the alarm system owner or user.
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
§ 99-16 ALARM SYSTEMS § 99-19
99:103
§ 99-19. Miscellaneous regulations.
§ 99-20. Rule-making authority.
The Director of Fire shall from time to time promulgate rules and
regulations supplementing this article in order to provide for the efficient
management of the same. Said rules shall be subject to the approval of the
Village Manager.
A. Every permittee shall, by acceptance of the permit, be deemed to have
consented to inspection of the premises on which said alarm devices
are located at reasonable hours by Fire Subcode representatives.
B. Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Director of
Fire or his designated representative for noncompliance with this
article. Maintaining or installing unauthorized equipment shall be a
violation of this article, and the person(s) responsible shall be subject to
such penalties as are set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
I, of the Village Code.
C. Any licensee for the alarm console and any permittee utilizing the
services of any alarm company shall provide for a representative to be
on call at all times and such repair service shall be provided
immediately, when necessary, after notification by the Department of
Fire of any malfunction of any equipment or false alarms.
D. In addition to the penalties herein otherwise set forth, the Director of
Fire may revoke any license or permit upon 10 days written notice
when the Director of Fire has determined that the alarm owner or
permittee has failed to make the proper repairs and has failed to
comply with this article.
E. If upon the arrival of the Fire Department at the located reported by the
dial alarm, automatic alarm, reporting agency or any other method
used to alert the Fire Department, the premises are found locked with
no one in attendance, forcible entry shall be used to gain entrance to
inspect the interior to determine the cause of the alarm.
F. Any alarm sounding an audible signal shall have built into its
mechanism a device that shall automatically shut off the audible signal
within 30 minutes.
§ 99-19 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 99-20
99:104
Chapter 101
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145. Alcoholic beverages in outdoor cafes — See
Ch. 156, Art. VIII.
§ 99-20 ALARM SYSTEMS § 99-20
99:105

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 8-27-1974 by Ord. No. 1541 as Ch. 3 of the 1974 Code]
§ 101-1. Purpose. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
This article is for the purpose of regulating the sale and transportation
of alcoholic beverages in the Village, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations
issued or to be promulgated by the State Director, Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control, applicable thereto.22
§ 101-2. Authority to issue licenses.
The Council shall constitute the authority for the administration of issuance
of licenses under this article and shall forthwith report the issuance of all
such licenses to the State Director, Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 101-3. License required for sale or distribution. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
It shall be unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in the Village
without a license previously applied for and granted pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 101-4. Compliance with state law. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
All applications for licenses under this article and all licenses issued
thereunder and proceedings in connection therewith shall be subject to
N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and such rules and regulations of the State Director,
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control, applicable thereto and shall be
subject to any other statutes of the state or of the United States now extant
or hereafter enacted affecting such subject matters.
§ 101-5. Application requirements. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
All applications for licenses shall set forth, in full, answers to questions
prescribed by N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and by the rules and regulations of the
State Director and shall include declarations called for by such provisions.
§ 101-6. Full qualification under state provisions required.
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
No license shall be issued to any person, firm, corporation, group or
partnership not fully qualified under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
and such rules and regulations of the State Director.
22.Editor's Note: Former Sections 3-2 through 3-9 of the 1974 Code, providing for various
regulations, were deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
§ 101-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 101-7
99:107
§ 101-7. Term of license and payment of fees.
All licenses shall be for a term of one year from the first day of July
in each year, and all fees shall be paid in advance upon presentation
of the application, provided that any licensee, except a seasonal retail
consumption licensee, who shall voluntarily surrender his license and who
shall not have committed any violation of this article or of any rule or
regulation and who shall have paid all taxes, setoffs or counterclaims that
may have become due to the state or to the Village shall be entitled, after
deduction of 50% of such fee as a surrender fee, to the prorated fee for the
unexpired term.
§ 101-8. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375]
§ 101-9. Location restrictions. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages within 200
feet of any church or public school or private schoolhouse not conducted
for pecuniary profit except to manufacturers, wholesalers, hotels, clubs
and fraternal organizations which own or are actually in possession of the
licensed premises at the time of the effectiveness of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
such 200 feet to be measured in the normal way that a pedestrian would
properly walk from the nearest entrance of such church or school to the
nearest entrance of the premises sought to be licensed; provided, that this
prohibition may be waived at the issuance or renewal of such license by
the Council or authority of such school or church, and such waiver shall be
effective until the date of the next renewal of such license; and provided
also that this prohibition shall not apply to the renewal of any license where
no such school or church was located within the prohibited distance of such
licensed premises at the time of the issuance of the license or as otherwise
excepted by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 101-10. License entitlements; fees.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this article or any of the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., or any other statutes heretofore mentioned or
of any of the regulations and rules prescribed by the State Director,
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., by service of a five-day notice of
charges preferred against the licensee, as provided in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et
seq., and affording of a reasonable opportunity for a hearing, and such
suspension or revocation shall carry the penalties and prohibitions
provided for in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
A. The holder of a plenary retail consumption license shall be entitled,
subject to the rules and regulations, to sell for consumption on the
§ 101-7 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 101-10
99:108
§ 101-11. Plenary retail distribution license. [Amended 7-22-1975
by Ord. No. 1585; 7-27-1976 by Ord. No. 1608; 9-27-1977 by Ord.
No. 1652; 8-8-1978 by Ord. No. 1681; 8-28-1979 by Ord. No. 1733;
8-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1765; 6-23-1981 by Ord. No. 1807;
11-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1828; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
The holder of a plenary retail distribution license shall be entitled, subject
to rules and regulations, to sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption off
the licensed premises, but only in original containers. Commencing July 1,
1982, and thereafter, the fee for a plenary retail distribution license shall be
as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The number of plenary retail distribution
licenses now issued and outstanding in the Village is eight.
§ 101-12. Permitted hours of sale. [Amended 1-28-1975 by Ord. No.
1555; 11-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1828]
Sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption upon premises for which
a plenary retail consumption license has been issued shall be permitted
during the following hours: Monday through Saturday, from 7:00 a.m. in the
morning until 2:00 a.m. the following morning; on Sunday, from 12:00 a.m.
to 2:00 a.m. and from 12:00 noon to 2:00 a.m. Monday morning.
licensed premises any alcoholic beverages by the glass or other open
receptacles and also to sell all alcoholic beverages in original
containers for consumption off the licensed premises. Such license shall
not permit the sale of alcoholic beverages in or upon any premises in
which a grocery, delicatessen, drugstore or other mercantile business
is carried on, except the keeping of a hotel or restaurant, or the sale
of cigars or cigarettes, at retail, as an accommodation to patrons or
the retail sale of nonalcoholic beverages as accessory beverages to
alcoholic beverages.
B. The fee for a plenary retail consumption license shall be as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees, and the number of plenary retail consumption
licenses issued and outstanding in the Village at the same time shall not
exceed six. [Amended 7-22-1975 by Ord. No. 1585; 7-27-1976 by
Ord. No. 1608; 9-27-1977 by Ord. No. 1652; 8-8-1978 by Ord. No.
1681; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
A. If Christmas Eve or New Year's Eve falls on Monday through Saturday,
such sales shall be permitted until 3:00 a.m. on the following day, and if
New Year's Eve falls on Sunday, such sales shall be permitted until 3:00
a.m. on the following day.
B. The hours aforesaid shall be the prevailing time in the Village.
C. During hours other than those established above, all premises for which
a plenary retail consumption license has been issued, with the
exception of restaurants as the same is defined by N.J.S.A. 33:1-1t, shall
be closed and the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in any
§ 101-10 ALARM SYSTEMS § 101-12
99:109
§ 101-13. Club license.
§ 101-14. Renewal limitations.
Licenses not renewed in accord with the provisions of Title 33 of the New
Jersey Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to have expired and shall not
be subject to renewal. The number of new licenses (as defined in N.J.S.A.
33:1-12.13) in the Village shall be subject to the limitations of N.J.S.A.
33:1-12.14.
premises for which a plenary retail consumption license has been
issued are hereby prohibited.
D. Subject to the exceptions provided hereinabove pertaining to Christmas
Eve and New Year's Eve, the sale of alcoholic beverages in original
bottle or can containers for consumption off the premises by the holder
of either a plenary retail consumption license or a plenary retail
distribution license shall be as follows: Monday through Saturday, wine
and malt alcoholic beverage may be sold from 7:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m.
the following morning, distilled alcoholic spirits may be sold from 9:00
a.m. until 10:00 p.m. On Sunday, wine and malt alcoholic beverages
may be sold from 12:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. and from 12:00 noon until 2:00
a.m. Monday morning and distilled alcoholic spirits may be sold from
12:00 noon until 10:00 p.m.
A. The holder of a club license shall be entitled, subject to rules and
regulations, to sell only to bona fide club members and their guests
alcoholic beverages intended for immediate consumption on the
licensed premises.
B. Club licenses shall be issued only to such corporations, associations and
organizations as are operated for benevolent, charitable, fraternal,
social, religious, recreational, athletic or similar purposes and not for
private gain, and licenses shall be subject to the qualifications,
conditions and restrictions imposed by the State Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
C. Each application for a club license shall set forth the names and
addresses of all officers, trustees, directors or other governing officials,
together with the names and addresses of all the members of the
applying club, corporation or association.
D. The fee for a club license shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
§ 101-12 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 101-14
99:110
ARTICLE II
Licensing of Bartenders
[Adopted 8-10-1993 by Ord. No. 2424]
§ 101-15. Fingerprinting required.
All bartenders, that is, persons who dispense alcoholic beverages, including
owners, operators or employees, working in business establishments
holding a plenary retail consumption license shall, prior to commencement
of employment, be fingerprinted under the supervision of the Department
of Police of the Village of Ridgewood at such time and place as shall be
designated by the Chief of Police, and said fingerprints shall be filed with
the Department. Bartenders who are currently employed at the time of the
adoption of this article shall be fingerprinted within 10 days of the final
passage and publication of this article.
§ 101-16. Identification card; fee.
Identification cards shall be issued by the Police Department to all
bartenders. Said card shall be valid for a period of one year from the date
of issuance. The fee for said card shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
§ 101-17. Information form.
The Department of Police shall establish a form to be completed by persons
required to be fingerprinted. Among other things, the form shall require
the current name, address, home telephone number, date of birth, social
security number, driver's license number, personal identification
information and such other details as the Department of Police shall
determine to be consistent with the purposes of this article.
§ 101-18. Amendments to form; display of identification card.
Each person licensed hereunder shall advise the Department of Police
within 24 hours of any change or amendment to the information set forth
on the form. Persons required to be licensed shall have available at the
licensed premises the identification card issued by the Department of Police
and shall exhibit same upon request by any police officer or alcoholic
beverage control officer. While the person required to be licensed is
working in the licensed premises, the identification card shall be available
and on public display.
§ 101-19. Identification card required prior to employment.
No licensee shall employ any person required to be fingerprinted hereunder
until an identification card has been issued to the bartender by the
Department of Police.
§ 101-15 ALARM SYSTEMS § 101-20
99:111
§ 101-20. Revocation of identification card.
The identification card shall be revocable by the Department of Police
for any violation of the rules and regulations of the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control or any inaccurate or false statement made by the
applicant on the application form.
§ 101-20 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 101-20
99:112
ARTICLE III
Possession or Consumption by Underage Persons on Private
Property
[Adopted 6-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3065]
§ 101-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's mother, father, grandparent, aunt or
uncle who is 21 years of age or older or any other person related by blood
or affinity.
§ 101-22. Consumption or possession prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any underage person to knowingly consume or
possess an alcoholic beverage on private property.
§ 101-23. Exceptions.
The following is a list of exceptions to § 101-22 above:
A. Any underage person who possesses or consumes an alcoholic
beverage(s) in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or
rite or who possesses or consumes an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative
who has attained the legal age to purchase or consume alcoholic
beverages.
B. Any underage person who possesses, but does not consume, an
alcoholic beverage and is in the course of performing employment
duties for a person or entity who is licensed under Title 33 of the New
Jersey Statutes Annotated.
C. Any underage person who possesses or consumes an alcoholic beverage
within the confines of a private residence owned or resided in by the
parent, guardian or relative of the underage person, said relative being
of the age to legally possess or consume alcohol.
D. An underage person and one or two other persons shall be immune
from prosecution under § 101-22 above if: [Amended 3-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 3330]
(1) An underage person calls 9-1-1 and reports that another underage
person is in need of medical assistance due to alcohol consumption.
(2) An underage person calls 9-1-1 and, if applicable, one or two other
persons acting in concert with the underage person who calls 9-1-1,
and they provide each of their names to the 9-1-1 operator.
§ 101-21 ALARM SYSTEMS § 101-23
99:113
§ 101-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating the terms and provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense and $350 for the second
or any subsequent offense. In addition to such fines, the Court may, in its
sole discretion, suspend or postpone for up to six (6) months the driving
privilege of said persons. The Court may, in its sole discretion, require the
performance of community service for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(3) The underage person must be the first person to make the 9-1-1
report.
(4) The underage person and, if applicable, one or two other persons
acting in concert with the underage person who made the 9-1-1 call
must remain on the scene with the person under the legal age in
need of medical assistance until medical assistance arrives and
thereafter cooperates with medical assistance and law
enforcement personnel on the scene.
(5) The underage person who receives medical assistance shall also be
immune from prosecution under this section.
§ 101-23 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 101-24
99:114
Chapter 103
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Games of chance — See Ch. 161.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
§ 101-24 AMUSEMENTS § 101-24
103:115

ARTICLE I
Electronic Games
§ 103-1. License required. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
No person shall keep or maintain for hire or profit, directly or indirectly,
automatic amusement games, commonly known as "pinball," "bagatelle,"
"baseball," "video games" or similar devices, in any public or quasi-public
place or in any building, store or other place where the public is invited or
may enter without first procuring a license for each of such machines as
hereinafter provided.
§ 103-2. Application for license.
The proprietor of the premises where a machine such as described in the
preceding section is to be installed shall, before installation of any machine,
make application, in writing, to the Village Clerk for a license for each of
such machines to be so installed in the premises. Such application shall
state:
§ 103-3. License fees, term and renewal. [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
The application under § 103-2 shall be accompanied by a license fee as
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, for each machine to be licensed. Licenses
shall expire December 31 of each year and shall be renewed annually, on
or before the 31st day of December, by the filing with the Village Clerk
of an application for renewal containing the statements required above,
accompanied by the license fees for each renewal.
§ 103-4. License to contain serial number and be displayed.
The license issued under this article for each machine shall contain the
serial number and description of the machine, and such license shall be
plainly displayed in the premises where the machine is kept.
§ 103-5. Location restrictions.
No device regulated by this article shall be placed or permitted to be used
within 300 feet of any school.
A. The name and residence address of the proprietor and the business
location.
B. The number and type of machines to be kept.
C. The name and address of the person owning such machine.
D. The serial number and description of the machine to be licensed.
§ 103-1 AMUSEMENTS § 103-6
103:117
§ 103-6. Age use restrictions.
No license shall permit any of the devices regulated under this article to be
used by any person under the age of 16 years.
§ 103-7. Prizes, rewards and gambling prohibited.
No licensee shall offer any prize or other reward to any person playing any
of such devices, nor shall any licensee permit such machines to be used for
gambling purposes.
§ 103-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 103-7
103:118
ARTICLE II
Billiards, Bowling and Other Games
§ 103-8. License required.
No person shall keep a billiard table or pool table, bowling alley or
shuffleboard for public use or hire within the Village without first obtaining
a license.
§ 103-9. Application for license.
Application for a license under this article shall state the location of the
building and room where such billiard table, pool table, bowling alley or
shuffleboard are to be used, the name of the applicant, the number of tables,
bowling alleys or shuffleboards and the name of the owners of the building.
§ 103-10. Issuance, revocation and suspension of license.
§ 103-11. Annual license fee. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
The license fee for keeping a billiard parlor, pool table, bowling alley or
shuffleboard, shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
§ 103-12. Age playing restrictions.
No minor under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play billiards, pool,
bowling or shuffleboard in any place licensed under the provisions of this
article except upon the consent of his parent or guardian.
§ 103-13. Hours and days of operation; prohibited acts.
A. All licenses granted under the provisions of this article shall be issued
by the Village Clerk at the direction of the Council.
B. The Council shall have power to revoke or suspend such licenses in its
discretion in case gambling or disorderly conduct is permitted or any
provisions of this article violated. Licenses not revoked or suspended
may be renewed subject to the same conditions and charges as the
original license. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December
next ensuing the date of issuing the same.
A. All places licensed under the provisions of this article shall close every
night at 12:00 midnight.
B. No loitering by minors under the age of 18 shall be permitted. Such
places while open shall have an unobstructed view from the street. No
curtains, shades or other obstructions to view shall be permitted on any
windows.
§ 103-8 AMUSEMENTS § 103-13
103:119
C. All places licensed under the provisions of this article shall be closed on
the first day of the week, commonly known as "Sunday," and shall be at
all times open to inspection by the Village authorities.
§ 103-13 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 103-13
103:120
ARTICLE III
Miniature Golf Courses
§ 103-14. License required.
No person shall set up or operate any miniature golf course, miniature
driving and putting course, practice court or other device for profit or where
a fee is charged within the Village without first taking out a license therefor
before opening to the public or operating any such miniature golf course,
driving and putting course, practice court or any other such amusement
device.
§ 103-15. Issuance and term of license.
§ 103-16. Revocation or suspension of license.
The Council shall have power to revoke or suspend any license issued
under this article in its discretion in case gambling or disorderly conduct
is permitted or any of the provisions of this article violated, or in case the
Council shall determine the operation of any such course, court or device
shall constitute a nuisance.
§ 103-17. Annual fee. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
The license fee for the keeping of a miniature golf course or miniature
driving and putting course, practice court or other such device for profit or
where a fee is charged shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
§ 103-18. Hours of operation.
All places licensed under the provisions of this article shall close every night
at 12:00 midnight.
§ 103-19. Applicability of land use regulations. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
All licenses granted under the provisions of this article shall be subject to
the provisions of Chapter 190, Land Use and Development, affecting such
use of the premises for which licensed is applied.
A. All licenses granted under the provisions of this article shall be issued
by the Village Clerk on application, in writing, signed by the person
applying for such license, describing the location where such course,
court or other device is to be operated, accompanied by the license fee
hereinafter specified.
B. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December next ensuing the
date of issuing the same.
§ 103-14 AMUSEMENTS § 103-19
103:121
Chapter 105
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Dogs in parks and recreation areas — See Ch.
212.
§ 103-19 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 103-19
103:122
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 105-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CATTLE — Includes the following animals and their respective young: cows,
horses, mules, asses, sheep, goats, swine and other hoofed animals.
CLEANING — The thorough removal of contaminating material.
DISINFECTION — The application of any disinfected materials to infected
materials in sufficient concentration and for a sufficient length of time to
destroy pathogenic organisms.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof which is occupied or intended
to be occupied as a residence or sleeping place of one or more individuals,
families or households.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Village Health Officer or his designated
assistants.
KENNEL — Any establishment or premises wherein or whereon the
business of boarding or selling dogs, cats or other animals or the breeding
of dogs, cats or other animals or the keeping of five or more dogs, cats
or other animals is conducted, except a pet shop.[Amended 1-8-2020 by
Ord. No. 3758]
NUISANCE — Any condition which is harmful to human life or health or that
which renders air, water, soil or any type of food hazardous or injurious to
human life or health.
PERMIT or LICENSE — A duly authorized permit or license of the Division
of Health, issued in accordance with this chapter or the regulations of the
Village.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog declared potentially
dangerous by a municipal court pursuant to state law N.J.S.A.
4:19-30.[Added 2-13-2013 by Ord. No. 3372]
POULTRY — Includes chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, guinea fowl, pigeons,
pheasants and all other fowl or winged animals kept, raised or sold for
human consumption or for production of eggs.
REGULATIONS — Any regulations, whether general or special, which the
Division of Health may from time to time lawfully adopt and issue.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Off the premises of the person owning or having
the care, custody or control of an animal or on the premises of another
without his consent or on public property, unless in a vehicle or restrained
by an adequate collar and leash or unless accompanied by a responsible
person able to control the animal.[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
SANITARIAN — Includes every officer appointed by the Village Manager
to aid in the enforcement of the rules, regulations and ordinances of the
§ 105-1 AMUSEMENTS § 105-1
103:123
Council, excepting the Health Officer, Secretary, Registrar or other persons
performing principally clerical duties in the office of the Division of Health.
SMALL ANIMALS — Includes rabbits, mink, guinea pigs, rodents and any
other small animals kept or raised for commercial purposes or kept and
raised for sale or for the production of meat, fur or wool or kept and raised
for exhibition or other purposes or as a source of supply for laboratories,
provided that the term "small animals" shall not apply if the animals total in
the aggregate fewer than two in number.
STATE BOARD and STATE DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Public Health
Council or State Department of Health or any successor agency thereto.
§ 105-2. Slaughtering.
No person shall slaughter or engage in the business of slaughtering any live
animals.
§ 105-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-2
103:124
ARTICLE II
Dogs
§ 105-3. Barking.
No person shall permit within the Village, upon his premises, premises
occupied by them or in any other place, the barking of dogs owned by him
or under his control in a loud or disturbing manner which tends to disturb
the public peace.
§ 105-4. License required. [Amended 6-28-1983 by Ord. No. 1891]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog, which dog has attained
the age of seven months or possesses a set of permanent teeth, shall cause
the same to be licensed, such license to be obtained as herein provided.
Applications for a license shall be made within 10 days of acquisition of a
dog required to be licensed.
§ 105-5. Issuance of license; records; tags. [Amended 6-28-1983 by
Ord. No. 1891]
A license shall be issued by the Division of Health upon written application.
A record shall be kept of each license, given the name, breed, sex, age and
license number of the dog and the owner's name and address. The Division
shall issue to the owner a metal tag bearing the number of the license,
which tag must be worn by the dog at all times and be securely fastened to
a collar or harness.
§ 105-6. Fees. [Amended 8-28-1973 by Ord. No. 1498; 4-24-1979 by
Ord. No. 1710; 6-28-1983 by Ord. No. 1891; 12-11-1984 by Ord. No.
1952; 2-13-1990 by Ord. No. 2241; 5-14-1991 by Ord. No. 2317;
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
A. A person applying for a license and registration tag shall pay for a oneyear
license and registration tag the sums set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees, as a license fee and as a registration tag fee for a spayed/neutered
dog. For dogs not spayed/neutered, the one-year license fee shall be as
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, in addition to the one-year registration
tag fee. Each license and registration tag and renewals thereof shall
expire on June 30 in the year stated on the license. Dogs used as guides
for blind persons, commonly known as "Seeing Eye" dogs, or dogs used
to assist deaf persons, commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs, and
service dogs used to assist handicapped persons shall be licensed and
registered as other dogs, but the owner or keeper of such dog will not
be required to pay any fee therefor.
B. A person applying for a license and registration tag subsequent to June
30 shall pay a late charge fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, for the
issuance of the license and registration tag.
§ 105-3 AMUSEMENTS § 105-6
103:125
§ 105-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with §§ 105-4 and
105-5 of this chapter shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more
than $50 for each offense; except that for the first offense, the penalty shall
be not less than $1 nor more than $50.
§ 105-8. Running at large.
No dog shall be permitted to run at large. Any dog running at large may be
impounded, and the owner of any dog running at large, whether impounded
or not, shall be liable to the penalties provided in § 105-16.
§ 105-9. Impoundment. [Amended 2-8-1977 by Ord. No. 1627;
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
The animal pound is hereby continued, and any dog running at large when
captured shall be taken to such pound. If such captured dog is wearing
a properly issued current year license tag, the owner shall be notified
personally or by mail addressed to him at his or her last known address.
If notification is by mail, it shall be accompanied by a copy of this article.
Such owner may redeem his or her dog by the payment of the sum as
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, for its detention, which said sum includes
maintenance not to exceed $1 per day payable to the Village of Ridgewood.
If such owner shall not redeem his or her dog within the period of seven
days after notification is herein provided or where notice cannot be given
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 and seven days of detention
have thereafter elapsed, then it shall be lawful for the keeper of the pound
to dispose of such dog in some humane manner. The keeper of the pound,
however, shall, if practicable, find a home therefor. A report of his disposal
of the dog shall be promptly filed by the keeper of the pound with the
Division of Health, which shall keep a proper and complete record of all
such disposals.
C. In the event that a person applying or having applied for a license and
registration tag requires a duplicate dog license for any reason, the fee
payable to the Village for issuance of a duplicate dog license shall be as
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
D. A person may apply for a three-year license and registration tag
covering a three-year period for a spayed/neutered dog or unsprayed/
unneutered dog, with proof of rabies vaccination good for 34 months of
the three-year licensing period. The fees for the three-year license are
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, as a license fee and registration tag.
Each three-year license shall expire on June 30 of the year stated on the
license. [Added 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 3339]
E. License fee for potentially dangerous dog: as set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees. [Added 2-13-2013 by Ord. No. 3372]
§ 105-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-10
103:126
§ 105-10. Destruction of rabid or vicious dogs.
Any dog running at large and acting in a vicious manner or showing signs of
rabies may be destroyed by any police officer without capture or removing
to the pound. In all such cases, a full report thereof shall be immediately
made to the Health Department by the officer. If the destroyed dog has
been licensed in the Village, the owner shall be notified promptly either
personally or by mail addressed to his last known address by the Health
Department.
§ 105-11. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of each police officer of the Village to assist in carrying
out the provisions of this article.
§ 105-12. Remittance of licenses and fees. [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
All licenses and fees collected by the keeper of the pound, Village Clerk and
other officers under this article shall forthwith be remitted to the Village
Treasurer.
§ 105-13. Pet solid waste. [Added 9-26-1978 by Ord. No. 1689;
amended 8-14-1984 by Ord. No. 1946; 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2964]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for the
proper disposal of pet solid waste in the Village of Ridgewood, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
failure to comply.
B. Definitions and word usage. For the purpose of this section, the
following terms, phrases, words and their definitions shall give the
meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this section
clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall posses, maintain, house, be
responsible for, or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet,
whether or not the owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
§ 105-10 AMUSEMENTS § 105-13
103:127
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the
pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or
other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is
regularly emptied by the Village of Ridgewood or some other refuse
collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage
for proper treatment and disposal.
C. Requirement for disposal. All pet owners and keepers are required to
immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited
on any property; public or private, not owned or possessed by that
person.
D. Exemptions. Any owner or pet keeper who requires the use of a
disability assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section while such animal is being used for that purpose.
E. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Board of Health of the Village of Ridgewood and the Village of
Ridgewood Police Department.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500 in accordance with Chapter 105, § 105-16.
G. Severability. Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of
this section is declared to be an independent section, subsection,
sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding of any such
portion of this section to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any
cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this section.
H. When effective. This section shall be in full force and effect from and
after its adoption and any publication as may be required by law.
§ 105-13 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-13
103:128
ARTICLE III
Keeping of Certain Animals
§ 105-14. License application, issuance and conditions.
A. Use of terms. It is intended that the terms "license" and "permit,"
wherever used within this article, be synonymous if, in the
interpretation of any part hereof, such synonym is required to carry out
the manifest intent and purpose of this article.
B. Application. All applications for licenses and permits shall be made at
the Office of the Division of Health during regular office hours, and the
fees for every license or permit shall be paid in advance at the time of
making the application therefor.
C. Investigation. The granting of any license or permit may be withheld, at
the direction of the Division of Health, pending examination,
investigation or inspection of the person who or the premises which
may be the subject matter of the license or permit under consideration.
D. Fee exemptions. No fee for any license or permit issued under this
article shall be required of any person declared by state law to be
exempt from the payment of any such fee.
E. Transferability; term. All licenses and permits issued under this article
shall be valid only for the balance of the calendar year in which they are
issued, unless otherwise provided in this article. No such license or
permit shall be transferable or assignable.
F. Issuance. The Division of Health shall evidence the granting of any
license or permit issued by furnishing to the licensee or permittee a
suitable card, sign, placard, disc, plate or other writing which shall
convey information concerning the nature of such license or permit, the
serial number of the same, the name of the person to whom the same
has been issued, the year in which the same is so issued, the premises
so licensed, if that be material or required, and such other information
as the Division may deem pertinent.
G. Display. Every license and permit issued by the Division of Health shall
be displayed in a conspicuous place in the establishment, premises or
other place for which the same is issued for the period that such license
or permit shall be in force, unless the Division of Health shall otherwise
prescribe.
H. Suspension.
(1) Every license and permit issued under this article may at any time
during the term for which the same is so issued be suspended by
the Division of Health or, in an emergency, by the Health Officer,
pending a hearing to be granted the holder thereof, pursuant to a
notice to show cause by the Division why such license or permit
should not be suspended further or revoked.
§ 105-14 AMUSEMENTS § 105-14
103:129
§ 105-15. Inspection of licensed establishments.
(2) No such license or permit shall be suspended unless the Health
Officer shall file with the Division a complaint or charges
evidencing one or more violations of this article under which such
license or permit was originally issued.
(3) Every suspension ordered under this subsection shall automatically
terminate two weeks from the date thereof unless the continuance
of such suspension shall be ordered by the Division, and then such
suspension shall continue only during the period of any such
continuance so ordered by the Division.
(4) During the period of any such suspension or ordered continuance
thereof, every license or permit so suspended shall be ineffective,
and the holder thereof shall, during the entire period of such
suspension, cease the operation of any business or discontinue
every activity or use permitted under the license or permit
suspended.
I. Revocation.
(1) Any license or permit issued under the provisions of this article
may be revoked at any time by the Division of Health for just cause
or if the licensee or permittee or any of the employees, agents or
servants of such licensee or permittee shall violate:
(a) Any of the provisions of this article.
(b) The Sanitary Code of the State Department of Health,
specifically applicable to the subject matter for or upon which
such license or permit was issued.
(2) Before any license or permit may be revoked, the holder thereof
shall be given a hearing and an opportunity to be heard on the
complaint made or violation charged against him.
(3) The time and place for such hearing shall be fixed at the discretion
of the Division, provided that an unreasonable time shall not be
permitted to elapse between the date of any suspension of license
and the date fixed for the hearing.
(4) Notice of the time and place of any hearing held under this
subsection shall be given by the Division to the holder of the license
or permit so involved, in writing, and served either personally or
sent to him by registered mail, addressed to him at the address
stated in the license or permit.
(5) A licensee or permittee who fails to appear at the time and place
fixed for such hearing shall not be entitled to any further hearing,
and in that event, his license or permit may, as a matter of course,
be forthwith revoked.
§ 105-14 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-15
103:130
§ 105-16. Violations and penalties.
A. At least once every three months the Health Officer shall inspect all
establishments licensed under the provisions of this article. In case the
Health Officer discovers the violation of any item of sanitation, he shall
make a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems
necessary for the defect to be remedied, and the second inspection shall
be used in determining compliance with the requirements of this
article. Any violation of the same item of this article shall call for
immediate suspension of license.
B. A copy of the inspection report shall be filed and kept by the
establishment for a period of one year, and the original shall be filed in
the records of the Division of Health.
C. The person operating the establishment shall, upon request of the
Health Officer, permit access to all parts of the establishment.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who shall do or
commit any act prohibited by the terms of this article; or do or commit
any act for which a license or permit is required without having secured
and being in possession of a valid license or permit at the time of the
doing or commission thereof; or omit to do or perform any act required
by him to be so done or performed by this article; or maintain any place,
establishment, equipment or article in violation of any of the provisions
of this article; or fail to maintain any condition, equipment or facility
required to be maintained by this article; or fail to install any article of a
particular type, kind, quality or specification where such installation is
required; or in any manner, by deed, act, act of commission or act of
omission, violate any one or more of the provisions of this article; shall,
upon conviction thereof or upon conviction of any violation of the
provisions hereof, be subject to a penalty or judgment of not more than
$500 and, upon conviction and refusal or neglect to pay the amount of
such penalty or judgment, to be committed to the county jail for a
period of time not exceeding 90 days or, if he shall have been twice
convicted within the space of six months of the violation of this article
and due proof of the fact is made, he may be imprisoned in the county
jail or county workhouse for any number of days not exceeding one day
for each dollar of the penalty, in addition to the imposition of the penalty
prescribed above, all in the discretion of the Municipal Judge or other
officer before whom the complaint shall be brought. [Amended
12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1953]
B. In the event that any violation of this article shall also be a violation of a
state law for which is provided a greater penalty or judgment than that
contained in this section, the Municipal Judge or trial judge before
whom any complaint is brought based upon such violation shall, in his
discretion, have the right to impose, in the place and in lieu of any
penalty provided for herein, that so provided in the state law which has
been so violated.
§ 105-15 AMUSEMENTS § 105-17
103:131
§ 105-17. Cattle.
§ 105-18. Poultry and fowl.
A. License or permit required. No person shall keep any cattle without
having first obtained a license or permit.
B. Fees. The license or permit fee for the keeping of cattle shall be as set
forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The fee is intended to be an annual fee, but
when paid, shall cover only the balance of the calendar year during
which the same is so paid or payable. [Amended 3-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 2202; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
C. Barn and stable construction to comply with zoning regulations. All
barns or stables shall be constructed in accordance with the regulations
now or hereafter in force under Chapter 190, Land Use and
Development. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
D. Adequate ventilation required. Adequate ventilation shall be provided
in all barns or stables.
E. Concrete floor. Every stable or barn shall have a concrete floor.
F. Removal of manure. Manure from all barns or stables shall be removed
from the premises weekly.
G. Containers for stable wastes and accumulations. Every stable or barn
shall have a watertight covered container for receiving and holding
stable wastes and accumulations.
H. Location. No barn, stable, pen or corral shall be within 100 feet of any
dwelling unit or place where people congregate or within 400 feet of
any food or eating establishment or within 10 feet of any property line.
I. Drainage and seepage pits. Adequate drainage and seepage pits shall
be provided for all liquid wastes.
A. License or permit required. No person shall keep or maintain live
poultry or fowl, even for noncommercial purposes, without first having
obtained a license or permit for that purpose from the Division of
Health covering the premises intended to be so used.
B. The license or permit fee for keeping of poultry or other fowl shall be as
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The fee is intended to be an annual fee,
but when paid, shall cover only the balance of the calendar year during
which the same is so paid or payable. [Amended 3-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 2202; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
C. Coops and runs used to confine live poultry. All live poultry shall be
confined in coops or runs.
D. Construction to comply with zoning regulations. All coops or runs shall
be constructed in accordance with the regulations now or hereafter in
§ 105-17 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-18
103:132
force under Chapter 190, Land Use and Development. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
E. Location. No coop or run shall be located within 50 feet of any
neighbor's dwelling unit or place where people congregate or within
200 feet of any food or eating establishment or within 10 feet of any
property line and 10 feet from any dwelling within the property.
[Amended 11-28-2018 by Ord. No. 3681]
F. Sanitation requirements shall be as follows:
(1) All coops and runs and the entire surroundings of all such places
shall be kept clean at all times and shall be subjected to periodic
inspection by the Health Officer or his representative.
(2) Coops and runs shall be disinfected or otherwise treated when so
directed by the Division of Health.
(3) The floors of all coops shall be kept clean and dry at all times.
(4) All of the droppings shall be removed from each coop and buried,
removed from the premises or otherwise disposed of in a manner
approved by the Division of Health at least once each week.
G. Construction requirements. All coops shall be provided with concrete
floors unless it is a raised coop. A sufficient number of roosts to provide
roosting space for each individual specimen of poultry or fowl kept in
such coop and a sufficient number of properly placed drop boards
beneath each roost to catch all droppings excreted by such poultry or
other fowl while on the roost shall be provided. [Amended
11-28-2018 by Ord. No. 3681]
H. Number of specimens kept within a coop in relation to usable floor
space. No person shall keep more than one individual specimen of
poultry or fowl in any coop for each three square feet of usable floor
space including the run within such coop. [Amended 11-28-2018 by
Ord. No. 3681]
I. Food and food containers. All food for immediate consumption shall be
placed in suitable feeding troughs or similar containers and all other
food shall be stored in ratproof containers at all times. No poultry food
shall be scattered about any premises. Solid, easily cleanable surface
required under feeding area. [Amended 11-28-2018 by Ord. No.
3681]
J. Keeping of live poultry for sale. The provisions of this section shall not
be deemed to authorize the keeping of live poultry for sale or for the
preparation for sale.
K. Noisy fowl. No person shall keep any crowing rooster or screaming or
chattering fowl.
§ 105-18 AMUSEMENTS § 105-18
103:133
§ 105-19. Small animals.
L. Flying or running at large. No live poultry, pigeons or other fowl shall
be permitted to fly or run at large.
A. License required. No person shall keep small animals on any premises
within the Village unless a license for that purpose shall have been first
secured from the Division of Health covering the premises to be so
used.
B. Fee. The license fee for the keeping of small animals shall be as set
forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The fee is intended to be an annual fee, but,
when paid, it shall cover only the balance of the calendar year during
which the same is so paid or payable. [Amended 3-28-1989 by Ord.
No. 2202; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
C. Grounds for refusal to grant. No license for the keeping or raising of
such small animals shall be granted to any person when the keeping or
raising of such small animals, because of the nature or characteristics
thereof, would be detrimental to the general health of the residents of
the neighborhood of the premises sought to be so licensed.
D. Hutch or coop, minimum size. No person shall keep any small animals
in a hutch or coop of a size having less than eight square feet of floor
space and being less than two feet in height without special permission
from the Division of Health.
E. Sanitation requirements. Each hutch or coop shall be dry and
adequately ventilated and shall be cleaned daily and rebedded with
fresh straw, leaves or other absorbent material.
F. Location. No hutch or coop shall be less than 50 feet from any dwelling
nor less than 10 feet from all adjoining property lines.
G. Animals infected with contagious disease; immediate destruction;
cremation of carcass.
(1) No person shall keep any small animal infected with skin mange,
coccidiosis, parasitic worms or other diseases contagious to other
animals or human beings, and any such animal so infected shall
immediately be destroyed and the carcass cremated forthwith.
(2) Destruction or disinfection of hutch or coop. Any hutch or coop
wherein such infected animal as described in Subsection G(1), is
found and all adjoining hutches or coops shall be destroyed or
thoroughly disinfected with a germicide approved by the Division of
Health and under the direction of the Health Officer. The provisions
of this subsection shall not apply to any small animal under regular
professional treatment by a duly licensed veterinarian, but all such
provisions shall fully apply when such treatment shall be
discontinued without a full cure having been effected or when such
§ 105-18 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-19
103:134
veterinarian shall certify that, in his opinion, such cure cannot be
effected.
H. Running at large prohibited. No person shall allow any small animal to
run at large, but the same shall, at all times, be confined to the premises
for the keeping thereof.
§ 105-19 AMUSEMENTS § 105-19
103:135

ARTICLE IV
Kennels, Pet Shops and Animal Hospitals
§ 105-20. Kennel requirement.
The keeping of five animals or more per premises shall be deemed a kennel.
§ 105-21. License required.
No person shall operate a kennel, pet shop or an animal hospital without
having first obtained a license therefor from the Division of Health.
§ 105-22. Application.
All applications for licenses shall be made at the Office of the Division of
Health during regular office hours, and the fees for every license or permit
shall be paid in advance at the time of making the application therefor.
§ 105-23. Fees. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
The yearly fee for each license issued hereunder shall be as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees.
§ 105-24. Exemptions.
No fee for any license issued under this article shall be required of any
person declared by state law to be exempt from the payment of any such
fee.
§ 105-25. Investigation of applicant.
The granting of any license may be withheld at the direction of the Division
of Health, pending examination, investigation or inspection of the person
who or the premises which may be the subject matter of the license under
consideration.
§ 105-26. Grounds for refusal of license.
No license to operate a kennel, pet shop or animal hospital shall be granted
when the keeping of dogs, cats or animals, because of the location
surroundings and characteristics of the premises, would be detrimental or
likely to cause discomfort or annoyance to those residing or carrying on
business in the neighborhood.23
§ 105-27. Location requirements.
No license to operate a kennel, pet shop or animal hospital shall be granted
unless the building and premises are so located and equipped as to prevent
23.Editor's Note: Issuance of a kennel license is contingent upon compliance with the
applicable provisions of Ch. 190, Land Use and Development.
§ 105-20 AMUSEMENTS § 105-27
103:137
noise, stench and unsanitary conditions from arising or existing in the
operation thereof.
§ 105-28. Term of license; nontransferability. [Amended 6-28-1983
by Ord. No. 1891]
All licenses issued under this article shall be valid only for the balance of
the fiscal year in which they are issued, unless otherwise provided in this
article. No such license shall be transferable or assignable. Each license
issued hereunder shall expire on the last day of June in each year.
§ 105-29. Issuance of evidence by Division of Health.
The Division of Health shall evidence the granting of any license issued
by furnishing to the licensee a suitable card, sign, placard, disc, plate or
other writing which shall convey information concerning the nature of such
license, the serial number of the same, the name of the person to whom the
same has been issued, the year in which the same is so issued, the premises
so licensed, if that be material or required, and such other information as
the Division of Health may deem pertinent.
§ 105-30. Display of license.
Every license issued by the Division of Health shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place in the establishment, premises or other place for which
the same is issued for the period that such license shall be in force, unless
the Division of Health shall otherwise prescribe.
§ 105-31. Suspension of license.
A. Every license issued under this article may at any time during the term
for which the same is so issued be suspended by the Division of Health
or, in an emergency, by the Health Officer, pending a hearing to be
granted the holder thereof pursuant to a notice to show cause by the
Division why such license should not be suspended further or revoked.
B. No such license shall be suspended unless the Health Officer shall file
with the Division a complaint or charges evidencing one or more
violations of this article under which such license was originally issued.
C. Every suspension ordered under this section shall automatically
terminate two weeks from the date thereof unless the continuance of
such suspension shall be ordered by the Division, and then such
suspension shall continue only during the period of any such
continuance so ordered by the Division.
D. During the period of any such suspension or ordered continuance
thereof, every license so suspended shall be ineffective, and the holder
thereof shall, during the entire period of such suspension, cease the
operation of any business or discontinue every activity or use permitted
under the license suspended.
§ 105-27 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-32
103:138
§ 105-32. Revocation of license.
§ 105-33. Violations and penalties.
A. Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked at
any time by the Division of Health for just cause or if the license or any
of the employees, agents or servants of such licensee shall violate:
(1) Any of the provisions of this article.
(2) The Sanitary Code of the State Department of Health specifically
applicable to the subject matter for or upon which such license was
issued.
B. Before any license may be revoked, the holder thereof shall be given a
hearing and an opportunity to be heard on the complaint made or
violation charged against him.
C. The time and place for such hearing shall be fixed at the discretion of
the Division, provided that an unreasonable time shall not be permitted
to elapse between the date of any suspension of license and the date
fixed for the hearing.
D. Notice of the time and place of any hearing held under this section shall
be given by the Division to the holder of the license so involved, in
writing, and served either personally or sent to him by registered mail,
addressed to him at the address stated in the license.
E. A licensee who fails to appear at the time and place fixed for such
hearing shall not be entitled to any further hearing, and in that event,
his license may as a matter of course be forthwith revoked.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who shall do or
commit any act prohibited by the terms of this article; or do or commit
any act for which a license is required without having secured and
being in possession of a valid license at the time of the doing or
commission thereof; or omit to do or perform any act required by him to
be so done or performed by this article; or maintain any place,
establishment, vehicle, conveyance, equipment or article in violation of
any of the provisions of this article; or fail to maintain any condition,
equipment or facility required to be maintained by this article; or fail to
install any article of a particular type, kind, quality or specification
where such installation is required; or in any manner, by deed, act, act
of commission or act of omission, violate any one or more of the
provisions of this article; shall upon conviction thereof or upon
conviction of any violation of the provisions hereof, be subject to a
penalty or judgment of not more than $500 and, upon conviction and
refusal or neglect to pay the amount of such penalty or judgment, to be
committed to the county jail for a period of time not exceeding 90 days
or, if he shall have been twice convicted within the space of six months
of the violation of this article and due proof of that fact is made, he may
be imprisoned in the county jail or county workhouse for any number of
§ 105-32 AMUSEMENTS § 105-33
103:139
days not exceeding one day for each dollar of the penalty, in addition to
the imposition of the penalty prescribed above, all in the discretion of
the Municipal Judge or other officer before whom the complaint shall
be brought. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1953]
B. In the event that any violation of this article shall also be a violation of a
state law for which is provided a greater penalty or judgment than that
contained in this section, the Municipal Judge or trial judge before
whom any complaint is brought based upon such violation shall, in his
discretion, have the right to impose, in the place and in lieu of any
penalty provided for herein, that so provided in the state law which has
been so violated.
§ 105-33 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-33
103:140
ARTICLE V
Harboring Wild Animals
§ 105-34. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BOARD OF REVIEW — A board to consist of five members to be appointed
by the Village Manager with the approval of the Council, to hear and dispose
of appeals in accordance with the provisions of this article.
PLACE — Any plot, lot, house, garage, barn building or structure of any kind
or nature.
WILD ANIMAL — An animal of a species dangerous to human beings
or savage in nature, living ordinarily at large and not customarily made
tame or gentle by long continued association with man, without regard to
whether a specific animal is considered a pet or domesticated by its keeper
or possessor.
§ 105-35. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the keeping or harboring of wild
animals within the Village in order to protect the health and general welfare
of the populace of the Village and to keep public order and to prevent riot
and panic in case of fire or other emergencies.
§ 105-36. Prohibited acts.
No person shall hereafter keep, maintain, harbor or have in his possession
any wild animal in, at or upon any premises or place owned, leased or
otherwise occupied by him within the Village. No person shall hire, lease
or occupy any place within the Village for the purpose of keeping or
maintaining or harboring any wild animal.
§ 105-37. Removal procedure.
A. When the sanitarian shall hereafter have reason to believe that a wild
animal is being kept, maintained, harbored or possessed by any person
within the Village, he shall thereupon cause to be issued a notice to
such person of the classification of such animal as wild. Such notice
shall be sent by certified mail to such person at the post office address
of the place wherein or whereon such animal is being kept, maintained,
harbored or possessed. Such person shall thereupon have 15 days from
the date of mailing of such notice within which to cause the removal of
such wild animal from the Village or to file a notice of appeal from such
classification as herein provided.
B. For purposes of classification in accordance with the provisions of this
section, the sanitarian shall be governed by the definitions provided in
§ 105-34 as well as the purposes set forth in § 105-35.
§ 105-34 AMUSEMENTS § 105-38
103:141
§ 105-38. Board of Review; procedure.
There is hereby created a Board of Review to hear and dispose of all
appeals from the classification of wild animal. The Board is to consist of five
members to be appointed by the Village Manager with the approval of the
Council. Any person desiring to appeal from the classification of wild animal
shall, within 15 days from the date of notice of such classification, file a
notice of appeal, in writing, with the Board of Review. The Board of Review
shall convene for the purpose of considering such appeal within 45 days
from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. Notice of the hearing of such
appeal shall be made by certified mail at least 10 days prior to the hearing
to the person aggrieved at the post office address shown on the notice of
appeal. The Board of Review shall render a decision within 30 days from the
date of the hearing and cause notice thereof to be sent by certified mail to
the person aggrieved. In the event of a decision adverse to the appellant,
the wild animals shall be caused to be removed from the Village within 30
days of the date of mailing of such notice from the Board of Review. In
considering all appeals pursuant to the provisions of this article, the Board
of Review shall be governed by the definitions provided in § 105-34 as well
as the purposes set forth in § 105-35.
§ 105-38 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-38
103:142
ARTICLE VI
Rabies Control
§ 105-39. Report of suspected cases.
Whenever a dog, cat or other animal is infected or is suspected of being
infected with rabies or has been bitten by an animal known or suspected to
be infected with rabies, the owner or person in charge of any such animal
or every other person having knowledge thereof shall forthwith notify the
Division of Health. Such notification shall be in writing, signed by the
person making the same, and shall state where the animal or animals so
infected may be found.
§ 105-40. Confinement; notice.
§ 105-41. Examination of animals.
§ 105-42. Confinement or destruction of infected animals.
The owner or other person in charge of any dog, cat or other animal known
to be rabid or known to have been bitten by an animal known to have been
infected by or with rabies shall, upon notice by the Division of Health to do
so, either confine such animal for a period of six months or put or cause
such animal to be put to death.
A. Whenever the Division of Health or any officer thereof has reason to
believe or has been notified by the State Department that there is
danger that rabies may spread within the jurisdiction of such Division,
the Division or Health Officer shall serve a notice, in writing, upon all
persons within the jurisdiction of such Division, so far as the same may
be known to the Division or to such Health Officer, of any dog, requiring
such person to confine such dog.
B. Any and all other animals may be included in the notice last mentioned
whenever, in the opinion of the Board, such animal shall be so included.
C. In lieu of serving the written notice required to be given by this section,
one may be published in the official legal newspaper of the Village.
A. The Division of Health or the duly authorized agent of such Division
within its jurisdiction shall be permitted by the owner or person in
charge of a dog, cat or other animal which has attacked or bitten a
person to place the animal in quarantine at a designated pound for a
period of 10 days to determine whether the animal shows symptoms of
rabies. The cost of any confinement shall be paid by its owner.
B. No person shall refuse, obstruct or interfere with the Division in making
such examination.
§ 105-39 AMUSEMENTS § 105-43
103:143
§ 105-43. Certificate of release required.
Any animal confined under order of the local Division of Health shall not be
released until a certificate of release has been issued by such Board.
§ 105-43 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-43
103:144
ARTICLE VII
Cats
[Added 4-9-1991 by Ord. No. 2299]
§ 105-44. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person or agency designated by the
Village Manager or authorized by law to enforce the provisions of this
article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or
neutered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of four
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Department of Health of the Village of
Ridgewood or any persons designated by the Village Manager charged with
administering the issuance and revocation of permits and licenses under the
provisions of this article.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
VACCINATION — Inoculation against rabies performed by a licensed
veterinarian or such other person permitted by law to do the same under
the supervision of a veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium
of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization
published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians.
VETERINARIAN — Any person licensed to practice veterinary medicine by
any state of the United States.
§ 105-45. Rabies vaccination required.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall be the owner of
a cat of licensing age within the Village of Ridgewood unless such cat is
licensed and has a vaccination which was administered within the last
365 days or for which a valid vaccination certificate indicates an
expiration date occurring in the future. The provisions of this section do
not apply to cats held in a veterinary establishment where cats are
received or kept for diagnostic medical, surgical or other treatments.
§ 105-44 AMUSEMENTS § 105-45
103:145
§ 105-45.1. Holding cage rentals. [Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2381]
§ 105-46. License required.
B. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each cat which has been administered a vaccination in a form
recommended by the state.
C. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the Village of Ridgewood
Department of Health, upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate
stating that because of an infirmity or other physical condition or
regimen of therapy, the vaccination of such cat shall be deemed
inadvisable.
A. Cats owned by residents are required to be placed under strict
quarantine for a period of six months in instances where the cat has
been attacked by an animal of unknown origin and the cat did not have
a current rabies vaccination. The cat must be segregated from other
animals in the household, as well as humans residing therein. The
Village has authorized the construction of a cage to be utilized as a
temporary holding place for the cat in the owner's home until the owner
has constructed a cage for that purpose.
B. There is hereby authorized a rental charge as set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees, to be paid in advance by the resident to the Village of Ridgewood
for the utilization of the isolation cage. The isolation cage shall be
rented to a resident for a period not to exceed 14 days. During the
fourteen-day period, the resident shall cause to be constructed such
isolation cage or area as is necessary to quarantine the cat for the
period required by the Department of Health.
A. Cats must have a license number displayed. Any owner of a cat of
licensing age shall apply for and procure from the Village Department
of Health or other official designated by the Village Manager a license
for each cat owned, except as provided below. The license number shall
be displayed on any licensed cat. Acceptable methods of displaying the
license number shall include, but are not limited to, an official license
tag or sleeve securely affixed to a breakaway or elastic collar. License
tags or sleeves are not transferable. If a cat is tattooed with the owner's
social security number plus a letter uniquely identifying such cat and
such identifying tattoo is listed on the license application and vaccine
certificate, then no license number need be displayed.
B. Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat of
licensing age or of any cat which attains licensing age shall make
application for a license for such cat within 10 days after such
acquisition or age attainment. For a one-year cat license to be issued,
the cat owner must show to their municipal licensing authority proof
that a licensed veterinarian administered a rabies vaccine to the cat by
§ 105-45 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-46
103:146
providing a rabies vaccination certificate. The duration of immunity
from the most recent vaccination must extend through at least the
first 10 months of the twelve-month licensing period. Animals that
have a duration of immunity which expires prior to the ten-month
cutoff must receive a rabies booster vaccination prior to licensure.
This requirement will not apply to a nonresident keeping a cat within
the Village of Ridgewood for no longer than 30 days. [Amended
1-11-1994 by Ord. No. 2439; 1-8-2020 by Ord. No. 3759]
C. Cats brought into jurisdiction. Any person who shall bring or cause to
be brought into the Village of Ridgewood any cat and shall keep the
same or permit the same to be kept within the Village of Ridgewood for
a period of more than 30 days shall immediately apply for a license for
such cat, unless otherwise exempted under this article.
D. Application contents; preservation of information. The application shall
state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which a
license is sought, and whether it is of a long- or short-haired variety; the
date on which such cat was last vaccinated against rabies and the
expiration date of such vaccination if it is greater than one year from
the vaccination date; the name, street, post office address and
telephone number of the owner or the person who shall keep or harbor
such cat; and any tattoo which shall be used to uniquely identify such
cat. The information on said application and the registration number
issued for the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the
Village Department of Health or other official designated to license
cats.
E. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall be furnished by the
Village and shall be numbered serially and shall bear the year of
issuance and the name of the Village.
F. Evidence of rabies vaccination or certification of exemption;
requirement for license. The Village Department of Health or other
official designated by the Village Manager to license cats shall not grant
any such license for any cat unless the owner thereof provides evidence
that the cat to be licensed has been vaccinated or has been certified
exempt as provided by § 105-45 of this article.
G. License fee schedule. A license shall be issued after payment of a fee as
provided in the Village's general fee ordinance.24 [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375; 1-11-1994 by Ord. No. 2439]
H. Cat licenses shall expire January 30 of the licensing year. Licenses not
applied for before February 1 will be subject to a late charge as set
forth in Chapter 145, Fees, and subject to penalty provisions of the
Ridgewood Village Code.25 [Amended 1-11-1994 by Ord. No. 2439;
1-8-2020 by Ord. No. 3759]
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Fees.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I, for penalty provisions.
§ 105-46 AMUSEMENTS § 105-46
103:147
I. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
Village Department of Health may issue a duplicate license or
registration sleeve for that particular cat at a fee as provided in the
Village's general fee ordinance.26 [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
J. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any owner of
a cat upon the request of any health official, police officer, or animal
control officer.
K. Interfering with persons performing duties under this article. No
person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
L. Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other moneys collected
or received under the provisions of this article shall be forwarded to the
Treasurer of the municipality and shall be placed in a special account
separate from any of the other accounts of the municipality and shall be
used for the following purposes only: collecting, keeping and disposing
of cats liable to seizure; local prevention and control of rabies;
providing antirabies treatment under the direction of the local
Department of Health for any person known or suspected to have been
exposed to rabies; and administrating the provisions of this article. Any
unexpended balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained until the end of the third fiscal year following and may be used
for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of said third
fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there
shall be transferred from such special account to the general funds of
the municipality any amount then in such account which is in excess of
the total amount paid into the special account during the last two fiscal
years next preceding.
M. Sick or diseased cats. Management of domestic animals known or
suspected to have been bitten by a known or suspected rabid animal of
unknown origin shall be quarantined in accordance with Title 26 of the
New Jersey Statutes Annotated. The owner of a cat evidencing a change
in disposition or illness suggesting it may be rabid may be required to
have such cat examined by an approved veterinarian. Any cost incurred
in quarantining such cat or veterinary service examination shall be paid
for by the owner or harborer of such cat or cats.
N. A person may apply for a three-year license and registration tag
covering a three-year period for a spayed/neutered cat or unspayed/
unneutered cat, with proof of rabies vaccination good for 36 months of
the three-year licensing period. The fees for the three-year license are
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, as a license fee and registration tag.
Each three-year license shall expire during the month that the cat
rabies booster shot expires, which is stated in the license that was
issued. [Added 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 3510]
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Fees.
§ 105-46 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-47
103:148
§ 105-47. Annual canvass.
The Chief of Police of the Village shall annually cause a canvass of all cats
owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the Village and shall report
on or before May of each year to the Village Clerk, Village Department
of Health and, if required by law, to the State Department of Health the
result thereof, setting forth the names and addresses of persons owning,
keeping or harboring such cats; the number of licensed cats owned, kept
or harbored by each of said persons, together with the license numbers of
each of said cats; and also setting forth the names and addresses of persons
owning, keeping or harboring unlicensed cats, the number of unlicensed
cats owned, kept or harbored by each said person, together with a complete
description of each unlicensed cat.
§ 105-48. (Reserved)27
§ 105-49. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this article shall
be liable to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
I, of the Village Code.
27.Editor's Note: Former § 105-48, Reminder to be published and notices sent, was repealed
1-11-1994 by Ord. No. 2439.
§ 105-47 AMUSEMENTS § 105-49
103:149

ARTICLE VIII
Wildlife Feeding
[Added 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2965]
§ 105-50. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements to prohibit the
feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public park or on any other property
owned or operated by the Village of Ridgewood so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 105-51. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future; words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting, or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include the baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game
in accordance with applicable regulations.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 105-52. Prohibited acts and conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed, in any public park or on any other
real property owned or operated by the Village of Ridgewood, any wildlife.
§ 105-53. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Village of Ridgewood
Police Department, and/or the Construction Official, and/or the Health
Department Sanitarian, and/or the Director of Public Works or his/her
designated representative.
§ 105-54. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation. Chapter 105
of the Code of the Village of Ridgewood shall be modified by the addition
of Article VIII by this article to establish a minimum fine of $25 and a
maximum fine of $1,000 per violation.
§ 105-50 AMUSEMENTS § 105-54
103:151

ARTICLE IX
Sale of Dogs and Cats
[Added 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3553]
§ 105-55. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — An animal control center or animal shelter,
maintained by or under contract with any state, county or municipality,
whose mission and practice is, in whole or in part, the permanent rescue
and placement of animals in homes or other rescue organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any nonprofit organization which
has tax exempt status pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the United States
Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in part,
the permanent rescue and placement of animals in homes or other private
residential living structures.
KENNEL, PET SHOP OR POUND — Any business, shop, establishment,
property or place which harbors, keeps or maintains five or more dogs,
cats or similar animals that can be kept as pets or offers to sell any of
the aforesaid animals to the general public at retail. Such definition is not
inclusive of an animal care facility or an animal rescue organization defined
above.
§ 105-56. Restrictions on Sales.
§ 105-57. Dogs to be restrained.
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, dog shelter or pound shall be permitted
off such premises except on a leash or in a crate or under safe control.
A. Any pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet
shop has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
(1) An animal care facility.
(2) An animal rescue organization.
B. Any pet shop shall not offer for sale any dog or cat that is younger than
eight weeks old.
§ 105-55 AMUSEMENTS § 105-57
103:153

ARTICLE X
Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer
[Added 8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 3654]
§ 105-58. Position established; requirements; conditions.
A. The position of Municipal Humane Law Enforcement Officer(s)
(MHLEO) be and hereby is established.
B. The MHLEO appointed as such must be named as an individual, not an
entity or company, and is permitted to be employed by a third party or
outside company or entity. The appointment of the individual person
becomes null and void if and when the individual person appointed
leaves the position of MHLEO.
C. Until the time when the Office of the Bergen County Prosecutor
prepares and issues directives or policy for the Municipal Humane Law
Enforcement Officers, the policies established by the Office's Animal
Cruelty Task Force shall be used as the Model for the Ridgewood
MHLEO.
D. The MHLEO will be responsible for:
(1) The enforcement of all animal welfare or animal cruelty laws of the
state and ordinances of the municipality;
(2) The investigation and signing of complaints concerning a violation
of an animal welfare or animal cruelty law of the state or ordinance
of the municipality;
(3) Shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 22 of Title 4 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes and any other such powers and duties
required under ordinance or at law.
E. While the position established herein is recognized as an "unfunded
state mandate," all summonses issued for violations of the state animal
cruelty laws will be heard in Municipal Court and the fines shall be
distributed in accordance with the directives of the Administrative
Office of the Courts guidelines.
F. The individual to be appointed to the MHLEO position shall be subject
to any and all background investigations deemed appropriate by the
Village prior to the individual's appointment. Upon appointment, the
appropriate identification badge shall be issued to the appointed
person.
G. The position of Animal Control Officer (either in-house or outside
contractors) shall be designated as Humane Law Enforcement Officers.
H. Members of the Ridgewood Police Department may be dispatched to
assist the MHLEO and shall provide assistance in accordance with
Department guidelines and policy.
§ 105-58 AMUSEMENTS § 105-58
103:155
I. The MHLEO shall be supervised by and under the authority of Chief of
Police of the Village or designee.
§ 105-58 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 105-58
103:156
Chapter 107
AUCTIONS AND SPECIAL SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Businesses and occupations — See Ch. 117.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Garage sales — See Ch. 163.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 218.
Sidewalk sales — See Ch. 239.
§ 107-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AUCTIONS and AUCTION BUSINESS — The business of offering for sale
and selling at public sale personal property to one who offers to pay the
highest bid price therefor.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Any goods, wares, work of art, commodity, thing,
chattel or merchandise.
PUBLISH — Any and all means of conveying to the public notice of sale or
notice of intention to conduct a special sale, oral, written or printed.
SPECIAL SALE — Any sale of personal property or the publishing of a sale
or an offering for sale thereof to the public by forced sales at reduced
prices, such as insurance, bankruptcy, insolvency or sales of personal
property damaged by fire, smoke or water. It shall also include going-outof-
business, loss-of-lease or termination-of-business sales so advertised and
published so as to reasonably convey to the public that, upon the disposal
of the stock of goods on hand, the business will be discontinued and cease.
§ 107-2. Prohibited acts.
Except as hereinafter permitted, no person shall conduct an auction or
engage in the auction business or conduct a special sale in the Village.
§ 107-3. License required.
An auction or special sale may be conducted in the Village when a license
therefor has been obtained as provided in this chapter.
§ 107-4. Application for license.
A. Application for a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be made to the Village Clerk at least 30 days prior to the
commencement of the activities sought to be licensed and shall state:
(1) The full name and address of the applicant.
§ 105-58 AUCTIONS AND SPECIAL SALES § 107-4
107:157
(2) The full name and address of any person other than the applicant
who will conduct the auction or special sale.
(3) The residence address for three preceding years of the applicant.
(4) The residence address for three preceding years of all persons to
conduct the auction or special sale.
(5) Whether an applicant or person to conduct the auction or special
sale has ever been convicted of a crime or any violation of the New
Jersey Criminal Code or any municipal ordinance relating to the
conduct of auction sales. If the applicant is a corporation, the
information shall be furnished for each officer or director thereof
and for any person owning 10% or more of the stock of said
corporation.
(6) The date, place and time of the conduct of such auction or special
sale, if known. If not known, said information shall be furnished to
the Village Clerk at least three days prior to the date of the conduct
of such auction or special sale.
(7) The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, of the
premises where such auction or such special sale is to be held and
the effective date of termination of such occupancy.
(8) An itemized list of the personal property to be offered for sale and
the place where such personal property was purchased or
acquired, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition to
the extent known at the time of the application; if not known at the
time of application, such information shall be furnished to the
Village Clerk within three days after the conduct of the sale.
(9) The type of license applied for.
B. All such applications shall thereafter be delivered to the Director of the
Police Department of the Village for investigation of the applicant and
all persons named in the application within a reasonable time not to
exceed 10 days thereafter. After completion of the investigation, the
Director of the Police Department shall cause to be endorsed on such
application his approval or disapproval thereof, returning the same to
the Village Clerk. In the event of a disapproval of such application, the
reason or reasons therefor shall be stated on such application, but any
license fee hereinafter required shall be retained as and for an
investigation fee to which the Village shall be entitled notwithstanding
any refusal to issue a license hereunder.
C. The Director of Police or the Village Clerk may refuse to issue a license
hereunder if:
(1) The application is incomplete, the answers are not responsive to
the questions set forth on the application or the application of the
§ 107-4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 107-4
107:158
§ 107-5. Issuance of license; term; renewability; fee; revocation.
[Amended10-13-1992byOrd. No. 2375]
Licenses for auctions shall be issued for a period of three consecutive
days or on an annual basis as applied for in accord with the fee schedule.
Licenses for special sales and other than termination-of-business sales shall
be issued for a period covering three consecutive days. Licenses for
termination-of-business sales shall be issued for a period of 30 consecutive
days. No license shall be issued unless the application therefor is
accompanied by a fee payable to the Village in an amount as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees. No going-out-of-business sale shall continue for longer
than 90 days. In the event that a license is applied for and issued for
auction sales for a calendar year, the applicant shall notify the Village Clerk,
in writing, at least three business days prior to each auction, furnishing
the information required under § 107-4A(2), (4), (5), (6), (7) and (8) of the
Village Code.
§ 107-6. Display of license.
Upon commencement of any auction or special sale, the license therefor
shall be conspicuously displayed near the entrance to the premises.
§ 107-7. Sale limited to merchandise described in application.
No additional merchandise of the type or kind described in the original
application shall be added to the inventory or list of personal property to
be offered for sale, except as herein set forth, and no special sale of the
type of fire, removal or going-out-of-business shall be permitted except for
applicant contains any false, fraudulent or misleading material
statement.
(2) The applicant has been convicted of a violation of an ordinance
relating to the conduct of auctions or special sales or has previously
conducted sales in the Village of Ridgewood or elsewhere in bad
faith or during the conduct of said sales has made any false,
fraudulent or misleading material statement.
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a crime or other violation
involving moral turpitude.
D. Any license may be suspended or revoked by the Village Manager for
any of the aforementioned reasons.
E. Any applicant aggrieved by the action of the Director of Police, the
Village Clerk or the Village Manager shall have the right to file a written
appeal to the Village Manager within 10 business days after notice of
the action complained of has been mailed to the applicant by regular
mail at the address set forth in the application. The Village Manager
shall conduct a public hearing relative to the appeal, which hearing
shall be conducted in a summary manner.
§ 107-4 AUCTIONS AND SPECIAL SALES § 107-7
107:159
personal property involved in such fire, removal or going out of business in
the premises where such sale shall be conducted, it being the intention of
this provision to protect the public against fraud or deception in such sales,
unless a complete report is filed with the Village Clerk within three days of
the date of conduct of said sale.
§ 107-8. Display of signs.
No poster, sign or other display or advertising matter shall be exhibited
upon the windows or doors of the premises upon which such auction or
special sale shall be conducted so as to prevent the interior thereof from
being visible and observable from the street fronting the same and upon the
side street, if such premises are located upon a corner property, for police
and fire detection purposes.
§ 107-9. Contents of published notice.
In the publishing of any notice of sale under this chapter, there shall be
stated the number and the date of the license required by this chapter and
the expiration date thereof.
§ 107-10. Applicability to ordered sales.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sale which is to be held
under a judicial order, judgment or decree or a writ issuing out of any court
or to enforce any lawful lien or power of sale, whether by judicial process or
not.
§ 107-11. Hours.
No sale shall be conducted before 10:00 a.m. nor shall any sale terminate
after 10:00 p.m. without the applicant first having obtained the permission
of the Village Manager, in writing.
Chapter 112
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Skateboards — See Ch. 241.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 249.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 265.
§ 112-1. Purpose.
It is hereby determined to be in the public interest and a matter of the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village of Ridgewood
to establish a program for annual registration of bicycles in the Village
in order to assure minimum safety training for owners and operators of
§ 107-7 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 112-1
112:160
bicycles and to assist the Department of Police in the return of lost or stolen
bicycles.
§ 112-2. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BICYCLE — A vehicle having two or more wheels with tires connected by
a frame and intended to be propelled by human power on public streets or
highways.
§ 112-3. Responsibilities of Police Department. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
It shall be the function and responsibility of the Police Department to
conduct registration of residents' bicycles as hereinafter provided and in
connection therewith to develop and conduct programs of bicycle safety
training for school-age children of the Village as a prerequisite to
registration.
§ 112-4. Registration tag required.
It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the Village to ride or propel a
bicycle upon any public way in the Village without having attached to such
bicycle a registration tag as hereinafter provided.
§ 112-5. Application for registration; fee; issuance;
nontransferability.
A. Application for a registration tag shall, except as hereinafter provided,
be made to the Police Department, upon forms to be provided therefor
at Village Hall. Each applicant shall be required to demonstrate
familiarity with pertinent traffic and equipment regulations of Title 39
of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated and movement signals prior to
issuance. A fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, shall be charged for
each registration, original, transfer or renewal, to defray the cost of
administration of the program. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
B. Registration shall be made on an annual basis.
C. The Police Department will conduct annual registrations as designated
from time to time on the Village school grounds. No registration tags
will be affixed to any bicycle not in safe mechanical riding condition.
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
D. Bicycles not registered by the Police Department registration must be
taken to Village Hall for registration. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
E. Upon the transfer of ownership of any bicycle, the original owner shall
remove the registration tag therefrom and report the transfer to the
§ 112-1 BICYCLES § 112-5
112:161
§ 112-6. Compliance with statutes required.
All persons riding or propelling bicycles upon any street or other public
highway or place in the Village shall observe all the rules and regulations as
promulgated by the terms of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 112-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon first offense,
be given a warning. Report of such violation and warning shall be given to
the Police Department, which shall maintain a record thereof. Conviction
of violation of any provision hereof after a warning has been received shall
subject the offender to a fine not to exceed $25.
Chapter 114
BODY ART
GENERAL REFERENCES
Businesses and occupations — See Ch. 117.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
§ 114-1. Findings and purpose.
The Village Council finds that the regulation of body art establishments
within the Village of Ridgewood is required in order to protect the public
health, welfare and safety. The purpose of this chapter is to establish
a procedure for the proper review and approval of plans for body art
establishments and to require the inspections and licensing of body art
Police Department on forms provided therefor at the Village Hall, giving
the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold
or transferred (turning in the old tag to the Police Department), or
the licensee's registration tag may be transferred to his replacement
bicycle without additional fee upon application to the Police
Department giving the license number and make and frame number of
both the original and replacement bicycle. Such reports shall be made
within seven days of the date of the sale or transfer. The purchaser or
receiver of the transferred bicycle shall secure a registration tag in the
manner provided in this chapter. Proof of ownership may be required
by the Police Department. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
F. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or maliciously to remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame or alter any
registration tag during the time in which such registration tag is
operative.
§ 112-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 114-1
114:162
establishments by the Department of Health of the Village of Ridgewood in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:27 et seq.
§ 114-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment in permitted
establishments by operators utilizing, but not limited to, the following
techniques:
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any place or premises, whether public or
private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the practices
of body art, whether or not for profit, are performed.
BODY PIERCING — Puncturing or penetration of the skin of a person
using presterilized single-use needles and the insertion of presterilized or
disinfected jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — The Department of Health of the Village of
Ridgewood.
ESTABLISHMENT — A physical place of business, permanent in nature;
includes all areas used by a body art technician and clients, including, but
not limited to, treatment areas and waiting/reception area.
OPERATOR — Includes the owner or the owner's designee having
ownership, control or custody of any place of business or employment and
who manages the day-to-day operations of the body art establishment.
PERMANENT COSMETICS — The implanting of inert pigments, colors, and/
or dyes intradermally which results in permanent alteration of tissue to gain
a cosmetic effect.
PERMIT — Written approval by the Department of Health of the Village of
Ridgewood to operate a body art establishment.
PRACTITIONER — Any person who performs the act of tattooing,
permanent cosmetics and/or ear and body piercing.
TATTOOING — Any method of placing ink or other inert pigment into or
under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument
used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or
mucosa. This includes all forms of permanent cosmetics.
§ 114-3. Terms not defined.
Whenever a term is not defined in this chapter, it is intended to have the
meaning set forth in N.J.A.C. 8:27-1.3. In the event of conflict between
A. Body piercing;
B. Tattooing; and
C. Permanent cosmetics.
§ 114-1 BODY ART § 114-3
114:163
the definition in this chapter and that contained in said regulations, the
definition in said regulations shall apply.
§ 114-4. Approval to operate.
§ 114-5. Application procedure.
A. No body art establishment shall be permitted to open or, in the event
such establishment is open at the time of adoption of this chapter,
continue to be open for operation until the Department of Health of the
Village of Ridgewood has given formal approval by issuance of an
appropriate license. This license shall be renewed annually. The license
period shall be from January 1 to December 31 of each year. In the
event that a license is issued to become effective after July 1 of any
calendar year, said license shall expire on December 31 of that year.
Fees for the licenses shall be as hereinafter set forth in § 114-8.
(1) The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the
premises where it may readily be observed by all clients.
(2) No person shall operate a body art establishment whose license has
been suspended.
(3) Proof of professional malpractice liability insurance for each
practitioner shall be provided to the Department of Health of the
Village of Ridgewood as part of the initial and renewal license.
(4) The operator shall provide a current copy of a negative biological
indicator test result to the Department of Health of the Village of
Ridgewood as part of the initial license application.
B. Establishments in operation at the time of adoption of this chapter shall
be required to obtain a license within 30 days of the effective date of
this chapter. There shall be a late charge as hereinafter set forth in the
event that this subsection is violated or in the event that a renewal
license is not applied for within the month of January.
C. Licenses are not transferable.
A. Any person desiring to construct, expand, alter, or operate a permanent
cosmetic, tattooing, or ear or body piercing establishment shall apply in
writing on the forms prescribed by the Department of Health of the
Village of Ridgewood for review and approval before such construction,
expansion, alteration or operation is begun. Such application shall
include the following information:
(1) The applicant's legal name, home address and telephone number,
full business name, business address, post office address and
telephone number. The application shall also include whether the
applicant is an individual, partnership, firm or corporation. If the
applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners
shall be included on the application. If the applicant is a
§ 114-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 114-5
114:164
§ 114-6. Review of plans.
The Department of Health of the Village of Ridgewood shall review the
application for compliance with all the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:27-2.1 to
include the final plans, specifications, and reports and shall either approve
or disapprove of the application in writing within 30 business days from the
date of submission to the Department of Health of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 114-7. Denial of approval.
Persons denied approval shall be notified in writing by the Department of
Health of the Village of Ridgewood. Such notice shall specify the reason(s)
for the action, and shall give the person(s) denied approval the opportunity
for a hearing before the Village Manager of the Village of Ridgewood within
a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 business days from the date the health
authority denied approval of the application.
corporation, the names and addresses of all corporate officers shall
be included on the application.
(2) Plans and specifications shall illustrate the location of the proposed
establishment and a floor plan of the establishment as it is
proposed to be operated. An exact inventory of all processing
equipment as it is to be used shall be included. Plans shall indicate
the layout of the reception area, the procedure areas, the cleaning
and sterilization area, the storage area and the toilet facilities.
(3) A statement of approval from the municipal agency responsible for
the administration of planning and zoning ordinances for the
proposed construction or expansion of the body art establishment.
(4) A complete description of all services to be provided, the proposed
hours of operation, the name of the operator and the names of all
practitioners and their exact duties, a copy of the informed consent
for each procedure.
(5) The names and addresses of all manufacturers of processing
equipment, instruments, jewelry, and inks used for any and all body
art procedures.
(6) The make, model and serial number of the applicant's steam
autoclave shall be printed on the back of a photograph of the
autoclave.
(7) A copy of the manufacturer's specifications for operation of the
autoclave.
B. A licensed establishment shall only permit those persons who have
successfully completed the forty-hour training program approved by
the Society of Permanent Cosmetics Professionals or the International
Micropigmentation Association to practice in the licensed
establishment.
§ 114-5 BODY ART § 114-8
114:165
§ 114-8. Fees.
The fee for a license required pursuant to § 114-4 above shall be as set forth
in Chapter 145, Fees. Chapter 145 of the Ridgewood Village Code is hereby
amended to include a fee for the annual license and a fee for the license
issued effective July 1 of any calendar year. The late charge for applying
for any license more than 30 days after the renewal date is as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees.
§ 114-9. Change of information notification requirements.
Facility license holders shall notify the Department of Health of the Village
of Ridgewood by mail within five calendar days of a change in the following
information:
§ 114-10. Prohibitions.
A. The business name or ownership;
B. The area code and telephone number;
C. An address change resulting from city or postal service action;
D. License status, whether from active to inactive practice or from inactive
to active practice;
E. Closure or sale of a facility; or
F. A change in procedures or personnel.
A. A person who violates a prohibition under this section shall be subject
to enforcement action pursuant to this chapter, Chapter 8 of the New
Jersey State Sanitary Code, civil penalties as provided by N.J.S.A.
26:1A-10 and all other applicable laws and/or injunctive action as
provided by law.
(1) Implants under the skin shall not be performed in a body art
establishment.
(2) Scarification such as branding and cutting shall not be performed
in a body art establishment.
(3) No person shall perform any body piercing procedure upon a
person under 18 years of age, without the presence, written
consent and proper photo identification of a parent or legal
guardian. The body piercing procedure may be performed upon a
person under 18 years of age, if said person proves that he or she is
an emancipated minor.
(4) No person shall perform genital piercing upon a person under 18
years of age, regardless of parental consent.
§ 114-8 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 114-10
114:166
§ 114-11. Insurance requirements.
Each practitioner shall maintain current professional malpractice liability
insurance.
§ 114-12. Inspection.
The Department of Health of the Village of Ridgewood shall inspect every
body art establishment as often as the Department of Health deems
necessary using an inspection report form approved by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services.
§ 114-13. Criteria for closure.
(5) No tattoo or permanent cosmetics shall be applied to any person
under 18 years of age, without the presence, written consent and
proper photo identification of a parent or legal guardian.
(6) No person shall practice or attempt to practice body art in an
unlicensed facility.
(7) No person shall operate a facility unless it is at all times under the
direct supervision of an operator.
(8) No person shall display a sign or in any way advertise or purport to
be a body art practitioner or to be engaged in the business of body
art without first obtaining a license for the facility from the
Department of Health of the Village of Ridgewood.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:27-9.1, piercing of the ear lobe
only shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
A. A representative of the Department of Health of the Village of
Ridgewood shall provide proper identification.
B. The operator shall permit access to all parts of the establishment, and
all pertinent records required for the inspection shall be made available
to the Department of Health of the Village of Ridgewood representative
for review.
C. An inspection report shall identify in a narrative form any violations of
N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq. and shall be cross-referenced to the section of the
regulations being violated.
D. Results of the inspection shall be made available to the public upon
request.
A. The approval or license of any person to operate a body art
establishment may be suspended at any time, when in the opinion of the
Department of Health of the Village of Ridgewood such action is
necessary to abate a present or threatened menace to the public health.
B. The following shall be reason(s) for closure:
§ 114-10 BODY ART § 114-13
114:167
(1) Failure or lack of properly functioning equipment;
(2) Unsanitary or unsafe conditions which may adversely impact the
health of the public;
(3) The Department of Health of the Village of Ridgewood has
reasonable cause to suspect that a communicable disease is, or
may be, transmitted by an operator/practitioner.
(4) The practitioner(s) has demonstrated gross incompetence in
performing body piercing, ear piercing, tattooing, or
micropigmentation;
(5) The owner obtained or attempted to obtain a license by means of
fraud, misrepresentation or concealment;
(6) The owner or practitioner(s) has been convicted in this or any other
state of a crime directly related to the practice of tattooing,
micropigmentation, body piercing or ear piercing;
(7) The owner or practitioner(s) has permitted a genital piercing upon
a person under 18 years of age; and
(8) The operator has failed to prevent implants, branding, and cutting
to be performed in a body art establishment.
(9) The establishment repeatedly has critical violations, such as, but
not limited to, untrained personnel, unsanitary conditions,
improper functioning of equipment, or employing improper
procedures which could result in transmitting of infection or
disease.
(10) Personnel performing such body art procedures do not possess the
required training in accord with N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq.
C. The following shall be cause for a suspension of a minimum of seven
days:
(1) Failure to report to the Department of Health of the Village of
Ridgewood within 24 hours any infection or injury requiring
medical referral;
(2) Performing body art procedures on any person under the age of 18
years of age, without the presence, written consent and proper
identification of a parent or legal guardian;
(3) Failure to notify the Department of Health of the Village of
Ridgewood within 24 hours of positive biological indicate test
result of the autoclave; and
(4) Using an ear piercing instrument for any part of the body other
than the ear lobes and trailing edge of the ear.
§ 114-13 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 114-14
114:168
§ 114-14. Administration and enforcement.
The Department of Health of the Village of Ridgewood is authorized to
administer the provisions of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall
be enforced by the Department of Health of the Village of Ridgewood or any
other individual designated by the Department of Health of the Village of
Ridgewood.
§ 114-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who shall
refuse to comply with a lawful order or directive of the Department of
Health of the Village of Ridgewood shall be liable for penalties as provided
by N.J.S.A. 26:1A-10 and all other applicable laws and/or injunctive action
as provided by law, or as provided by the penalty section of the Village Code
of the Village of Ridgewood.
Chapter 115
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish, refuse and recycling — See
Ch. 165.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 223.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 260.
§ 115-1. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.13 and 40:48-2.14.
§ 115-2. Notice to remove.
In the event that the Director of Buildings and Inspections or his designated
agent finds that it is necessary and expedient for the preservation of the
public health, safety or general welfare, or to eliminate a fire hazard, to
remove from any lands situate in the Village of Ridgewood or destroy
thereon any brush, weeds, including ragweed, dead and dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris, the
Director of Buildings and Inspections or his designated agent is hereby
authorized and directed to notify, in writing, the owner and, if occupied
by a tenant, the tenant or tenants thereof, to remove or destroy the same.
The notice shall contain a copy of this chapter. If the owner or tenant does
not remove or destroy the same within 10 days after written notice from
the Department of Buildings and Inspections, the Department of Buildings
and Inspections is hereby authorized and directed to cause the offending
material to be removed or destroyed.
§ 114-14 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 115-3
115:169
§ 115-3. Appeals.
Any owner or tenant affected by an order of the Director of Buildings and
Inspections hereunder shall have the right, within the ten-day notification
period, to file an appeal from the order of the Department of Buildings
and Inspections to the Village Manager. The appeal shall be in writing and
the Village Manager shall set the matter down for hearing in a summary
manner. The Village Manager shall have the authority to affirm, deny or
modify the order of the Director of Buildings and Inspections. The decision
of the Village Manager shall be in writing and, if action by the owner or
tenant is required thereby, the Village Manager shall furnish the owner or
tenant an additional period of time up to a maximum of 10 days to comply.
Failure of the owner or tenant to comply within said period shall authorize
the Department of Buildings and Inspections to move forthwith in accord
with the terms of this chapter.
§ 115-4. Removal by Village; costs to become lien.
Chapter 117
BUSINESSES AND OCCUPATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Body art — See Ch. 114.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Food and food-handling establishments — See
Ch. 156.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
Payment of taxes prior to issuance of license
or permit — See Ch. 254, Art. I.
A. In the event that any of the aforementioned are removed or destroyed
by the Village of Ridgewood, the Department of Buildings and
Inspections shall certify the costs thereof to the governing body, which
shall review the cost and if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown
thereon to be charged as a lien against said lands.
B. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon the lands
and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon said lands and shall bear interest at the same
rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers
and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 115-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 115-4
115:170
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 117-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ADVERTISE or ADVERTISING — Any form of solicitation, promotion,
and communication for marketing, used to solicit, encourage, persuade,
or manipulate viewers, readers, or listeners into contacting for goods
and/or services in violation of this chapter, as same may be viewed
through various media including, but not limited to, newspapers,
magazines, flyers, handbills, pamphlets, commercials, radio, direct
mail, internet websites, or text or other electronic messages for the
purpose of establishing occupancies or uses of rental property, for
consideration, which are prohibited by this chapter.[Added 1-11-2017
by Ord. No. 3570]
BOARDING HOME FOR CHILDREN — Any house or establishment
where children are boarded or cared for, whether for one day or part
thereof or a longer period, by or under supervision of persons not close
relatives of such children for compensation or as a business.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A private housing or dwelling unit where the
owner, tenant or occupant thereof is engaged in keeping two or more
boarders not related to him by blood or marriage for a part of a day or
longer period and in serving food to some or all of such lodgers under
expressed contract or rate of payment.
CLEANING — The thorough removal of contaminating material.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES — Any infectious, contagious or
communicable diseases so declared or defined by law or by this chapter
or which has been or may hereafter be declared as "communicable
diseases" by the State Department of Health.
DISINFECTION — The application of any disinfected materials to
infected materials in sufficient concentration and for a sufficient length
of time to destroy pathogenic organisms.
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof which is occupied or is
intended to be occupied as a residence or sleeping place of one or more
individuals, families or households.
FOOD — Includes any article used for food or beverage for humans
or other animals and every ingredient therein, including, without
limitation, all confectionery, condiments, flavorings and other
components of any such article.[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer or his designated
representatives.
§ 117-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 117-1
115:171
HOTEL — A private housing or dwelling unit open to the public where
the owner, tenant or occupant is engaged in keeping two or more guests
for a part of a day or a longer period under expressed contract or
agreed rate of payment.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — Constitutes a family-type situation, involving
one or more persons, living together that exhibit the kind of stability,
permanency and functional lifestyle equivalent to that of a traditional
family unit, as further described in the applicable reported and
unreported decisions of the New Jersey Superior Court.[Added
1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 3570]
LODGING HOUSE — A private dwelling unit where the owner, tenant
or occupant is engaged in keeping two or more lodgers not related to
him by blood or marriage for a part of a day or longer period under
expressed contract or agreed rate of payment.
MATERNITY HOME — Any home, house or other place conducted or
maintained by any person advertised or held out by such person as
a maternity or obstetrical home, sanitarium or place where one or
more women during pregnancy, labor or lying-in period are attended or
intend to be attended professionally or otherwise during any pregnancy,
labor or lying-in period.
NURSING HOME or CONVALESCENT HOME — Any home, house or
other place conducted or maintained by any person advertised or held
out by such person as a rest home, sanitarium or place where one or
more persons are cared for or attended during a convalescent period or
for the attending of the aged.
OCCUPANT — Any individual inhabiting, using, living, gathering,
entertaining, being entertained as a guest, or sleeping in a dwelling or
a portion thereof, or having other permission or possessory rights or
interest in the dwelling.[Added 1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 3570]
OWNER — Any person(s) or entity(ies), association, limited liability
company, corporation, or partnership, or any combination, who legally
use, possess, own, lease, sublease or license (including an operator,
principal, shareholder, director, agent, or employee, individually or
collectively) that has charge, care, control, or participates in the
expenses and/or profit of a dwelling unit pursuant to a written or
unwritten agreement, rental, lease, license, use, occupancy agreement
or any other agreement.[Added 1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 3570]
PERMIT or LICENSE — A duly authorized permit or license of the
Village issued in accordance with this chapter.
PROPERTY or PREMISES — Unless restricted or limited by the context
to either real or personal property shall include both.
QUARANTINE — The restriction of movement of any person who has
been exposed to a communicable disease by confining such person to a
restricted area and the exclusion of other persons from that area.
§ 117-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 117-1
115:172
§ 117-2. Applications and fees. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No.
1954; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375; 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 2523]
All applications for licenses, permits or health certificates as required by
this chapter shall be made at the Office of the Division of Health during
regular office hours, and the fees for every license, permit or health
certificate shall be paid in advance at the time of making the application
therefor. If a license application is submitted more than 30 days after the
due date, a late charge as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, shall be assessed
and collected, and an additional late charge in the same amount shall be due
and payable for every thirty-day additional period thereafter. In the event
that any license, permit or health certificate required by this chapter is
suspended or revoked but is thereafter reinstated, said reinstatement shall
be accompanied by payment by the licensee, permit holder or holder of the
health certificate of a sum equal to a full year's fee for such license, permit
or health certificate.
§ 117-3. Investigation of applicant or premises.
The granting of any license, permit or health certificate may be withheld, at
the direction of the Division of Health, pending examination, investigation
or inspection of the person who or the premises which may be the subject
matter of the license, permit or health certificate under consideration.
§ 117-4. Exemption from application fees.
No fee for any license, permit or health certificate issued under this chapter
shall be required of any person declared by state law to be exempt from the
payment of any such fee.
REGULATIONS — Any regulations, whether general or special, which
the Division of Health may from time to time lawfully adopt and issue.
SANITARIAN — Includes every officer appointed by the Division of
Health to aid in the enforcement of the sanitary laws of the state
or to aid in the enforcement of the applicable rules, regulations and
ordinances of the Division of Health, excepting the Health Officer,
Secretary, Registrar or other persons performing principally clerical
duties.
STATE BOARD and STATE DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Public
Health Council or State Department of Health or any successor agency
thereto.
TENANT — Any person occupying any house, building or portion
thereof which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as a
house, residence or a business establishment.
B. It is intended that the terms "license" and "permit," wherever used
within this chapter, be synonymous if, in the interpretation of any part
hereof, such synonym is required to carry out the manifest intent and
purpose of this chapter.
§ 117-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 117-5
115:173
§ 117-5. Term of license; nontransferability.
All licenses, permits or health certificates issued under this chapter shall
be valid only for the balance of the calendar year in which they are issued,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter. No such license, permit or health
certificate shall be transferable or assignable.
§ 117-6. Issuance of evidence by Division of Health.
The Division of Health shall evidence the granting of any license, permit or
health certificate issued by furnishing to the licensee, permittee or health
certificate holder a suitable card, sign, placard, disc, plate or other writing
which shall convey information concerning the nature of such license,
permit or health certificate, the serial number of the same, the name of the
person to whom the same has been issued, the year in which the same is so
issued, the premises so licensed, if that be material or required, and such
other information as the Division may deem pertinent.
§ 117-7. Display of license.
Every license, permit or health certificate issued by the Division of Health
shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the establishment, premises or
other place for which the same is issued for the period that such license,
permit or health certificate shall be in force, unless the Board shall
otherwise prescribe.
§ 117-8. Suspension of license.
A. Every license, permit or health certificate issued under this chapter
may, at any time during the term for which the same is so issued, be
suspended by the Division of Health or, in an emergency, by the Health
Officer, pending a hearing to be granted the holder thereof, pursuant to
a notice to show cause by the Division why such license, permit or
health certificate should not be suspended further or revoked.
B. No such license, permit or health certificate shall be suspended unless
the Health Officer shall file with the Division a complaint or charges
evidencing one or more violations of this chapter under which such
license, permit or health certificate was originally issued.
C. Every suspension ordered under this section shall automatically
terminate two weeks from the date thereof unless the continuance of
such suspension shall be ordered by the Division, and then such
suspension shall continue only during the period of any such
continuance so ordered by the Division.
D. During the period of any such suspension or ordered continuance
thereof, every license, permit or health certificate so suspended shall be
ineffective, and the holder thereof shall, during the entire period of
such suspension, cease the operation of any business or discontinue
§ 117-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 117-8
115:174
§ 117-9. Revocation of license.
§ 117-10. Inspection of licensed establishments.
every activity or use permitted under the license, permit or health
certificate suspended.
A. Any license, permit or health certificate issued under the provisions of
this chapter may be revoked at any time by the Division of Health for
just cause or if the licensee, permittee or health certificate holder or
any of the employees, agents or servants of such licensee, permittee or
health certificate holder shall violate:
(1) Any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Sanitary Code of the State Department of Health specifically
applicable to the subject matter for or upon which such license,
permit or health certificate was issued.
B. Before any license, permit or health certificate may be revoked, the
holder thereof shall be given a hearing and an opportunity to be heard
on the complaint made or violation charged against him.
C. The time and place for such hearing shall be fixed at the discretion of
the Division, provided that an unreasonable time shall not be permitted
to elapse between the date of any suspension of license and the date
fixed for the hearing.
D. Notice of the time and place of any hearing held under this section shall
be given by the Division to the holder of the license, permit or health
certificate so involved, in writing, and served either personally or sent
to him by registered mail, addressed to him at the address stated in the
license, permit or health certificate.
E. A licensee, permittee or health certificate holder who fails to appear at
the time and place fixed for such hearing shall not be entitled to any
further hearing, and in that event his license, permit or health
certificate may, as a matter of course, be forthwith revoked.
A. At least once every three months the Health Officer shall inspect all
establishments licensed under the provisions of this chapter. In case the
Health Officer discovers the violation of any item of sanitation, he shall
make a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems
necessary for the defect to be remedied, and the second inspection shall
be used in determining compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. Any violation of the same item of this chapter shall call for
immediate suspension of license.
B. A copy of the inspection report shall be filed and kept by the
establishment for a period of one year, and the original shall be filed in
the records of the Division of Health.
§ 117-8 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 117-10
115:175
§ 117-11. Violations and penalties.
C. The person operating the establishment shall, upon request of the
Health Officer, permit access to all parts of the establishment.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who shall do
or commit any act prohibited by the terms of this chapter; or do or
commit any act for which a license, permit or health certificate is
required, without having secured and being in possession of a valid
license, permit or health certificate at the time of the doing or
commission thereof; or omit to do or perform any act required by him to
be so done or performed by this chapter; or maintain any place,
establishment, vehicle, conveyance, equipment or article in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter; or fail to maintain any condition,
equipment or facility required to be maintained by this chapter; or fail
to install any article of a particular type, kind, quality or specification
where such installation is required; or in any manner, by deed, act, act
of commission or act of omission, violate any one or more of the
provisions of this chapter; shall, upon conviction thereof or upon
conviction of any violation of the provisions hereof, be subject to a
penalty or judgment of not more than $500 and upon conviction and
refusal or neglect to pay the amount of such penalty or judgment, to be
committed to the county jail for a period of time not exceeding 90 days
or, if he shall have been twice convicted within the space of six months
of the violation of this chapter and due proof of that fact is made, he
may be imprisoned in the county jail or county workhouse for any
number of days not exceeding one day for each dollar of the penalty, in
addition to the imposition of the penalty prescribed above, all in the
discretion of the Municipal Judge or other officer before whom the
complaint shall be brought. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No.
1954]
B. In the event that any violation of this chapter shall also be a violation of
a state law for which is provided a greater penalty or judgment than
that contained in this section, the Municipal Judge or trial judge before
whom any complaint is brought based upon such violation shall, in his
discretion, have the right to impose, in the place and in lieu of any
penalty provided for herein, that so provided in the state law which has
been so violated.
§ 117-10 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 117-11
115:176
ARTICLE II
Barbershops and Beauty Parlors
§ 117-12. Sanitation requirements.
A. Every person operating or conducting a barbershop or beauty parlor
and every person employed therein shall at all times comply with all of
the following requirements:
(1) The premises in which the barbershop or beauty parlor is
maintained shall be kept in a clean condition.
(2) All brushes, scissors, razors, combs, tweezers and clippers shall be
sterilized before being used upon any customer by immersion in
boiling water or a ten-percent solution of formalin or a five-percent
solution of carbolic acid or by any other means approved by the
Board.
(3) Every such shop or parlor shall be provided with running hot and
cold water.
(4) Clean towels and fresh neckbands shall be provided for each
customer.
(5) Every operator, employee or any person actually engaged in
waiting upon or servicing a customer shall thoroughly cleanse his
hands immediately before serving such customer.
B. No person shall be served in any barbershop or beauty parlor if such
person visibly evidences that he is infected with ringworm of the scalp
or any other communicable disease.
C. The use of styptic pencils is prohibited.
D. The use of powder puffs or sponges except for individual use is
prohibited.28
28.Editor's Note: Former Section 9-17, regarding Sunday closing of barbershops, was deleted
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
§ 117-12 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 117-12
115:177

ARTICLE III
Boarding Homes for Children
§ 117-13. License required.
No person shall conduct or maintain a boarding home for children without
a license first having been obtained therefor from the Division of Health
covering all the premises to be so used.
§ 117-14. Application for license.
Every application for a license shall be in writing, and it shall contain a
full description of the premises and buildings intended to be used for such
purposes, the age, qualifications and training of the person in charge and
satisfactory proof that each person residing in the licensed premises or
otherwise employed thereat is free from communicable disease.
§ 117-15. Contents of application.
Every license issued under this article shall state the names of the licensee,
the location of the licensed premises and the maximum number of children
that may be maintained, boarded or cared for at any time.
§ 117-16. License fee. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1954;
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
The license fee for conducting a boarding home for children shall be as set
forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The fee is intended to be an annual fee but,
when paid, shall cover only the balance of the calendar year during which
the same is so paid or payable.
§ 117-17. Revocation of license; surety bond.
In addition to the right to revoke any license contained in other provisions
of this Code, any license granted under this article shall be revocable upon
proof to the Division of misstatement of material facts in the application
therefor or upon failure of the licensee to furnish proof to the Division
that the licensee has deposited a surety bond of $1,000 with the State
Department of Institutions and Agencies for each child boarded or to be
boarded from outside of the state or upon the failure of the licensee to
permit inspection of the licensed premises or records by the employee of
the Division of Health.
§ 117-18. Conduct and maintenance of premises.
In addition to any other provision in this Code contained and affecting the
maintenance of premises or buildings, the following regulations shall apply
to the conduct or maintenance of boarding homes for children:
A. The premises shall at all times be attended by a sufficient number of
competent adult persons.
§ 117-13 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 117-18
115:179
§ 117-19. Required records.
Every person who conducts or who is in actual charge of a boarding home
for children shall keep or cause to be kept a record wherein there shall
be entered the name, age, sex, color and religion of every child cared for
by such person or establishment, together with the names and addresses
of each of the parents of such child or, in lieu of the names and addresses
of each of the parents of such child, the name and address of the person
placing such child in such boarding home; and the name of every child who
dies while in such person's care, together with the date and the cause of
death and the name and residence of the person who removes the child.
This entry is to be made within 24 hours after such child is given out, taken
away or disposed of in any manner.
§ 117-20. Examination of records.
All records required by the previous section or kept in conformity therewith
shall be accessible to the Health Officer or his representative or to the
representative of the State Department of Health for his examination at any
time.
B. The buildings shall be approved by the local fire authorities, zoning
authorities and Health Officer.
C. Not more than one family shall reside in the building.
D. All buildings and all appurtenant premises surrounding the same shall
be subject to and open for inspection by the Health Officer at all times.
E. All rooms shall be above street level, well-lighted and sufficiently
ventilated by windows opening to the outer air.
F. Doors and windows shall be adequately screened to exclude flies, and
adequate provision for toilet and bathing facilities must be supplied.
G. The heating system must be adequate to maintain a temperature in all
rooms of at least 65° F., which shall be maintained in all inhabited
rooms between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
H. Individual cots and cribs shall be provided for all children kept
overnight or for any longer period.
I. Individual toilet articles shall be provided for each child and shall
include washcloths, towels, combs and toothbrushes.
J. All formulas must be prescribed by a registered licensed physician.
K. Adequate provisions shall be made for the care of formulas, sterilization
of bottles and nipples and the care of soiled diapers and bed linen.
L. All children must be examined by a licensed physician before
admission.
§ 117-18 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 117-21
115:180
§ 117-21. Number of children limited to terms of license.
No greater number of boarding children shall be kept at any one time on
the premises than that permitted by the terms of the license.
§ 117-22. Restrictions on boarding of children.
No normal child shall be boarded in any home where any member of
the family appears to be mentally deficient or where there is a mentally
deficient child.
§ 117-21 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 117-22
115:181

ARTICLE IV
Motels, Lodging Houses and Boardinghouses
§ 117-23. Permit required.
No person shall conduct or maintain a hotel, lodging house or
boardinghouse for more then two boarders or roomers without first having
obtained from the Division of Health a permit therefor.
§ 117-24. Application for permit.
The application for a permit shall be made in writing and signed by the
applicant, stating the type of establishment proposed to be maintained
or conducted, the maximum number of guests, lodgers or boarders to be
accommodated and the facilities to be offered.
§ 117-25. Inspection of premises.
Such permit shall not be issued until the premises have been inspected and
approved by the Health Officer.
§ 117-26. Required temperature of inhabited rooms. [Amended
12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1954]
The permittee of a hotel, lodging house or boardinghouse shall provide heat
for the inhabited rooms from the 15th day of September through the 15th
day of April so that the temperature is maintained at 68° F. between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and at 65° F. between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 117-27. Sanitary facilities.
§ 117-28. Sanitation requirements for rooms.
All rooms shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. All inhabited
rooms shall be adequately lighted and properly ventilated with one or more
windows opening to the outside air. All outside doors and windows shall be
screened to exclude flies and mosquitoes from May 1 to November 1.
A. Each such establishment shall have for every six occupants or lodgers
at least one bathtub or shower and at least one toilet and one
washbasin.
B. Every occupant shall be furnished with clean towels, washcloths, soap
and drinking glasses, each for individual use. Adequate provision shall
be made for furnishing and care of bed linens, all of which shall be kept
clean and sanitary at all times.
§ 117-23 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 117-29
115:183
§ 117-29. Sleeping quarters.
All sleeping quarters shall be above grade and shall have ceilings at least
seven feet high and at least 60 square feet of floor space for each bed.
§ 117-30. Heating and lighting.
All heating shall be furnished by a central heating system. The use of any
portable heater or gas heater is hereby prohibited, except in an emergency,
as is the use of any light other than electrical.
§ 117-31. Storage and food-handling requirements.
Rooms used for storage, preparation or service of food shall be subject to
the same requirements specified in Chapter 156, Food and Food-Handling
Establishments.
§ 117-32. Keeping of poisons.
The keeping or use on the premises of any cleansing agents containing
hydrocyanic acid or other dangerous poisons is hereby prohibited.
§ 117-29 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 117-32
115:184
ARTICLE V
Laundry Businesses
§ 117-33. License required.
It shall be unlawful to operate a laundry, laundromat, laundry vehicle or
carrier within the limits of the Village for the purpose of cleaning, washing,
collecting or distributing laundry without first having a license from the
Division of Health.
§ 117-34. Fees. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1954]
§ 117-35. Separation of soiled and clean laundry.
It shall be unlawful to place any soiled laundry in any automobile, other
vehicle or carrier containing clean laundry or laundry intended for delivery
except where such automobile, vehicle or other carrier is so constructed as
to effect complete separation of and avoidance of contact between soiled
and cleaned laundry and in a manner acceptable to the Division.
§ 117-36. Collection from houses under quarantine.
§ 117-37. Sanitation requirements.
The vehicles, carriers, plant, buildings and premises wherein or whereon
the work of laundering is done and wherein or whereon soiled and cleaned
laundry is stored or handled shall at all times be kept in a clean sanitary
condition satisfactory to the Division, and such plant, buildings, premises,
vehicles and carriers shall at all times be subject to examination and
inspection by the Division of Health and its duly authorized representatives.
A. The license fees for conducting a laundry business shall be as set forth
in Chapter 145, Fees, for each establishment and one vehicle. There
shall also be a fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, for each additional
vehicle. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
B. The fees are intended to be annual fees but, when paid, shall cover only
the balance of the calendar year during which the same are so paid or
payable.
A. It shall be unlawful to collect laundry from a house wherein there exists
a communicable disease and having been placarded by the Division as
having, or having had a case of communicable disease during the period
of quarantine established by such placarding.
B. Laundry which has accumulated during the period of communicable
illness shall not be removed from such house where the same has
accumulated until a permit is issued by the attending physician or
Health Officer, certifying that such accumulated laundry has been
properly sterilized and is in acceptable condition for removal and
relaundering.
§ 117-33 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 117-37
115:185
Soiled laundry which is in transit to or from or within such plant, buildings,
premises, vehicles and carriers shall not at any time be allowed to come
in contact with cleaned laundry, and means satisfactory to the Division of
Health must be provided by the permittee to effectively prevent possibility
of such contact.
§ 117-38. Coin-operated laundry or dry-cleaning establishments.
[Added 8-14-1984 by Ord. No. 1945]
A. It shall be unlawful to operate a coin-operated laundry facility or drycleaning
establishment with equipment for cleaning, washing or drying
laundry or dry cleaning, which facility is open to the public, without first
having obtained a license to operate said facility from the Division of
Health.
B. Licenses shall be issued for a calendar year or part thereof.
Applications for the licenses shall be completed on forms prepared by
and provided by the Division of Health. The application shall require
information concerning the name, address and telephone number of the
owner of the real estate, the landlord and tenant, if any, the owner and/
or operator of the business and the designated agent of the owner or
operator for the purposes of contact by the Division of Health. If during
the course of a license year any of the information furnished on the
application changes, the applicant shall be obligated to immediately
furnish the Division of Health with such amended information.
C. Applications shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
§ 117-37 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 117-38
115:186
ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)29
§ 117-39. (Reserved)
§ 117-40. (Reserved)
§ 117-41. (Reserved)
29.Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Massage Operators and Masseurs, as amended, was
repealed 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 2547.
§ 117-39 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 117-41
115:187

ARTICLE VII
Maternity Homes
§ 117-42. License required.
No person shall conduct or maintain a maternity home or engage in
conducting a business of attending women during pregnancy, labor or lyingin
period outside their several homes without first having obtained a license
therefor from the Board covering all the premises intended to be so used.
§ 117-43. Application for license.
Every application for such license shall state the following:
§ 117-44. Fees. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
The license fee for conducting a maternity home shall be as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees. The fee is intended to be an annual fee but, when paid,
shall cover only the balance of the calendar year during which the same is
so paid or payable.
§ 117-45. Number of patients.
§ 117-46. Required records.
The licensee shall at all times keep and maintain complete records in the
form to be prescribed by the Board and covering the name, age, color,
religion, place of residence and such other information concerning the
care, maintenance, treatment and progress of all customers, patrons and
patients, together with full and complete records of any and every kind
concerning births, deaths, disease or illness as are now or hereafter may be
required by an regulation of law, statute or ordinance.
A. The name of proposed licensee.
B. A particular description of the premises and building in or at which the
same is contemplated to be conducted.
C. The maximum number of women and infants to be cared for at any one
time.
A. Every license granted under this article shall contain a limitation upon
the number of patients who may be cared for in the licensed premises at
any one time, and such limitations shall be determined solely by the
Division of Health, based upon the number of rooms available in the
licensed premises for the care of patients, their size, height and such
other factors as may bear upon the services contemplated to be
rendered.
B. The number of women cared for during pregnancy, labor or lying-in
period shall at no time exceed the number authorized or permitted by
the terms of the license.
§ 117-42 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 117-47
115:189
§ 117-47. Inspection of records.
All records required to be kept under this article shall be open to inspection,
check and audit by the Division of Health or any of its duly authorized
representatives.
§ 117-48. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any institution or department
maintained or operated by the state or by any county, municipality or
subdivision thereof or a hospital duly licensed by the State Board of Control
of the Department of Institutions and Agencies.
§ 117-49. Operation in conjunction with boarding home for children
prohibited.
No maternity home shall be operated in conjunction with a boarding home
for children.
§ 117-50. Use of place not designated in license prohibited.
No women or infants shall be kept, cared for or administered to within any
place or building not designated in the license.
§ 117-51. Other applicable provisions.
In addition, the same regulations shall apply to the conduct and
maintenance of a maternity home and the premises and buildings used in
connection therewith as are provided in Article III regarding the conduct
and maintenance of boarding homes for children.
§ 117-47 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 117-51
115:190
ARTICLE VIII
Nursing and Convalescent Homes
§ 117-52. License required.
No person shall conduct or maintain a nursing home or convalescent home
without first having obtained a license therefor from the Division of Health
covering all the premises intended to be so used.
§ 117-53. Fees. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1954; 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375]
The license fee for conducting a nursing or convalescent home shall be as
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The fee is intended to be an annual fee but,
when paid, shall cover only the balance of the calendar year during which
the same is so paid or payable.
§ 117-54. Operation in conjunction with other homes.
No nursing or convalescent home shall be run in conjunction with a
maternity home or boarding home for children.
§ 117-55. Other applicable provisions.
In addition, the same regulations shall apply to the conduct and
maintenance of a nursing and/or convalescent home and the premises
and buildings used in connection therewith as are provided in Article III
regarding the conduct and maintenance of boarding homes for children and
Article VII, regarding maternity homes.
§ 117-52 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 117-55
115:191

ARTICLE IX
Short-Term Rentals
[Added 1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 3570]
§ 117-56. Permitted use.
The residential occupancy of an otherwise lawful and lawfully occupied
dwelling for a period of 30 days or less by a person who is a member of
the housekeeping unit of the owner, without consideration, such as house
guests, is permitted.
§ 117-57. Prohibitions.
No person shall undertake, maintain, authorize, aid, facilitate, solicit and
advertise any rental activity that violates any part or provisions of this
article.
§ 117-58. Short-term rental property.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Village Code, it shall be
unlawful for any person, including, but not limited to, an owner, lessor,
sublessor with any possessory interest in any dwelling, to receive
compensation of any kind for the use, occupancy, or rental of any dwelling
for a period of 30 days or less.
§ 117-59. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Village Zoning Officer,
Fire Department, Police Department and any other Village official or
employee so designated by the Village Manager who all shall be authorized
to issue summons or other appropriate civil violations or complaints for any
violations of the terms and provisions of this article.
§ 117-60. Fines; violations and penalties.
Any person who is found or adjudicated to have violated any provisions of
this article shall be liable for a fine not to exceed $1,000. Each day of any
such violation after receiving written notice of same shall be a new and
separate violation.
§ 117-56 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 117-60
115:193
Chapter 123
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 31. Fees — See Ch. 145.
§ 123-1. Designation of administrative agency.
The Village Clerk of the Village of Ridgewood is hereby designated as the
Administrative Agency for the purposes of administrating the municipal
provisions of the Senior Citizens and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act
(N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.).
§ 123-2. Fees. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
The following fees shall be paid to the Village of Ridgewood by the owner of
any building or structure who seeks to convert any premises subject to the
aforementioned Act:
Chapter 125
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
Housing standards — See Ch. 175.
§ 125-1. Enforcing agency.
A. At the time of notification of the Village Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:18-61.27, a fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, per building sought
to be converted and, in addition thereto, a fee as set forth in Chapter
145, Fees, per apartment or unit in the building sought to be converted.
B. In the event that the Administrative Agency is required to conduct an
appeal or hearing, whether at the instance of the owner or of any
tenant, the owner of the building shall pay to the Village of Ridgewood
the sum as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, for each appeal required to
be held pursuant to the aforementioned statute or the rules and
regulations adopted by the Department of Community Affairs
thereunder.
A. There is hereby established in the Village of Ridgewood a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Department of
§ 117-60 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 125-1
123:194
§ 125-2. Construction Board of Appeals.
Building and Inspections," consisting of a Construction Official,
Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical
Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other
subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner
of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall
hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. Said
officials shall be those department personnel designated by the Village
Manager. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of
the enforcing agency. For purposes of providing the required services of
any of the subcode officials mandated hereinabove, the Village Manager
shall have the authority, from time to time, to designate personnel from
such other departments of the Village of Ridgewood to the Department
of Building and Inspections who shall thereupon be subject to the
procedures and policies of the enforcing agency and be primarily
responsible to the Construction Official.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
as amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each
such position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. The Building Code Board of Appeals heretofore established by
resolution dated May 11, 1976, is hereby designated the Construction
Board of Appeals to hear appeals from decisions by the enforcing
agency. Such Board shall consist of five members. At least one Board
member shall be a registered architect or licensed professional
engineer of building construction experience, and at least one Board
member shall be as qualified as a plumbing subcode official and one as
qualified as an electrical subcode official. No more than two Board
members shall be selected from the same business or profession. Each
Board member shall have had at least three years' experience in
construction, design or supervision as a licensed engineer or registered
architect or, in the alternative, five years' experience in construction,
design or supervision as an architect or engineer with a bachelor's
degree in architecture or engineering, respectively, from an accredited
institution of higher education or, as a further alternative, supervision
as a journeyman in a construction trade or as a construction contractor,
subcontractor or inspector.
B. The Village Manager shall appoint the Board members and any
alternative members. For the members first appointed, the Village
§ 125-1 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 125-2
125:195
§ 125-3. Fees. [Amended 2-14-1978 by Ord. No. 1663; 2-26-1980 by
Ord. No. 1746; 1-12-1982 by Ord. No. 1833; 2-28-1984 by Ord. No.
1916; 5-7-1984 by Ord. No. 1924; 2-12-1985 by Ord. No. 1972;
9-9-1986 by Ord. No. 2061; 4-12-1988 by Ord. No. 2147; 12-12-1989
by Ord. No. 2232; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
Manager shall designate the appointees' terms so that one shall be
appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years, one
for a term of three years and two for terms of four years. At the
expiration of such terms and thereafter, appointments shall be made
for terms of four years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term. The Village Manager shall appoint such number of alternates as
may be appropriate or terms not to exceed four years; or may, in the
alternative, appoint alternates on a case-by-case basis. No regular or
alternative Board member may be a member of the enforcing agency,
the decisions of which are subject to the review of the Board.
C. Neither regular nor alternate members of the Construction Board of
Appeals shall receive any compensation for services rendered.
A. The fee for a construction permit and other related permits shall be as
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, and shall be paid before the permit is
issued.
B. The fee for plan review, as set forth in said Chapter 145, Fees, shall be
paid before the plans are reviewed. The amount paid for said fee shall
be credited toward the amount of the fee to be charged for the
construction permit.
C. In order to provide for the training, certifications and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. Said
surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection,
Department of Community Affairs as required by the state.
D. No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing private structure or any of the
facilities contained therein. For the purposes of this subsection,
"disabled person" means a person who has the total and permanent
inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any
medically determinable, physical or mental impairment, including
blindness, and shall include but not be limited to any resident of this
state who is disabled pursuant to the Federal Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. § 416), or the Federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C.
§ 231 et seq.) or is rated as having a 60% disability or higher pursuant
to any federal law administered by the United States Veterans' Act. For
purposes of this subsection, "blindness" means central visual acuity of
20/200 or less in the better eye with the use of a correcting lens. An eye
§ 125-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 125-3
125:196
§ 125-4. Reporting requirements. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
The enforcing agency shall report as required by the state the total amount
of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year. In the fiscal year in which
the regulations first become effective, said report shall be for the third and
fourth quarters only.
§ 125-5. Fire district limits established. [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
To control types of construction based on the inherent fire hazard by reason
of the use groups of buildings, there are hereby established fire district
limits to include all areas in which congested business, commercial and
public assembly use may be housed. Such areas shall be designated as
"within the fire limits" and shall be bounded and described as being all
lands within the B-1, B-2 and B-3 Retail Business Districts, C Commercial
District, OB-1 and OB-2 Office Building Districts, R-4 Garden Apartment
Residence District, and R-5 Multifamily Residence District as such areas are
now or may be from time to time shown on the Zoning Map of the Village of
Ridgewood. In addition, all regulations of the fire district limits regarding
construction materials, procedures and safety requirements shall apply to
all schools, churches, hospitals and municipal buildings, in no matter what
zone the same may be located.
Chapter 127
CONTRIBUTIONS, GIFTS AND DONATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Political fund-raising — See Ch. 221.
which is accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision such that the
widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than
20° shall be considered as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or
less. [Added 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2641]
§ 125-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 125-5
125:197

ARTICLE I
Gifts to Village Council
[Adopted 8-13-2008 by Ord. No. 3132]
§ 127-1. Prohibition; conditions for Council acceptance of gifts.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CONTRIBUTIONS, GIFTS AND OTHER DONATIONS — The free and
voluntary presentation by any person to the Village Council of any sum
of money or other item of value, the acceptance of which requires a
resolution.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
group, organization, association, government, governmental agency or
any other entity, affiliate, subsidiary or related company of that
entity.[Amended 12-8-2010 by Ord. No. 3273]
B. The Village Manager shall be authorized to establish rules and
requirements for persons making, offering or presenting any
contribution, gift and other donation to the Village, its agencies,
departments, boards and/or employees, which rules shall require
adoption by resolution by the Village Council to be effective. Said rules
and requirements shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
[Amended 12-8-2010 by Ord. No. 3273]
(1) Identification or determination of the value of said contribution,
gift or other donation;
(2) Requirements for the reporting of the contribution, gift or other
donation to Village Manager;
(3) Requirements for if and when Council approval is necessary for the
acceptance of the contribution, gift or other donation by the
Village.
C. Any person as defined in Subsection A above who wishes to make, offer
or present a contribution, gift or other donation to the Village or its
agencies, departments or boards must satisfy the rules and
requirements as established by the Village Manager and adopted by
resolution of the Village Council. [Amended 12-8-2010 by Ord. No.
3273]
D. Upon the acceptance of a gift, contribution or donation by the Village
Council, the Village reserves the right to determine without
qualification any process, conditions or other specifications on the gift
and its utilization by the Village for the purpose for which said gift is
intended and accepted.
§ 127-1 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 127-1
125:199
Chapter 128
COSMETOLOGY
§ 128-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BARBER — Any person who is licensed to engage in any of the practices
encompassed in barbering.
BARBERING — Any separate or combination of the following practices
when done on the human body for cosmetic purposes and not for the
treatment of disease or physical or mental ailment and when done for
payment either directly or indirectly or when done without payment for the
general public:
BARBERSHOP — Any establishment engaged in the practice of barbering
the public.
DESIGNEE — Any person designated by the Health Officer to act for him/
her in the performance of his/her duties.
DISINFECTANT — An Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection registered product with
demonstrated bactericidal, virucidal and fungicidal activity used in
accordance with manufacturer's instruction.
HAIRDRESSER/COSMETICIAN OR COSMETOLOGIST — Any separate or
combination of the practices as outlined in N.J.S.A. 45:5B-3(j) when done on
the human body for cosmetic purposes and not for the treatment of disease
or physical or mental ailments and when done for payment either directly
or indirectly or when done without payment for the general public.
HAIRDRESSING or COSMETOLOGY SHOP/SALON — Any establishment
engaged in the practice of hairdressing, cosmetology or barbering for the
public.
A. Shaving or trimming of the beard, mustache or other facial hair;
B. Shampooing, cutting, arranging, relaxing or styling of the hair;
C. Singeing or dyeing of the hair;
Applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions or creams
to the hair, scalp, face or neck;
D.
Massaging, cleansing or stimulating the face, neck or scalp with or
without cosmetic preparations, either by hand, mechanical or electrical
appliances; or
E.
Cutting, fitting, coloring or styling of hairpieces or wigs, to the extent
that the services are performed while the wig is being worn by a
person.
F.
§ 127-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 128-1
125:200
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Village of Ridgewood or his/
her duly authorized representative.
NAIL SALON/SHOP — Any establishment engaged in the practice of
cutting, shaping, polishing or enhancing the appearance of the nails of the
hands or feet, including but not limited to the application and removal of
sculptured or artificial nails.
NAIL TECHNICIAN — A person who, for compensation, cuts, shapes,
polishes or enhances the appearance of the nails of the hands or feet,
including but not limited to the application and removal of sculptured or
artificial nails.
OPERATOR — As to this chapter, a person who owns, leases, or manages
a shop/salon or any licensed person performing barbering, hairdressing,
cosmetology or manicuring.
OWNER — As to this chapter, a person who owns a shop/salon
establishment and is responsible for upholding the regulations of this
chapter in all areas of the establishment.
PERSON — As to this chapter, an individual, firm, partnership, company,
corporation, trustee, association or any public or private entity.
PERSON IN CHARGE — As to this chapter, the individual present in a
barbershop or hairdressing and/or cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/
shop that is the apparent supervisor of the barbershop or hairdressing and/
or cosmetology shop/salon or nail salon/shop at the time of inspection. If no
individual claims to be a supervisor, then any employee present is deemed
to be the person in charge for purposes of this chapter.
SANITARY CONDITIONS — Safe and clean salon/shop conditions that
prevent the spread of communicable diseases and protect the public health
and welfare.
WORK STATION — A chair, countertop and floor space set aside for the
purpose of serving a customer, including floor space for the operator to
stand while serving the customer.
WORKING AREA — A separate room with more than one work station, or a
private room set aside to serve one customer at a time.
§ 128-2. License and fees.
A. No person shall maintain or operate any barbershop, hairdressing,
cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/shop or similar type of personal
grooming establishment without having a valid license issued by the
Health Officer. Only a person who complies with the requirements of
this chapter shall be entitled to receive or retain such a license.
B. Every barbershop, hairdressing, cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/
shop must comply with local planning and zoning regulations and all
other applicable ordinances before being issued a license.
§ 128-1 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 128-2
125:201
§ 128-3. Review of plans.
C. Application for a license shall be made on forms furnished by the Health
Officer. All licenses are valid for one year or a portion thereof and are
renewable on January 1 of each year.
D. Every applicant for a license to operate a barbershop or hairdressing
and/or cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/shop shall pay an annual
license fee according to Chapter 145, Fees, of the Code of the Village of
Ridgewood. The annual license fee shall be due and payable before the
last day of December each year.
E. No license shall be issued or renewed until a completed application has
been submitted, the license fee has been paid and the applicant's
barbershop or hairdressing and/or cosmetology salon/shop or nail
salon/shop meets the requirements set forth in this chapter and all
other applicable state and local regulations.
F. Licenses shall be valid until December 31 of each year as noted on the
license unless suspended by the Health Officer, or until such time as the
facility changes owners, close, or goes out of business.
G. Licenses shall not be transferable from person to person or from
location to location. Any planned change in ownership of a facility must
be reported promptly to the Village of Ridgewood and such changes
must be approves by the Village of Ridgewood prior to the issuance of
an operating license.
H. Licenses must be displayed in a prominent location within the
establishment where patrons can observe it.
I. No person shall operate any barbershop, beauty parlor, nail salon or
any similar type of personal grooming establishment without first
securing any and all applicable licenses from the New Jersey Board of
Cosmetology and Hairstyling.
J. No person shall provide barbering, cosmetology and/or hairstyling
services in a barbershop, beauty parlor, nail salon or similar
establishment without being in compliance with the New Jersey Board
of Cosmetology and Hairstyling for the particular specialty or service
said person is providing.
A. Submission of plans. Whenever a barbershop, beauty parlor, nail salon
or other similar personal grooming establishment is constructed or
renovated, and whenever a structure is converted for such use or
alterations are made that will significantly change the nature of the
operation, plans and specifications pertaining to the health and sanitary
aspects of the operation shall be submitted to the health authority for
review and approval before construction, renovations or conversion is
begun. The health authority shall review these plans and respond
accordingly within 30 days of the date of submission. No barbershop,
beauty parlor, nail salon or similar establishment shall be constructed,
§ 128-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 128-3
125:202
§ 128-4. Annual inspections.
§ 128-5. License and operation requirements.
renovated or converted except in accordance with plans and
specifications previously submitted to and approved by the appropriate
health and construction authorities.
B. Preoperational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are
required to be submitted the regulatory authority, the regulatory
authority hall inspect the establishment prior to the start of operations
to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
A. The Health Officer shall promulgate such rules and procedures as are
necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
B. At least once a year, the Health Officer or his/her designee shall inspect
each barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop/salon and nail
salon/shop and shall make as many additional inspections as are
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.
C. The Health Officer or his/her designee, after proper identification shall
be permitted to enter, during normal operating hours, any portion of
any barbershop or hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop/salon or nail
salon/shop for the purpose of conducting inspections to determine
compliance with this chapter.
D. In the event that the Health Officer or his/her designee observes
unsanitary conditions in the operation of a barbershop or hairdressing
and/or cosmetology shop/salon or nail salon/shop, or if a violation or
multiple violations occur, the Health Officer or his/her designee may
immediately issue a written notice to the license holder, or person in
charge, citing such conditions, specifying the corrective action to be
taken and time frame within which such action shall be taken. If
corrective action is not made in the allotted time, the licensee may be
fined or his/her license suspended.
A. General cleanliness. Each shop/salon shall be maintained to provide a
safe and sanitary environment. All facilities shall be kept clean, sanitary
and in good repair.
B. Disinfection of reusable equipment:
(1) After each use on a patron, all electrical and nonelectrical
instruments shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove foreign matter,
treated with an approved disinfectant and stored in a protected
manner until the next use.
(2) Disinfectants shall be changed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions to ensure complete disinfection. No
sediment from the item being disinfected shall be allowed to
remain in the bottom of the disinfection container.
§ 128-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 128-5
125:203
C. Disposable and single-use equipment:
(1) Disposable or single-use articles shall be disposed of in a waste
receptacle after use on each patron unless stored in a separate
closed clean container labeled with the patrons name and used only
on that patron.
(2) All disposable or single-use articles that come into contact with
blood and/or body fluids shall conform to medical waste
regulations.
(3) All sharp or pointed articles shall be disposed of in a punctureproof
container.
D. Sanitation of foot spas and water baths.
(1) An antimicrobial additive shall be placed in each foot spa or water
bath during use.
(2) After each patron, the shop/salon shall drain all water and debris,
thoroughly wash, rinse and properly disinfect and dry the foot spa
or water bath.
(3) At the end of each day, the shop/salon shall remove and immerse
any filter in disinfectant and flush the foot spa or water bath with
low sudsing soap and water.
E. Towels.
(1) Clean, properly laundered or disposable towels shall be used for
each patron.
(2) All linens and towels shall be deposited in a covered cleanable
receptacle after each patron.
(3) Clean towels and linens shall be stored off the floor in a clean,
protected location.
F. Cosmetics.
(1) When only a portion of a cream, liquid, powder, wax or other
cosmetic preparation is to be removed from the container, it shall
be removed in such a way as to not contaminate the remaining
portion.
(2) Multi-use of cosmetic applicators is prohibited. This includes the
use of lipsticks, powder puffs, makeup brushes and sponges which
are not disposable.
(3) Lotions and powders shall be dispensed from a sanitary selfdispensing
container.
G. Operators.
§ 128-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 128-5
125:204
(1) Operators shall thoroughly wash their hands with soap and water
immediately after using the toilet, eating or smoking. Before
serving each customer, operators shall thoroughly wash their
hands with soap. Proper hand-washing procedures shall be
adhered to by:
(a) Rinsing the hands and exposed portions of the arms under
clean running water.
(b) Applying a generous amount of soap.
(c) Rubbing the hands together vigorously for at least 10 seconds,
creating friction on the surface of the hands, arms, fingertips
and areas between the fingers.
(d) Rinsing thoroughly.
(e) Drying thoroughly with a disposable paper towel.
(f) Turning of the faucet without touching the faucet with clean
hands by using a barrier such as a paper towel.
(2) No operator shall remove moles or warts or treat any disease of a
patron, nor perform any medical procedure such as an injection,
nor dispense any medical device.
(3) All operators shall have an exclusion policy for people with a
communicable disease that may be transmitted through the
services of a barber, hairdresser, cosmetologist or nail technician.
(4) No individual shall perform procedures requiring licensure by the
New Jersey State Board of Cosmetology without possessing such a
valid license.
(5) No individual shall perform procedures requiring licensure by the
New Jersey State Board of Cosmetology without having such
license on site and visibly posted near the entrance along with a
current photograph.
H. Water and plumbing.
(1) Every shop/salon must have an approved water supply with
sufficient hot and cold running water under pressure.
(2) All plumbing fixtures must be protected against back-siphonage or
backflow.
(3) Plumbing fixtures shall be clean and free from defects.
(4) Every such establishment shall be provided with a suitable mop
sink.
I. Toilet and sink facilities.
§ 128-5 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 128-5
125:205
§ 128-6. License suspension.
(1) Each shop/salon shall provide adequate toilet and hand-washing
facilities for patrons and employees.
(2) Toilet and hand-washing facilities shall be in working condition at
all times, and kept clean and sanitary.
(3) Each hand-washing sink shall have a soap dispenser and disposable
towels or an air dryer for hand drying.
J. Lighting and ventilation.
(1) Lighting shall be no less than 30 footcandles to provide adequate
illumination in the work area.
(2) The shop/salon shall be properly and adequately ventilated to
remove excess heat, vapors and odors.
(3) Windows shall be effectively screened against insects, rodents, and
other vermin.
K. Floors, walls and ceilings shall be kept clean and in good repair.
L. Proper measures shall be in place to prevent harborage of pests.
M. Smoking shall be prohibited in all areas of licensed shops pursuant to
the New Jersey Smoke Free Air Act, N.J.S.A. 26:3d-55, and the Smoke
Free Air Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 8:6.
N. A copy of the most current Material Data Safety Sheet (MDSS) for each
hazardous chemical is stored in a binder and available to all salon/shop
staff and to the Health Officer or its authorized representatives.
O. The owner of the shop shall not permit any animals or pets in the
licensed premises. This prohibition shall not apply to trained guide dogs
(or dogs in training) for the disabled, sightless or hearing impaired,
consistent with the requirements of the Law Against Discrimination,
N.J.S.A. 10:5-29.
P. The owner of the shop shall not provide or offer to provide fish
pedicures.
A. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable
state regulations shall be grounds for suspension of any license issued
under the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Health Officer may suspend, without warning, prior notice or
hearing, any license to operate a barbershop or hairdressing and/or
cosmetology shop/salon or nail salon/shop if the operation constitutes
an imminent hazard to public health including, but not limited to, any of
the following:
§ 128-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 128-6
125:206
Chapter 129
DEDICATION OF VILLAGE PROPERTY
§ 129-1. Request for dedication.
Any and all requests for the dedication of any Village property, including
buildings, streets, trees, benches and/or other Village property, shall be
made in writing and filed with the Village Manager's office. Such written
request must include at least the following information and supporting
documentation:
(1) There is an outbreak of an infectious, pathogenic or toxic agent
capable of being transmitted to consumers.
(2) There is an absence of potable water, supplied under pressure, in a
quantity which, in the opinion of the Health Officer is capable of
meeting the needs of the facility.
(3) There is a sewage backup into the facility.
C. Suspension shall be effective immediately upon delivery of the written
order to the license holder or person in charge of the facility by the
Health Officer or his/her designee. When a license is suspended, all
barbershop, hairdressing and/or cosmetology shop or nail salon/shop
operations shall cease immediately and shall not resume until written
approval has been issued by the Health Officer.
A. The name of the person to be honored, hereinafter "honoree";
B. Written authorization to make such request from a family member of
the honoree such as the most immediate living family member (i.e.,
spouse, parent, child, blood relative, next of kin) or, in the absence of
any known living relations, attestation to the lack of any kin and a
detailed description of the relationship of the person authorizing the
request on the behalf of the honoree;
C. In the event the honoree is a member of a community organization or
group, a written authorization from the president or executive of such
group or organization must be provided with the dedication request.
D. The nature, extent and description of the Village property requested to
be dedicated, and a detailed description of the type of remembrance
requested;
E. Acknowledgment and agreement by the person(s) requesting the
dedication that they will be responsible for the costs of replacement and
installation of the remembrance if necessary; and
F. The estimated amount they will contribute to the dedication of the
property.
§ 128-6 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 129-2
125:207
§ 129-2. Qualifying criteria.
Before a request for the dedication of a Village asset shall be considered
by the Village Council, the following criteria must be met by the honoree(s)
who is to be considered for such dedication:
§ 129-3. Discretion of Council.
§ 129-4. General guidelines for plaques.
In the case of a dedication of a plaque, the standard specification shall be
as follows:
A. Village employee. If the person(s) in whose name such dedication is
requested is presently or formerly a Village employee, such person
must have been employed for a minimum of 10 consecutive years and
been in good standing at all times.
B. Volunteers. If the person in whose name the dedication is requested
was a volunteer or noncompensated member of any Village board,
committee, or other Village-sponsored organization, said person shall
have served at least two terms in said position.
C. Others. Person(s) who have volunteered time or other valuable
consideration to the Village whose name(s) is(are) requested to be
honored by the dedication of Village property must have been or
presently is(are) a resident of the Village and contributed to the Village
in such a manner as to distinguish his or her contribution as an
exceptional service to the Village and its residents.
A. The Village Council, in its sole discretion subject to no limitations or
precedent, is the final authority to approve any requested dedication of
Village property; and
B. The Village Council, in its sole discretion, with the assistance of any
Village department director or staff deemed helpful by the Council,
shall determine the suitable characteristics and placement of all
dedicated property. Such determination shall include the exercise of its
discretion as to, but is not limited to, location, size, shape, and the type
of the property to be dedicated, the manner in which the dedication is
to be displayed and the wording of such remembrance.
A. Height. The top of the plaque shall be no more than 12 inches from the
ground and shall be at an approximate thirty-two-and-one-half-degree
angle of the ground.
B. Material: cast bronze or brass.
C. Dimensions: eight inches by four inches.
D. Dedication. Only the following wording may be used:
(1) In memory/honor of;
§ 129-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 129-4
125:208
§ 129-5. Street signs.
In the case of the dedication of any street sign, the standard specification
shall be that the sign color shall be brown with white lettering and six
inches by 30 inches in size.
§ 129-6. Trees.
In the case of the dedication of any tree, the standard specification shall
be marked by a concrete block, 12 inches by 11 inches in size, set in the
ground with a bronze or brass plaque measuring 10 inches by nine inches
placed thereon.
§ 129-7. Benches.
In the case of the dedication of any bench, the standard specification of any
bronze or brass plaque set thereon shall be three inches by four inches.
§ 129-8. Park or land area.
In the case of the dedication of any park or land area, the standard
suggested type of material shall be concrete or stone or other suitable
material as may be approved by the Village Council. In the case of a stone
or concrete marker, the specifications shall be 12 inches by 11 inches in size
set on the ground with a bronze or brass plaque measuring 10 inches by
nine inches.
§ 129-9. Buildings.
In the case of the dedication of any building, the standard specification of
any markers to be placed on the building shall be a bronze or brass plaque
measuring 18 inches by 24 inches.
Chapter 131
DRUG-FREE ZONES
§ 131-1. Map as official finding of record. [Amended 6-10-2009 by
Ord. No. 3191]
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 and N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, the
Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood does hereby approve a certain
map prepared by Christopher J. Rutishauser, New Jersey Professional
(2) Name;
(3) Title or relationship with the Village;
(4) Date of birth, employ or service; and
(5) Date of death.
§ 129-4 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 131-1
125:209
Engineer, PE License No. 36373, Village Engineer, and entitled “Village of
Ridgewood, Engineering Division, Bergen County, New Jersey, the Village of
Ridgewood Official Finding and Recording Map for the Purpose of Criminal
Code Enforcement of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 and N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1,” as the official
finding and record of the locations and boundaries of the area or areas
situate in the Village of Ridgewood on or within 1,000 feet of school
property as described in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 and within 500 feet of a public
housing facility, a public park, libraries, and museums as described in
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1.
§ 131-2. Filing of map.
The original map hereby approved and as it may be revised pursuant to the
cited statutes, or a true copy thereof, shall be filed with the Clerk of the
Village of Ridgewood and shall be maintained in the Office of the Village
Clerk as an official record of the Village of Ridgewood.
Chapter 133
REFUSE CONTAINERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Garbage, rubbish, refuse and recycling — See
Ch. 165.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
§ 133-1. Compliance required.
No person, as herein defined, shall place or permit to be placed in the
Village of Ridgewood a refuse container or similar container commonly
used for the collection of building materials, except in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 133-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings indicated:
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES — The Department of Police of the Village
of Ridgewood, the Department of Buildings and Inspections, or the
Department of Public Works, Engineering Division.
LICENSING OFFICES — The Department of Police of the Village of
Ridgewood or the Department of Buildings and Inspections.
NUISANCE — Any condition which is harmful to life or health or that which
renders air, water, soil or any type of food hazardous or injurious to human
life or health.
§ 131-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 133-2
125:210
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, organization or entity of any type.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any real property located within the Village of
Ridgewood which is not within the jurisdiction and control of the Village of
Ridgewood or any other governmental agency.
PUBLIC AREA — Includes any street, sidewalk, highway, public lane, alley,
Village parking lot or other public place in the Village.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any portable container, without motor power,
designed to be towed, drawn or carried by a motor vehicle and placed upon
private property for the purpose of the temporary storage and collection of
refuse, debris, building materials and similar materials, including what is
commonly known as a "roll-off container" or "dumpster."
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Any residential zone, as defined in Chapter 190,
Land Use and Development, of the Ridgewood Village Code.
§ 133-3. Permit required.
No person shall place or utilize a refuse container or permit a refuse
container to be placed or utilized in the Village of Ridgewood without first
having obtained a permit therefor.
§ 133-4. Application for permit; fees; term; regulations.
A. Any person seeking to place, permit to be placed or utilize a refuse
container in a public area in the Village of Ridgewood shall do so only
after having obtained a permit from the Department of Police. Any
person seeking to place or utilize a refuse container on private property
shall only do so after having obtained a permit from the Department of
Buildings and Inspections. In order to obtain a permit, an application
for a permit on a form to be furnished by the appropriate enforcing
agency shall be filed and the appropriate fee shall be paid.
B. The application shall require that the applicant specify the proposed
location of the refuse container, the size and capacity thereof, the
estimated duration during which the refuse container shall be placed on
private property and the contemplated use of the refuse container.
C. The fee for obtaining a permit to place a refuse container in a public
area shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. A permit shall be
required for the placement of a refuse container on private property for
a period of time greater than one week. The permit shall be issued for a
term not to exceed 15 calendar days if placed in a public area and 30
calendar days if placed in a residential zone. The permit may be
renewed once upon the written request of the applicant without the
filing of a new application but upon payment of an additional fee as set
forth in Chapter 145, Fees. In addition to the application fee and the
renewal fee, if applicable, the daily fee, as set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees, determined by the size of the dumpster, shall be paid at the time
§ 133-2 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 133-4
125:211
§ 133-5. Location, placement and condition.
of application based on the applicant's estimate of the number of days
for which the permit shall be required.
D. A permit may be issued to allow the placement of a refuse container on
private property for an initial period of 30 calendar days. A permit may
be renewed for no more than two additional six-month periods, or
portions thereof, upon application for renewal by a permit holder, but
no longer than 30 days after a valid certificate of approval or certificate
of occupancy has been issued by the Department of Buildings and
Inspections.
E. A permit is valid only when the work is continuous. Any cessation of
work for more than 15 calendar days shall invalidate the permit and the
refuse container shall be removed.
F. No refuse container in excess of 30 cubic yards shall be permitted in the
Village of Ridgewood. The permit shall be issued for a specific period of
time based on the estimate of the applicant at the time the application is
filed.
G. For refuse containers placed in the public areas, at the time the
application is filed, each applicant shall furnish the Village of
Ridgewood with a certificate of insurance containing limits of at least
$100,000/$300,000 for bodily injury and $100,000 for property
damage, which shall name the Village of Ridgewood as an additional
insured and which shall be noncancellable during the permit period.
H. Each applicant for a permit to place a refuse container in a public area
shall furnish the Village of Ridgewood with sufficient surety, to be
determined by the Village Engineer, to guarantee against damage to the
streets, curbs and sidewalks or other improvements in the public rightof-
way.
I. No refuse container shall be placed in a public area more than 24 hours
prior to commencement of construction and shall not remain therein
more than 24 hours subsequent to construction being completed.
J. No permit shall be issued if the Department of Police determines that
the issuance of a permit will constitute a danger to public safety or an
unwarranted interference with the efficient movement of traffic.
K. A permit may be revoked at any time during its term if the placement or
use of a refuse container constitutes a hazard to the health, safety or
welfare of the citizens of the Village or for any other reason constitutes
a nuisance.
L. The Village Manager may exempt from all but the safety requirement of
this chapter any persons contracting with the Village.
§ 133-4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 133-5
125:212
§ 133-6. Use provisions.
Refuse containers shall be permitted in all residential zones subject to the
following provisions:
A. No refuse container shall be placed in a public area in a residential zone
unless it is determined by the Department of Police that there is not
sufficient room on the private property of the person utilizing the refuse
container to place said container and therefore, the refuse container is
required to be placed in a public area. No refuse container placed on
private property, shall impede the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
or safety site lines.
B. Refuse containers may be placed in public areas only upon the
determination the Department of Police that there is no safe or
practical place where the refuse container may be placed other than in
the public area.
C. All refuse containers placed in public areas are required to comply with
the following conditions:
(1) Planking or other wood sheeting of sufficient size is required to be
placed under the wheels or road contact areas to protect the
roadway from damage. If the refuse container has wheels, they
must be chucked to prevent movement.
(2) Flashing, warning, amber, barricade-mounted lights are required
to be placed on the refuse container to provide a visual warning to
those utilizing the roadway or public right-of-way. The lights are
required to be operable at all times.
(3) No refuse container shall be permitted in a public area the
placement of which interferes with the free and safe flow of traffic
or which otherwise stands in a hazardous location.
(4) Refuse containers shall not be permitted to be placed in a public
area on certain designated holidays, sale days and special event
days that occur from time to time during the year.
D. Upon removal of the refuse container, the public area shall be swept
clean of all loose debris and restored to its former condition in accord
with the standards of the Department of Public Works, Engineering
Division.
E. All refuse containers shall at all times be kept in good repair and shall
be structurally sound and leak-proof and shall be painted as to prevent
the show of rust or deterioration and shall be constructed to stand
firmly upright.
A. No more than one refuse container may be placed on the applicant's
property at any one time.
§ 133-5 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 133-6
125:213
§ 133-7. Removal.
§ 133-8. Violations and penalties.
B. No refuse container shall be located within 10 feet of a property line,
unless located on a driveway.
C. All refuse containers shall be set back minimally 10 feet from principal
buildings.
D. All refuse containers shall be located in such a manner as to utilize
existing buffers for the purpose of screening refuse containers from
adjoining properties.
E. The refuse container shall have affixed thereto a decal or sticker
provided by the Village in such location as to be readily visible from the
public street or at such location as shall be designated in the permit.
Upon expiration of the permit, the decal or sticker shall be removed.
F. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased or operated, a refuse
container must ensure that such container is covered at all times and
shall prevent refuse from spilling out or overflowing.
G. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased or operated, a refuse
container must ensure that such container does not leak or otherwise
discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids.
A. The owner or other person having control of a refuse container for
which a permit has been issued shall remove said refuse container from
the private property prior to the expiration of the permit unless an
additional permit is obtained prior to the expiration thereof.
B. In the event the refuse container is not removed from the private
property prior to the expiration of the permit, or in the event no permit
has been issued, the Village shall have the right to remove the refuse
container from the private property.
C. Both the owner of the refuse container and the person requesting the
refuse container on the private property shall be responsible for the
cost of said removal.
D. In addition to such other remedies as may be provided by law, the cost
of removal, storage and any other cost incurred by the Village in
connection with the removal of said refuse container shall constitute a
lien upon the real property owned by the applicant for which the permit
was requested.
A. Each day that a refuse container remains on site in violation of this
chapter, shall subject the applicant to penalties, with each day that the
refuse container remains on site considered to be a separate violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 133-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 133-8
125:214
Chapter 137
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES THIRD-PARTY BILLING
PLAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145.
§ 137-1. Establishment; operation; administration; fees.
B. Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a minimum fine of $250 per violation, not to exceed $2,000.
C. If any conditions/regulations are violated, the Village can revoke the
permit and require its immediate removal.
D. The regulations shall be enforced by the Village Police Department, the
Department of Buildings and Inspections and the Department of Public
Works, Engineering Division.
A. The Village of Ridgewood hereby establishes a third-party billing plan
for the Department of Emergency Services (R.E.S) to receive payment
for providing emergency medical services to its residents and other
persons designated pursuant to mutual aid agreements with
surrounding communities.
B. Certain fees are established for said emergency services to cover the
costs of providing transportation and other treatment to said
individuals, said fees to be set forth in Chapter 145, § 145-6, of the Code
of the Village of Ridgewood as it pertains to Chapter 137.
C. The third-party billing plan shall engage in "insurance-only billing" as it
pertains to individual Village of Ridgewood residents for whom
emergency medical services are provided, which means it will accept as
payment only what is paid by the resident's health insurance plan or
Medicare/Medicaid and shall not bill for any deductibles, copays or
other balance due. This policy is established because the majority of
residents in the Village contribute in some manner to the tax base of the
Village, which financially supports R.E.S. through the annual budget.
D. The third-party billing plan reserves the right to bill nonresident
individuals (whether privately or Medicare/Medicaid covered and those
uninsured) for whom emergency medical services are provided up to
the full amount of fees established by ordinance in Chapter 145,
§ 145-6, as it pertains to Chapter 137.
E. The Director of Ridgewood Emergency Services shall be responsible for
the administration of the plan and act in consultation with the Village
Manager's Office and Village's Financial Office in that capacity.
§ 133-8 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 137-1
125:215
§ 137-2. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subsection, sentence or any part of this chapter is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair
or invalidate the remainder of this chapter.
Chapter 141
FARMERS' MARKET
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145. Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
§ 141-1. License procedure.
There is hereby established a license procedure to permit a farmers'
market. Each farmer who operates in the market shall be required to obtain
a license from the Village department designated by the Village Manager.
The license shall be entitled "Seasonal Agricultural Market License."
§ 141-2. Rules and regulations.
The Village Manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish rules
and regulations for the operation and conduct of the farmers' market.
Each licensee shall be required to comply with the rules and regulations
established by the Village Manager. Additionally, the Village Manager is
hereby authorized and directed to establish rules and regulations for the
operation and conduct of all persons on site, including the sponsors and
participants who are not licensees under this chapter.
§ 141-3. Revocation or suspension of license.
In the event that an operator is determined by the Village Manager to have
violated any of the terms and conditions of the license or the rules and
regulations established by the Village Manager, the Manager shall have the
authority to revoke or suspend the license.
F. The Director of R.E.S. shall annually review the plan's cost accounting
records with the Village's Chief Financial Officer.
G. The Village's Chief Financial Officer shall annually adjust the fees to
charged for said emergency medical services. Said fees shall be
annually adjusted no later than the first day of March in the year
following the adoption of the within chapter. Said adjustments shall be
made in consultation with the Director of Emergency Services.
H. A certified copy of this chapter shall be filed with the applicable federal
and state agencies.
§ 137-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 141-4
141:216
§ 141-4. Application; validity; nontransferability.
Each applicant for a license shall complete an application form to be
prepared by the Village Manager. The license shall be valid only for the
balance of the calendar year in which it is issued. No license shall be
transferable or assignable.
§ 141-5. Health and safety.
Each operator shall comply with all health and safety regulations and laws
and each operator's area of operation shall be subject, at all times, to
inspection by proper Village officials, including health, fire and safety.
Chapter 145
FEES
§ 145-1. Policy.
It is hereby determined in the interest of and for the benefit of the residents
and taxpayers of the Village of Ridgewood and for the public good that a
uniform schedule of fees for public records and services of the Village of
Ridgewood and its employees be established and maintained.
§ 145-2. Public records.
Nothing in this chapter shall require the certification, reproduction or
issuance of any copy of any record unless said record is a public record.
§ 145-2.1. Unprescribed public record fees; extraordinary copying.
[Added 7-30-2002 by Ord. No. 2792]
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., the Village of Ridgewood is entitled
to be reimbursed the actual cost of duplicating a record in the event
that no fee is prescribed by law or regulation, and the Village of
Ridgewood is entitled to charge an additional fee in the event that a
record cannot be reproduced by ordinary document-copying equipment
in ordinary business size or in the event the duplication involves an
extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to accommodate the
request.
B. In the event that a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation for
producing a copy or copies of a government record, the person
requesting such copies shall pay to the Village the actual cost of
duplicating the record.
C. In the event that the nature, format, matter of collation or volume of a
government record embodied in the form of printed matter is such that
the record cannot be reproduced by ordinary document-copying
equipment in ordinary business size or reproduction involves an
extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to accommodate the
§ 141-4 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-2.1
141:217
§ 145-3. Collection and disposition.
All fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be considered funds of the
Village of Ridgewood and shall be collected as follows: The person
rendering the service shall maintain a consecutively numbered receipt
book, in triplicate. When the fees are collected, the payor shall be given
the original receipt therefor. A copy of the receipt, together with the fee
therefor, shall thereupon be delivered to the Treasurer of the Village and the
remaining copy of the receipt retained by the person rendering the service
as a permanent record.
§ 145-4. Departmental fees.
The following fees are for various department services and charges as
indicated below:
Department, Type of Fee Fee
All Village departments
30Certified copy of any other public record,
each [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord. No.
2500]
$1
Reproduction of any public record or
document [Amended 6-12-2002 by Ord.
No. 278231]
1st page to 10th page $0.75 per page
11th page to 20th page $0.50 per page
All pages over 20 $0.25 per page
Copy of the Ridgewood Village Code $175
request, the Village may charge, in addition to the actual cost of
duplicating the record, a special service charge that shall be reasonable
and based upon the actual direct cost of providing the copy or copies.
The actual cost to be charged by the Village shall be the cost charged
by outside sources to produce the document or documents. The special
service charge shall be the actual cost to the Village of Ridgewood of
labor and material.
D. In each of the aforementioned instances, recited in Subsections B and
C, the requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object to the
charge prior to it being incurred.
30.Editor’s Note: The fees for a certification of a vital record, added 5-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2825, for providing for certified copy of a certificate of domestic partnership, for providing
for a correction form on a domestic partnership certificate, added 9-8-2004 by Ord. No.
2895, and for an attachment of correction using state safety paper, added 9-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 2895, which preceded this entry, were repealed 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 3645.
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that if the actual cost of duplication of a
printed government record maintained by the Village of Ridgewood exceeds the foregoing
rates, the Village shall be permitted to charge the actual cost of duplicating the record.
§ 145-2.1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-4
141:218
Department, Type of Fee Fee
With supplement service, additional per
year
$75
Village Street Map [Amended 2-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 3039]
$5
Building Department [Amended 10-9-2001
by Ord. No. 2800]
Land Use and Development Chapter of the
Village Code
$35
Map only $8
Departments of Fire and Police [Amended
3-12-1994 by Ord. No. 2455; 2-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 3099; 9-11-2019 by Ord. No.
3739; 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 3720]
Reproduction of any motor vehicle accident
report on forms required by the New Jersey
Division of Motor Vehicles, per page, picked
up in person only
8.5 x 11 inches (letter size) or smaller $0.05
11 x 14 inches (legal size) or larger $0.07
Reproduction of any motor vehicle accident
report on forms required by the New Jersey
Division of Motor Vehicles, when received
any other way than in person
$5
Per page charge, plus mailing costs:
8.5 x 11 inches (letter size) or smaller $0.05
11 x 14 inches (legal size) or larger $0.07
Photographs on CD for discovery, per CD $1
DVDs for discovery, per DVD $1
Reproduction of any police or fire reports,
discovery, when picked up in person, per
page charge
8.5 x 11 inches (letter size) or smaller $0.05
11 x 14 inches (legal size) or larger $0.07
Reproduction of any police or fire reports,
discovery, when requested to be mailed or
sent electronically
$5
Per page charge, plus mailing costs:
8.5 x 11 inches (letter size) or smaller $0.05
11 x 14 inches (legal size) or larger $0.07
Fingerprinting, each individual $40
§ 145-4 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-4
141:219
Department, Type of Fee Fee
Good conduct letter $10
Fees established for staff services authorized
under Chapter 67 of the Village Code or
otherwise when authorized by the Village
Manager [Added 9-27-2000 by Ord. No.
2708; amended 10-10-2001 by Ord. No.
2760; 8-13-2008 by Ord. No. 3128;
5-13-2009 by Ord. No. 3187; 9-16-2009 by
Ord. No. 3217; 4-10-2013 by Ord. No.
3376; 6-8-2016 by Ord. No. 3538]
The Village of Ridgewood shall be paid for
staff services authorized under Chapter 67 of
the Village Code or otherwise when
authorized by the Village Manager in
accordance with the following requirements
and fee schedule:
There shall be a two-hour minimum charge
when the event is sponsored by the Village of
Ridgewood. There otherwise shall be a fourhour
minimum charge per staff member, per
request or event. Said four-hour minimum
shall be payable if the request or requirement
for staff services is canceled or terminated
with less than two hours' notice to the Police
Department prior to the event.
In addition, the Village of Ridgewood shall be
paid for each request for staff services to
cover the expenses incurred by the Village
for the processing of payroll and billing. The
term "request for staff services" shall mean a
request for one or more police officers at a
specific location for any part of a calendar
day. The Village Manager shall have the
authority to waive this fee when it is in the
interest of the Village to do so.
$20 flat fee
The fee schedule is as follows:
Effective July 1, 2016: $115 per hour per
officer
This fee covers: $20 to municipality
and $95 to officer
If it is determined that a vehicle is needed,
the Village of Ridgewood shall be paid for the
use of any motor vehicle of the Police
Department.
$20 per hour or any
portion of an hour for
use
§ 145-4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-4
141:220
Department, Type of Fee Fee
In all cases compensation to Village police
officers will occur following the full payment
for services from the contracting authority. In
the case of long agreements for services,
officers will be paid via regular payroll as
payments are received by the Village. This
payroll payment process applies to any and
all work under this chapter.
Tax Collector
Issuance of duplicate tax bill [Amended
1-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2860]
$5
Issuance of water search $10
Village Street Map [Amended 2-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 3039]
$5
Village Voting District Map [Amended
2-14-2007 by Ord. No. 3039]
$8
Municipal Court [Amended 9-15-2010 by
Ord. No. 3263]
Preparation of Certified Court Disposition
(without seal)
$5
Preparation of Certified Court Disposition
Exemplified (with seal)
$10
Planning Board
Certification of any public record $1
Issuance of a determination of whether a
property is located in the Flood Hazard Zone
$5
Board of Adjustment
Certification of any public record $1
Department of Public Works
Sidewalk permit [Amended 2-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 3039]
$25
Tax Map booklets [Amended 2-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 3039]
$35
Tax Map sheets [Amended 2-14-2007 by
Ord. No. 3039]
$10
Master Plans [Amended 2-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 3039]
$35
Sale of screened compost, per cubic yard $7
Sale of unscreened compost, per cubic yard $2
Sale of wood chips, per cubic yard $5
§ 145-4 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-4
141:221
Department, Type of Fee Fee
Pickup by resident of screen compost,
unscreened compost or wood chips at
designated site
No fee
Resident-requested unscheduled curbside
solid waste pickup, not to exceed six cubic
yards, per pickup [Added 8-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 3134]
$150
Resident-requested unscheduled curbside
solid waste pickup, greater than six cubic
yards, per pickup [Added 8-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 3134]
$250
Other boards, departments and agencies
Certification of any public record, each $1
Hairdressers, cosmetology shops/salons and
barbershops with 10 or fewer work stations
[Added 12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3693]
$150
Hairdressers, cosmetology shops/salons and
barbershops with 11 or more work stations
[Added 12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3693]
$200
§ 145-5. General fees.32
The following fees are charged for miscellaneous services of the Village:
Type of Service or Permit Fee
Notary service for non-Village residents
Administering an oath or taking an affidavit $0.50
Taking proof of a deed $1
Taking all acknowledgments $1
Bad check charge [Amended 1-14-2004 by
Ord. No. 2860]
$20
First certified copy of birth certificate per
individual [Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No.
2310; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 2500;
4-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2779; 12-10-2003 by
Ord. No. 2854; 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 3023;
3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 3168]
$25
Each additional copy of birth certificate for the
same individual, purchased at the same time33
[Added 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 3168]
$20
32.Editor's Note: See § 145-7 for applicable late charges.
33.Editor’s Note: The fees for filing and processing fees for a corrected birth certificate form
with the State of New Jersey, added 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 3023, as amended, and for filing
§ 145-4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-5
141:222
Type of Service or Permit Fee
Filing and processing fees for correction of
forms with the State of New Jersey (birth,
marriage, death, civil union and domestic
partnership) [Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No.
3645]
$50
Providing for a certified copy of domestic
partnership [Added 5-9-2018 by Ord. No.
3645]
$15
Death certificates [Added 11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 3023; amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No.
3268]
First certified copy of death certificate per
individual
$25
Each additional copy of death certificate
for the same individual purchased at the
same time
$2
Certified copies of civil union certificate [Added
2-14-2007 by Ord. No. 3038]
$20
Certified copies of marriage certificates
[Amended 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 3023;
2-14-2007 by Ord. No. 3038]
$20
Nursery school [Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 2310; 1-10-1995 by Ord. No. 2499;
7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2946]
$100
Food and beverage vending machine, per
machine
$40
Hot tubs [Amended 5-9-1995 by Ord. No.
252334]
$25
Swimming pools [Amended 1-10-1995 by Ord.
No. 2499; 1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2619;
7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2946]
Year-round $275
Seasonal $200
Camps35 [Amended 9-9-1991 by Ord. No.
2310; 1-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2619;
7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2946]
$200
a corrected birth certificate form with the State of New Jersey due to hospital error, added
11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 3023, which immediately followed this entry, were repealed
5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 3645.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that the amended fee is retroactive to 1-1-1995.
35.Editor’s Note: The fee for correction of forms (marriage, death, and civil union), added
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 2310, as amended, which immediately followed this entry, was
repealed 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 3645.
§ 145-5 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-5
141:223
Type of Service or Permit Fee
36Summer camps [Added 9-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 2310]
$50
Flu shots*37 [Added 9-9-1991 by Ord. No.
2310; amended 1-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2728;
10-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2762]
Equal to the current
year's Medicare
reimbursement rate
established by the
federal Medicare
program
Pneumonia shots* [Added 1-10-2001 by Ord.
No. 2728; amended 10-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2762]
Equal to the current
year's Medicare
reimbursement rate
established by the
federal Medicare
program
One-day special event license [Added
11-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2761]
$50
Open Public Records Act requests [Added
8-11-2010 by Ord. No. 3256]
Photocopying $0.05 per page,
8.5-inch-by-11-inch
paper
$0.07 per page, legalsize
paper
* NOTE: No fee shall be charged to senior citizens (age 65 or older) or to
residents who are disabled; both senior citizens and disabled residents
are required to show proof of current active participation in Medicare
Part B. "Disability" shall be defined as set forth in the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated.
§ 145-6. Enumeration of fees relating to Code chapters.38
The following schedule of fees is hereby established with respect to
licenses, permits and activities required or regulated under the provisions
of various chapters of the Code of the Village of Ridgewood. Applications
for and the issuance of such licenses and permits shall be subject to the
provisions of the specific chapter of the Code which is indicated for each
type of license or permit. The business, activity or operation for which the
license or permit is required shall be subject to all regulations set forth
36.Editor’s Note: The fee for correction of forms (marriage, death, and civil union), added
9-9-1991 by Ord. No. 2310, as amended, which immediately followed this entry, was
repealed 5-9-2018 by Ord. No. 3645.
37.Editor's Note: The fee for processing corrections to birth records under Reg. 34, 35, 36,
which followed this fee, as amended, was repealed 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 3023
38.Editor's Note: See § 145-7 for applicable late charges.
§ 145-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:224
in the chapter to which reference is made. These fees may be adopted or
revised by ordinance of the Village Council from time to time.
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Chapter 70, Public Defender, Municipal
§ 70-11, application fee Not more than
$200
Chapter 99, Alarm Systems [Amended 3-12-1994
by Ord. No. 2455]
§ 99-4C, annual dial alarm system $10
§ 99-7B, false alarms
3rd to 5th false alarm, each $50
6th through 8th false alarm, each $100
9th and each subsequent false alarm $250
§ 99-13, Gamewell systems [Added 1-14-2004
by Ord. No. 2860; amended 11-8-2006 by
Ord. No. 3025; 4-13-2011 by Ord. No. 3288]
Alarm registration with Fire Department,
annual
$45
Connection with Village fire alarm system $335
One-time installation fee $250
False alarm, alarm malfunction or
accidental alarm fee schedule
1st and 2nd false alarm per year No charge
3rd to 5th false alarm per year, each $50
6th through 8th false alarm per year,
each
$100
9th and each subsequent false alarm
per year
$250
Chapter 101, Alcoholic Beverages
If any establishment or business which fails
to pay the fire alarm fees and/or false
alarm fees within 30 days after notice of
nonpayment, which notice shall be written
and sent 30 days after the initial bill is
rendered, there shall be a late charge of
10% of the fee, and the unpaid balance of
the fee shall thereafter accrue interest at
8% per annum.
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:225
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
§ 101-10B, plenary retail consumption license
[Amended 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2876;
4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2935]
$2,500
§ 101-11, plenary retail distribution license
[Amended 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2876;
4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2935]
$2,500
§ 101-13D, club license [Amended 5-11-2005
by Ord. No. 2939]
$180
§ 101-16, bartender identification card [Added
8-10-1993 by Ord. No. 2424]
$25
Chapter 103, Amusements
§ 103-3, application for license, per machine $300
§ 103-11, billiard parlor, pool tables, bowling
alley or shuffleboard, annual fees
Each table of shuffleboard $25
First 5 bowling alleys $20
Each bowling alley over 5 $10
§ 103-17, miniature golf, driving or putting
course or practice course or other similar area
where a fee is charged, annually
$75
Chapter 105, Animals
§ 105-6A [Amended 3-14-2007 by Ord. No.
3047; 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3110;
3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 3167]
State registration for spayed/neutered dogs $1.20
State registration for unspayed/unneutered
dogs
$4.20
License for spayed/neutered dogs $16.80
License for unspayed/unneutered dogs $20.80
§ 105-6B, late fee for dog license, after June 30,
per dog [Amended 4-9-2003 by Ord. No.
2823; 10-28-2009 by Ord. No. 3228]
$20
§ 105-6D [Added 5-9-2012 by Ord. No. 3339]
3-year license for spayed/neutered dogs $50.40
3-year license for unspayed/unneutered
dogs
$62.40
§ 105-6E [Added 2-13-2013 by Ord. No.
3372]
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:226
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
License fee for potentially dangerous dog $700
§ 105-9, redemption, per day $5
§ 105-17B, permit for keeping of cattle, per
animal [Amended 7-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2946]
$75
§ 105-18B, keeping poultry or fowl, each
premises, maximum 15 chickens [Amended
7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2946; 11-28-2018 by
Ord. No. 3681]
$30
§ 105-19B, keeping small animals, each
premises [Amended 7-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2946]
$75
§ 105-23, kennel, pet shop, animal hospital
license, annually [Amended 1-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 2619; 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2946]
$150
§ 105-45.1B, rental charge for holding cage, per
day [Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2381]
$5
§ 105-46G, cat licenses [Amended 4-9-2003
by Ord. No. 2823; 12-12-2007 by Ord. No.
3088; 10-28-2009 by Ord. No. 3228;
1-8-2020 by Ord. No. 3760]
License for unspayed/unneutered cat $15
License for spayed/neutered cat $12
Delinquent fee, if not licensed during the
month of rabies expiration, per cat
[Amended ]
$20
§ 105-46H, late fee for cat license not applied
for during month of rabies vaccination
expiration [Amended 10-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 3228]
$20
§ 105-46I, reissuance of lost or duplicate license $5
§ 105-46N, three-year cat licenses [Added
12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 3511; amended
1-8-2020 by Ord. No. 3760]
Three-year license for unspayed/
unneutered cat
$45
Three-year license for spayed/neutered cat $36
Chapter 107, Auctions and Special Sales
§ 107-5, license fee
First 30 days $35
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:227
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
2 30-day extensions, each $35
Annual fee $300
Chapter 112, Bicycles
§ 112-5A, registration fee $0.50
Chapter 114, Body Art [Added 5-12-2004 by Ord.
No. 2877]
§ 114-8, annual license for body art
establishment
$350
License issued effective July 1 $175
Late charge for applying for license more
than 30 days after renewal date
$25
Chapter 117, Businesses and Occupations39
[Amended 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 2523]
§ 117-16, license for boarding home for
children, per establishment
$50
§ 117-34A, each laundry business establishment
and 1 vehicle
$75
Each additional vehicle $10
§ 117-38C, license for laundromats, per
establishment
$150
License for dry cleaners, per establishment $75
§ 117-44, license fee for maternity homes, each
establishment
$50
§ 117-53, license fee for nursing and
convalescent homes, each establishment [Last
amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 3081]
$540
Chapter 123, Condominium Conversions
§ 123-2A, per building to be converted $150
Plus, per apartment or unit in the building to be
converted
$25
§ 123-2B, per appeal required $150
Chapter 125, Construction Codes, Uniform
39.Editor's Note: The annual license fee for massage parlor operators and masseurs,
previously included in § 117-40, was repealed 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 2547.
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:228
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
§ 125-3. Fees, The fee for a construction permit
shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed
below, rounded to the nearest dollar amount.
Fees for combination rehabilitation and
additions shall be computed as the sum of the
fees for the additions and rehabilitations
computed separately: [Amended 3-12-1996
by Ord. No. 2557; 9-19-2007 by Ord. No.
3077; 1-16-2008 by Ord. No. 3095;
9-10-2008 by Ord. No. 3138; 6-10-2009 by
Ord. No. 3189; 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 3468]
a. Building subcode fees. The building subcode fees shall be as follows:
1. For new buildings and structures and additions:
(a) For Occupancy Classification R-5, $0.060 per cubic foot.
(b) For all other occupancy classifications, $0.065 per cubic foot.
(c) The minimum fee for new buildings and/or structures and
additions shall be $250.
2. For alterations, renovations or rehabilitation, fees shall be
calculated on the total estimated cost (value) of the work, including
labor and materials:
(a) For Occupancy Classification R-5, the fee shall be $26 per
$1,000 of estimated value.
(b) For all other occupancy classifications, the fee shall be $37 per
$1,000 of estimated value.
(c) The minimum fee for alterations, renovations or rehabilitation
work shall be $75.
3. Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be computed
as the sum of the fees computed separately in accordance with
Items 1 and 2 above.
4. For swimming pools, the fee shall be:
(a) Aboveground pool, $110.
(b) In-ground pool, $325.
(c) Swimming pool barriers and fences greater than six feet in
height, $165.
5. For retaining walls associated with:
(a) Class III residential structures, up to 550 square feet, the fee
shall be $85.
(b) Class III residential structures, greater than 550 square feet,
the fee shall be $165.
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:229
(c) For other than Class III residential structures the fee shall be
$30 per $1,000 of estimated cost; with the minimum fee for
such work set at $105.
6. Fees for signs shall be $3 per square foot of sign area, calculated
on one side of double-faced signs, provided that the minimum fee
shall be $100.
7. Fees for siding and roofing shall be calculated in accordance with
Item 2(a) and (b) listed above.
8. The certificate of compliance for lead hazard abatement in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5.17 shall be $70.
9. For radon and lead remediation, the fee shall be $75.
10. The fee for a garden/utility shed greater than 100 square feet in
area or greater than 10 feet in height shall be $75.
11. An administrative fee of $84 for each construction permit issued
for an asbestos hazard abatement project, with an administrative
fee of $17 for each certificate of occupancy issued following the
successful completion of an asbestos hazard abatement project.
12. For demolition work the fees shall be:
(a) For each principal building, $250.
(b) For each accessory building, $100.
13. For new duct installation as part of a heating or cooling system, the
fee shall be $75.
14. The fee to renew an expired permit shall be based on the fee
schedule at the time of permit renewal.
15. The New Jersey state permit surcharge fee shall be:
(a) A training fee surcharge of $0.00371 per cubic foot, mandated
by N.J.A.C. 5:23-4-19(b) shall be charged for new buildings and
structures, and additions to existing buildings and structures.
(b) A training fee surcharge of $1.90 per $1,000 of value of
construction, mandated by N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19(b), shall be
charged for alteration, renovation or rehabilitation work to
existing structures.
16. Fees for temporary structures shall be charged a flat fee for each
such structure.
(a) Fees for each tent, hoop house, green house or membrane
structure in excess of 900 square feet in area or more than 30
feet in any dimension shall be $100. Electrical permits shall be
assessed separately.
(b) For construction, sales trailers or similar structures, the fee
shall be $75.
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:230
17. The fee for a permit for the moving a structure from one lot to
another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $20 per $1,000
of the sum of the estimated cost of moving plus the estimated cost
of new foundations and all work necessary to place the structure in
its completed condition in the new location.
18. The minimum building subcode fee shall be $75.
b. Electrical subcode fees. The electrical subcode fees shall be as follows:
1. For installation or replacement of outlets, fixtures, receptacles,
including lighting outlets, wall switches, fluorescent fixtures, line
voltage smoke detectors, low voltage fire alarm systems, burglar
alarm systems, convenience receptacles or similar fixtures, and
motors (fractional HP) or other devices of less than one horsepower
or kilowatt, the fees shall be calculated on the number of individual
components or devices, at $5 per device, with a minimum fee of
$75.
2. For each motor or similar electrical device, the fees shall be as
follows:
(a) For one to 20 horsepower, the fee shall be $25.
(b) For greater than 20 horsepower, the fee shall be $65.
3. For each transformer and/or generator over one kilovolt, the fee
shall be as follows:
(a) For one to 100 kilovolts the fee shall be $65.
(b) For greater than 100 kilovolts, the fee shall be $125.
4. For photovoltaic systems, the fee shall be based on the design
kilowatt rating of the solar voltaic system as follows:
(a) For one to 50 kilowatts, the fee shall be $75.
(b) For 51 to 100 kilowatts, the fee shall be $150.
(c) For greater than 100 kilowatts, the fee shall be $675.
5. For each electrical service entrance, the fees shall be as follows:
(a) For up to 100 amperes, the fee shall be $75.
(b) For 101 up to 400 amperes, the fee shall $150.
(c) For over 400 amps, the fee shall be $175.
(d) For each additional underground service the fee shall be $40.
(e) For a temporary pole/construction service, the fee shall be
$100.
6. For each electrical service subpanels, the fees shall be as follows:
(a) For up to 100 amperes, the fee shall be $75.
(b) For 101 up to 400 amperes, the fee shall be $150.
(c) For over 400 amps, the fee shall be $175.
7. For central air conditioner units, space heater, air handlers and
similar appliances, the fee shall be $65.
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:231
8. For electric range receptacles, oven/surface unit, electric water
heaters, electric dryer receptacles, dishwashers, garbage
disposals, and baseboard heaters, the fee shall be $45.
9. For motor control centers, the fee shall be $125.
10. For swimming pools, spas, or hot tubs, the fee shall be $100;
exterior lighting, subpanels, exterior outlets, etc., are priced
separately.
11. For commercial lights and poles the fees shall be as follows:
(a) From one to 10 poles, the fee shall be $75.
(b) From 11 to 20 poles, the fee shall be $125.
(c) From 21 to 30 poles, the fee shall be $250.
(d) For over 30 poles, the fee shall be $500.
12. For the annual pool inspection the fee shall be $100.
13. The minimum electrical subcode fee shall be $75.
c. Plumbing subcode fees. The plumbing subcode fees shall be as follows:
1. For installation or replacement of plumbing fixtures and devices,
such as but not limited to water closets, urinals, bidets, bathtubs,
showers, lavatory, sinks, floor drains, dishwashers, drinking
fountains, washing machines, laundry tubs, hose bibs, backflow
preventers, trap primers, plumbing stacks, garbage disposals,
water softeners and other similar devices, the fee shall be $30 each.
2. For installation or replacement of special fixtures and devices, such
as but not limited to grease traps, water heaters, oil separators,
water-cooled air conditioners, commercial refrigeration units,
condensate lines including appurtenances, steam boilers, water
boilers, commercial cooking equipment, automatic fuel shut-off
devices, gas piping, sewer pumps, sewer ejectors, fuel oil piping,
underground sprinkler systems, the fee shall be $75 each.
(a) For each appliance, including but not limited to broilers, clothes
dryers, deep fryers, grills, ovens, radiant heaters, steam tables
or kettles, log lighters and/or fireplaces the fee shall be $30.
3. For utility service installations and/or connections, including
potable water, fire service water, sewer, and gas, the fees shall be
$75 per connection.
4. For liquefied petroleum gas tank installations, $125.
5. For septic system abandonment, $125.
6. For swimming pool water supply, $75.
7. For public pool annual inspection, $100.
8. The minimum plumbing subcode fee shall be $75.
d. Fire protection subcode fees. The fire protection subcode fees shall be
as follows:
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:232
1. For installation or replacement of fire protection alarm systems and
components, such as smoke or heat detectors, carbon monoxide
detectors, horns/strobes, or other types of automatic detection,
signaling or supervisory systems, the fees shall be calculated on the
number of individual component devices, at $7.50 per device, with
a minimum fee of $75.
2. For the installation, replacement or relocation of fire protection
sprinkler heads the fee shall be as follows:
(a) From one to 20 heads, the fee shall be $85.
(b) For each additional head, the fee shall be $5 each.
3. For installation or replacement of each standpipe system, the fee
shall be $250.
4. For fire pumps the fee shall be $200 each.
5. For preaction and dry pipe alarms and components the fee shall be
$75 each.
6. For pre-engineered extinguishing systems, such as but not limited
to wet chemical, dry chemical, foam, carbon dioxide, and FM 200
systems, the fee shall be $150 each.
7. For gas and oil-fired heat producing appliances, such as but not
limited to furnaces, boilers, industrial ovens, processing
equipment, water heaters, dryers, pool heaters, generators, and
other similar devices, the fees shall be $75 each.
8. For smoke control and exhaust systems, the fee shall be $300 each.
9. For solid fueled appliances, such as wood stoves, coal stoves,
premanufactured fireplaces and chimneys, the fee shall be $75
each.
10. For commercial cooking exhaust systems, the fee shall be $125 per
system.
11. For the installation, removal, demolition or abandonment of
flammable or combustible fuel storage tanks, the fee shall be $125.
12. The minimum fire protection subcode fee shall be $75.
e. Fee for plan review. The fee for plan review shall be 25% of the
anticipated total permit fees, and may be required to be paid
when the permit application and the plans are filed, and before
the plans are reviewed. The amount paid for this fee shall be
credited toward the final permit fees, provided that the plan
review fee shall not be refundable.
1. There shall be an additional fee of $65 per hour or portion
thereof, for review of any amendment or change to a plan
that has already been released.
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:233
f. Estimated value of work. The estimated cost (value) of work
for any subcode includes all costs normally associated with the
work, such as labor and materials (including those donated)
and the contractor's profit. The amounts entered on the permit
application forms are subject to review by the Construction
Official, who may approve or modify them as he deems
necessary.
g. Special inspections. Special overtime inspections: a permit
holder may request special inspections outside of the normal
business workday. The fee for these inspections shall be $100
for the first hour and $25 for each additional hour. When
inspection is not continuous with the business workday, the fees
shall be $150 for the first hour, and $50 for each additional
hour.
h. Certificates of occupancy. For certificates of occupancy, the fees
shall be as follows:
1. For one- and two-family dwelling units, $50 per unit.
2. For all other use groups, $100 per certificate.
3. There shall be no charge for the first temporary certificate
of occupancy issued.
4. For each extension of the temporary certificate of
occupancy for Residential Group R-5 occupancies, the fee
shall be $100.
5. For each extension of the temporary certificate of
occupancy for all other occupancy classifications, the fee
shall be $200.
6. For a zoning certificate of occupancy, the fee shall be
$200.
i. Construction Board of Appeals application. The fee for such application
shall be $125.
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Chapter 133, Dumpsters
§ 133-4C, permit fee - public areas [Amended
3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 3707]
$50
Renewal fee $50
Daily fee (determined by size of dumpster)
Less than 1 yard to 20 yards $10
21 yards to 30 yards $25
Permit fee - private property (per month or
part thereof)
$25
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:234
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Chapter 137, Emergency medical services thirdparty
billing plan fees: [Added 2-13-2008 by Ord.
No. 3098; amended 10-11-2017 by Ord. No.
3617]
Responding to calls and administering services,
nontransport
$125
Providing service and transportation $750
Mileage costs $18 per mile per
trip
Oxygen use $50
Outstanding balances for non-Village of Ridgewood residents shall go
to a collection agency to collect the outstanding balance. Collection
cost is 20% on a dollar going to the collection agency and 80% on a
dollar returned to the Village of Ridgewood.
Chapter 141, Farmers' Market [Added 2-14-2001
by Ord. No. 2729]
Annual license fee $50
Chapter 147, Filming [Amended 4-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 2779; 10-11-2006 by Ord. No. 3017]
§ 147-3, permit fees
Film fee:
Commercial $500
Nonprofit $100
Student (up to college level) $25
Traffic fee, per hour per officer $65
Clean-up deposit, per day covered by the permit
Not less than $250
Nor more than $5,000
Chapter 149, Fire Prevention
§ 149-8A, various use group inspection fees
[Amended 3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 2401;
4-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2779; 9-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 2798; 12-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2961; 11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 3027;
4-13-2011 by Ord. No. 3288; 9-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3736]
Assembly, A-1 $250
Business
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:235
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
0 to 500 square feet $65
501 to 999 square feet $75
1,000 to 2,999 square feet $85
3,000 to 4,999 square feet $100
5,000 to 6,999 square feet $110
7,000 to 8,999 square feet $140
9,000 to 10,999 square feet $160
11,000 to 17,999 square feet $300
18,000 square feet and up $440
Certificate of Fire Code status fee $55
(if inspection required) $110
Factory and industrial $325
(not regulated by life hazard use fee
schedule established by the State of
New Jersey)
Mercantile
0 to 500 square feet $65
501 to 999 square feet $75
1,000 to 2,999 square feet $85
3,000 to 4,999 square feet $100
5,000 to 6,999 square feet $110
7,000 to 8,999 square feet $140
9,000 to 10,999 square feet $160
11,000 to 11,999 square feet $300
(Mercantile establishments in excess of
12,000 square feet are regulated by life
hazard use fees payable to the State of
New Jersey)
Residential (multifamily)
Flat fee $100
Plus per unit fee of $6/each
(One- and two-family dwelling units,
non-owner occupied, fee to be paid by
party requesting inspection)
$55
Storage use $225
Temporary and miscellaneous $0
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:236
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
§ 149-9, permit fees [Amended 1-14-2004 by
Ord. No. 2861; 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3736]
Fire Safety Permits
Type 1 $54
Type 2 $214
Type 3 $427
Type 4 $641
§ 149-13, smoke detector and carbon monoxide
detectors [Amended 1-14-2004 by Ord. No.
2861; 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2960;
11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 3026; 9-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3736]
Certificate of compliance
Inspection requested more than 10 days
after date of application
$100
Inspection requested within 10 days of
application
$150
Inspection requested within three days of
application
$200
False alarm, alarm malfunction or
accidental alarms
First and second false alarm per calendar
year will remain at no charge
Third to fifth false alarm per calendar year $100
Sixth to eighth false alarm per calendar
year
$200
Ninth and each subsequent false alarm per
calendar year
$500
Chapter 156, Food and Food-Handling
Establishments
§ 156-15B, selling from vehicles [Last
amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2946]
License fee per establishment and 1
vehicle [Amended 7-13-2005 by Ord.
No. 2946]
$200
Each additional vehicle $25
§ 156-20B, license fee [Last amended
11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 3555]
Up to 6,000 square feet $405
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:237
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
6,000 to 10,000 square feet $625
Greater than 10,000 square feet $775
NOTE: After July 1 of the licensing year, license will be sold at a
prorated amount of half of the annual license fee.
§ 156-20C, permit fee for establishments selling
packaged food and beverages only [Amended
3-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2622; 7-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 2946]
$100
§ 156-29, license fee, wholesale, per
establishment plus 1 vehicle
$70
Each additional vehicle $25
§ 156-41, license to manufacture or sell ice
[Repealed 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 3555]
§ 156-50A, restaurant license fee, based on
seating capacity [Last amended 11-9-2016
by Ord. No. 3555]
1 to 49 seats $405
50 to 99 seats $565
100 or more seats $675
NOTE: After July 1 of the licensing year, license will be sold at a
prorated amount of half of the annual license fee.
§ 156-63, food handler's certificate, upon
issuance [Amended 12-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2854; 11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3151;
12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3314]
$25
Food handler’s course fee $35
Manager’s food handler’s course fee $135
Manager’s course handbook $65
Servsafe handbook $5
§ 156-70F, outdoor cafe license, annual fee per
number of seats [Added 6-7-1993 by Ord. No.
2415;40 amended 2-13-2001 by Ord. No.
273041; 7-17-2019 by Ord. No. 3723]
Fees Effective January 1, 2019
40.Editor's Note: This ordinance also specified that the fee would be for the issuance of a
license to operate an outdoor cafe in the Central Business District, whether authorized by
the Land Use Ordinance, Ch. 190, or the Outdoor Cafe Ordinance, Ch. 156, Art. VIII.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also included the definition of "seat" and "bench" as follows:
A seat shall be defined as an individual seating unit such as a chair. Benches shall be
defined as a minimum of two seating units and up to a maximum of four seating units.
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:238
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
1 to 4 chairs and/or combination of
benches
$100
5 to 12 chairs and/or combination of
benches
$175
13 to 20 chairs and/or combination of
benches
$300
Over 20 chairs and/or combination of
benches
$450
Benches only $100 per bench
Fees Effective January 1, 2020
1 to 4 chairs and/or combination of
benches
$100
5 to 12 chairs and/or combination of
benches
$175
13 to 20 chairs and/or combination of
benches
$300
31 to 40 chairs and/or combination of
benches
$550
Over 40 chairs and/or combination of
benches
$650
Benches only $100 per bench
Chapter 163, Garage Sales
§ 163-2, permit fee $5
Chapter 165, Garbage, Rubbish, Refuse and
Recycling
§ 165-25, license to remove fat, bones and
refuse, per establishment, plus 1 vehicle
$25
Each additional vehicle $10
Chapter 174, Holiday Displays [Added 10-14-2015
by Ord. No. 3503]
§ 174-2, Permit fee for display annual permit $50
Chapter 186, Landscapers and Landscaping
Services [Added 2-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2973;
amended 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2996;
4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 3716]
§ 186-4, Annual registration fee per year, for an
annual permit to deposit yard waste at
Lakeview Compost Facility, utilizing facility
acceptance tickets for up to five vehicles
$50
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:239
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Additional decals, each $10
Facility acceptance tickets, each $30
Chapter 190, Land Use and Development
[Amended 7-18-2007 by Ord. No. 3066]
§ 190-12C, for list of addresses to whom
applicant is required to give notice
$10
§ 190-22, schedule of fees
Copy of decision of governing body to
interested party in connection with an
appeal
$10
Publication in newspaper of decision
concerning governing body on an appeal
At cost
Certificate of subdivision approval $25
Certification of deed restriction $25
Minor subdivision $800
Plus, each lot, including the remainder $200
Concept plan for application for
development
$200
(fee to be credited against fee for
subsequent formal application if filed
within one year of hearing on concept
application)
Preliminary major subdivision $1,000
Plus, each lot $200
Final major subdivision
If approved requested simultaneously
with preliminary major subdivision
approval
$200
Plus, each lot $50
If approval requested subsequent to
preliminary major subdivision approval
$500
Plus, each lot $100
Minor site plan
Planning Board Site Plan
Subcommittee
$250
Full Board review $500
Preliminary major site plan
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:240
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
First 10,000 square feet of lot area or
fraction thereof affected by the
development
$500
Plus, each additional 10,000 square
feet of lot area or fraction thereof
affected by the development
$100
Plus, for first 1,000 square feet of floor
area of any new building or addition
$300
Plus, for each 1,000 square feet or
fraction thereof of floor area over 1,000
square feet
$100
Minimum amount $400
Maximum amount $15,000
Final site plan
If approval requested simultaneously
with preliminary major site plan
approval
25% of the fee for
the preliminary
site plan
(excluding any
variance fee)
If approval requested subsequent to
preliminary major site plan approval
50% of the fee for
the preliminary
site plan
(excluding any
variance fee)
Certificates of occupancy See fees for
§ 125-3 above
Sign permit fee, per square foot $2
Minimum $50
"D" variance application involving
prohibited use, expansion of
nonconforming use or density [N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(1), (2) and/or (5)]
$1,000 per
variance
"D" variance application, other [N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(3), (4) and/or (6)]
$500 per
variance
"C" variances (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c)
If not part of site plan or subdivision, or
if bifurcated from site plan or
subdivision
$200 each,
$1,000 maximum
If reviewed simultaneously with site
plan and/or subdivision
$150 each, $750
maximum
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:241
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Amended approval of prior subdivision, site
plan or variance application
25% of the fee for
the original
application
Application to extend or toll period of
protection against changes in development
regulations, to extend deadline for
complete construction (§ 190-97E) or to
extend deadline for filing of subdivision
$200
Application for certification of
nonconforming use or structure
$200
Relief from § 190-131 or 190-132 Same as "C"
variance
Appeal of administrative officer decision (§
190-29)
$200
Zoning chapter interpretations by Board of
Adjustment
$200
Special meeting requested by interested
party
Planning Board (includes professionals
attending)
$2,000
Board of Adjustment (includes
professionals attending)
$1,000
Transcripts or tapes: transcripts or
tapes of record of proceedings
furnished to an interested party
Actual cost of
preparing the
transcript or tape
Engineering review and site inspection
for single-family detached homes when
a lot's impervious area is increased
more than 200 square feet
$150
§ 190-23A, schedule of escrow deposits
Initial deposit required to reimburse
the Village for costs of professional
services involved in the processing an
application
Four times the
application fee or
fees as set forth
in the schedule of
fees
Subsequent escrow increases Determined by
the Board
Secretary
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:242
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
§ 190-37C(1), site plan exemption
application [Added 10-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 3220; amended 8-13-2014 by Ord.
No. 3426]
$250, provided
that the fee shall
be $100 if the
typical purchase
and installation
cost of the
improvements
which are the
subject of the
application do not
exceed $2,500.
The application
fee shall be
credited toward
the formal site
plan application
fee if a) the site
plan exemption is
denied and b) the
formal
application is
filed within 190
days of the
exemption denial.
§ 190-97B, zoning permit review, per lot $50
§ 190-97F(4)(a), application for temporary
certificate of occupancy
$200
§ 190-97F(4)(d), application for extension
of temporary certificate of occupancy
$200
§ 190-97F(4)(e), application for second
renewal of temporary certificate of
occupancy
$200
§ 190-97F(4)(g)[4], cash escrow for bond
other than cash
$500
§ 190-97J(3), minor retaining wall permit $50
§ 190-97J(4), major retaining wall permit $150
§ 190-97G(5)(a), application for temporary
certificate of occupancy, per dwelling unit42
$100
§ 190-122H(9), Temporary portable
sidewalk
42.Editor’s Note: The fee for a request to amend the Master Plan or development regulations,
which immediately followed, was repealed 9-7-2016 by Ord. No. 3541.
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:243
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
A-frame signs [Added 12-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 3567]
$100 per
calendar year
Temporary storage containers permit fee:
[Added 1-16-2019 by Ord. No. 3696]
$25 for first 30
days
Temporary storage containers permit renewal
fee: [Added 1-16-2019 by Ord. No. 3696]
$150 for six
months (no more
than two sixmonth
periods,
after first 30
days)
Chapter 199, Newsracks
§ 199-4A, annual fee per newsrack43 $100
Chapter 212, Parks and Recreation Areas [Last
amended 4-19-2003 by Ord. No. 2822]
§ 212-27B, tennis court badges [Amended
3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2982; 4-11-2007 by
Ord. No. 3048; 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3072;
3-13-2013 by Ord. No. 3375; 4-13-2016 by
Ord. No. 3526; 1-16-2019 by Ord. No. 3688]
Adult
2019 - 2020 $40
Child
2019 - 2020 $35
Guest pass
2019 - 2020 $5
Senior resident (62 and over)
2019 - 2020 Free
Nonresident adult
2019 - 2020 $50
Nonresident child
2019 - 2020 $45
43.Editor's Note: The fee for the Park and Ride Facility, which previously followed this entry,
was repealed 10-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2758.
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:244
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Day camp [Amended 5-12-2004 by Ord.
No. 2878; 5-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2938;
2-13-2008 by Ord. No. 3100; 3-11-2009
by Ord. No. 3165; 3-9-2011 by Ord. No.
3282; 4-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3335;
3-12-2014 by Ord. No. 3406; 4-13-2016
by Ord. No. 3525; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3578; 12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3687]
Resident $600
Nonresident $850
Late fee (after June 10 each year) $50
Graydon Pool admission: [Amended
3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2978; 4-19-2006
by Ord. No. 2989; 5-10-2006 by Ord.
No. 2992; 4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 3048;
4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 3050; 6-13-2007
by Ord. No. 3060; 8-8-2007 by Ord. No.
3072; 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3073;
5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3119; 5-14-2008
by Ord. No. 3121; 5-13-2009 by Ord.
No. 3185; 3-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3244;
3-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3250; 3-9-2011
by Ord. No. 3280; 5-15-2012 by Ord.
No. 3342; 3-13-2013 by Ord. No. 3375;
4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 3410; 4-13-2016
by Ord. No. 3526; 3-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3587; 1-16-2019 by Ord. No. 3688;
1-16-2019 by Ord. No. 3697]
Early discount - adult resident
membership (effective April 1 to April
30, 2019 and April 1 to April 30, 2020)
$117
Early discount - child resident
membership (effective April 1 to April
30, 2019 and April 1 to April 30, 2020)
$108
Adult resident membership
2019 - 2020 $130
Child resident membership
2019 - 2020 $120
Senior resident (62 and over)
2019 - 2020 $30
Nonresident adult
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:245
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
2019 - 2020 $220
Nonresident child
2019 - 2020 $195
Resident daily guest pass
2019 - 2020 $15
Resident seasonal member of Graydon
Pool sponsored guest pass
$15/day/person
Resident nonmember of Graydon Pool
guest pass
$15/day/person
Nonresident seasonal adult member of
Graydon Pool sponsored guest pass
$20/day/person
Nonresident guest/sponsored $20
Resident memberships - coupon
booklets
Resident coupon booklets of 11
coupons may only be purchased by
adult resident seasonal members
of Graydon Pool
$150
Resident patron with a permanent
disability as defined by the Americans
with Disabilities Act, Title 42 U.S.C.
§ 12101 (Applications for membership
for this new category must be
accompanied by proof of disability in
the form of social security income or
disability statement and proof of
residency must accompany application
and payment)
$30
Late season fees: August 1 through Labor Day,
2019 and 2020
Adult $65
Child $60
Mobile concession unit [Added 4-9-2014 by
Ord. No. 3409]
$250 per event
$500 per season
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:246
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Use of the unit shall be available to Parks
and Recreation cosponsored groups/
organizations and Village agencies,
departments, boards and committees. Fees
shall cover purchase of propane, overhead
grill filters and professional cleaning
services
§ 212-30C, Classifications [Added 4-12-2017
by Ord. No. 3590]
Class A Groups
Facility use after hours (defined as outside of
9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
and holidays) that require Village staff for
security. Two-hour minimum
$50 per hour or
any part therof
Supplemental charge if facility use is for
social or fundraising purposes. Two-hour
minimum
$30 per hour or
any part thereof
Class B Groups
Facility use after hours (defined as outside of
9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
and holidays) that require Village staff for
security. Two-hour minimum
$50 per hour or
any part thereof
Supplemental charge if facility use is for
social or fundraising purposes. Two-hour
minimum
$30 per hour or
or any part
thereof
Class C Groups
Facility use
Small meeting room (Activity Room, main
level) Two-hour minimum
$40 (first two
hours), plus $20
per hour
thereafter or any
part thereof
Conference room (Bolger Room, main
level). Two-hour minimum
$40 (first two
hours), plus $20
per hour
thereafter or any
part thereof
Large meeting room (Community Room,
lower level). Two-hour minimum
$50 (first two
hours), plus $25
per hour
thereafter or any
part thereof
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:247
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Supplemental charge if facility use is for
social or fundraising purposes
$30 per hour or
any part thereof
Supplemental security fee for weekends,
holidays, and after 4:00 p.m.
$50 per hour or
any part thereof
Class D Groups
Class D Groups are all of those that do not meet
the criteria of the previous groups, A, B, and C.
For use of any facility room
Rental fee, two-hour minimum $130 (first two
hours), plus $30
per hour
thereafter or any
part thereof
Security fee, groups less than 50 people $50 per hour or
any part thereof
for Friday,
Saturday, Sunday,
and holidays
Security fee, groups larger than 50 people,
up to 200 people
$100 per hour or
any part thereof,
all hours, all
times
Security fee, groups larger than 200 people
up to permitted maximum
$300 per hour or
any part thereof,
all hours, all
times
Kitchen and onsite equipment use,
including appliances, tables, chairs,
electronics/technology (TVs, VHS and DVD
players, projector, screens)
$100 per event
Nonresident use fee (Non-Ridgewood
based groups)
$50 per event
Additional fees for large groups requiring
Village services
$50 per hour or
any part thereof
per Village staff
member
§ 212-31C Classifications [Added 4-11-2018
by Ord. No. 3641]
Class A Groups
All rooms available for use
Room use charge No charge
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:248
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Security charge No charge
Class B Groups
All rooms available for use
Room use charge between the hours of 8:30
a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday
No charge
Security charge between the hours of 8:30 a.m.
and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday
No charge
If staffing is required, a security charge of $50 per hour shall apply during
weekends, public holidays, as well as hours after 4:30 p.m. Large groups
(over 75 attending) will also require one additional Village staff member
for security of the building at the rate of an additional $50 per hour.
Class C Groups (minimum of two hours)
Garden Room:
First two hours or part thereof $30
For each additional hour or part thereof $15
Senior Lounge:
First two hours or part thereof $50
For each additional hour or part thereof $25
Youth Lounge:
First two hours or part thereof $70
For each additional hour or part thereof $35
If staffing is required, a security charge of $50 per hour shall apply
during weekends, public holidays, as well as hours after 4:30 p.m.
Large groups (over 75 attending) will also require one additional
Village staff member for security of the building at the rate of an
additional $50 per hour.
Class D Groups (minimum of two hours)
All rooms:
First two hours or part thereof $150
For each additional hour or part thereof $45
If staffing is required, a security charge of $50 per hour shall apply during
weekends, public holidays, as well as hours after 4:30 p.m. Large groups
(over 75 attending) will also require one additional Village staff member
for security of the building at the rate of an additional $50 per hour.
Class E Groups (minimum of two hours)
All rooms:
First two hours or part thereof $200
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:249
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
For each additional hour or part thereof $75
If staffing is required, a security charge of $50 per hour shall apply during
weekends, public holidays, as well as hours after 4:30 p.m. Large groups
(over 75 attending) will also require one additional Village staff member
for security of the building at the rate of an additional $50 per hour.
Amenities Fee:
For kitchen use and use of on-site equipment:
A fee will apply for the use of the kitchen,
tables, chairs, table games, electronic/
technology (i.e., television, projector and
screen).
$100
Parks and Shade Tree Divisions [Added 1-16-2019
by Ord. No. 3694]
Village shade tree "adopt a tree" $450 per tree
(Special select
species may cost
extra. Placement
restrictions apply.
Includes
purchase and
installation only.
Maintenance is
the responsibility
of the
homeowner.)
Commemorative/memorial tree $650 (Includes
tree, bronze plate
footing/
inscription,
installation and
continued Village
maintenance.)
Commemorative/memorial bench $850 (Includes
bench, cement
installation and
plaque.)
Chapter 218, Peddling and Soliciting
§ 218-6A, license fee per identification card
issued, per calendar year
$50
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:250
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Chapter 238, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
[Amended 3-8-1994 by Ord. No. 2447;
12-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2855; 2-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 2973; 7-1-2006 by Ord. No. 3005;
11-8-2006 by Ord. No. 3030; 4-11-2007 by Ord.
No. 3051; 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3103;
8-13-2008 by Ord. No. 3131; 11-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 3150; 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3176]
§ 238-24A [Amended 10-13-2010 by Ord. No.
3264; 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 3350;
9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3546]
(1) Annual service charge, residential
dischargers. For each single-family
dwelling unit located outside of the
municipal boundaries of the Village of
Ridgewood that discharges into the
Village's collection system
$400
(2) Annual service charge, nonresidential
dischargers. For each nonresidential
property, entity, or discharger outside of
the municipal boundaries of the Village of
Ridgewood that discharges into the
Village's collection system, per EDU or part
thereof discharged per calendar year
$400
(3) Annual service charge, significant
dischargers. For each premises, entity,
dwelling unit, or property located outside
of the municipal boundaries of the Village
of Ridgewood that discharges in excess of
1 EDU per calendar year into the Village's
collection system.
$5,000
§ 238-24B [Amended 8-12-2009 by Ord. No.
3204]
(1) Connection fee for residential
development: for each dwelling unit
created by residential development
situated within the service area of the
Village of Ridgewood sanitary sewer
system [Amended 3-14-2018 by Ord.
No. 3635]
$6,000
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:251
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
(2) Connection fee for nonresidential
development: for all nonresidential
development, for all new or additional
square feet of gross floor area of
development created on a premise,
property, or parcel situated within the
service area of the Village of Ridgewood
sanitary sewer system [Amended
3-14-2018 by Ord. No. 3635]
Up to 6,000 square feet of gross floor
area of development
$6,000
For each square foot of gross floor area
of development in excess of 6,000
square feet
$0.75 per square
foot
(3) Connection fee per dwelling unit
situated in a municipality adjacent to the
Village of Ridgewood that has executed an
interlocal agreement with the Village of
Ridgewood for collection and treatment
services for domestic sanitary sewage
[Amended 12-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3235]
$5,000
Plus, for each EDU or part thereof $200
§ 238-24C [Amended 10-13-2010 by Ord. No.
3264; 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 3350;
3-12-2014 by Ord. No. 3405; 1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3451; 5-11-2016 by Ord. No. 3528;
3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3586; 3-14-2018 by
Ord. No. 3634; 3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 3705]
(1) Significant discharger annual flow
charge: for each commercial/industrial/
institutional premises, entity, dwelling unit,
user, or property located within the service
area of the Village of Ridgewood sanitary
sewage collection system boundaries
2019 charge per thousand gallons' flow
in excess of one EDU as measured by
water meter consumption
$4.27
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:252
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
(2) Tax-exempt and tax-credited users
annual flow charge: for each tax-exempt
and tax-credited entity, dwelling unit, user,
discharger, or property located within the
service area of the Village of Ridgewood
sanitary sewage collection system
boundaries
2019 charge per thousand gallons' flow
into the Village collection system as
measured by water meter consumption
$4.27
§ 238-25A, permit filing fee $25
§ 238-25B, connection fee per dwelling unit on
a premises within the Village of Ridgewood
limits
$5,000
Connection fee for nonresidential properties
outside of the Village of Ridgewood
$5,000
Plus, for each EDU or part thereof $250
§ 238-25B, connection fee for residential
premises within the Village limits
$4,000
§ 238-26, permit to reconnect when service is
disconnected for failure to pay the annual
service charge
$50
§ 238-34, permit fee for private sewer system $75
§ 238-39A, permit fee for septic tank, sewage
disposal device or subsurface drainage system
$200
§ 238-41B, certificate of registration $25
§ 238-41D, renewal of certificate of registration $5
§ 238-47, permit to pump out septic tank $5
§ 238-89, acceptable liquid wastes, fee per
gallon: [Added 12-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3234;
amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 3331;
9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 3390; 3-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 3584]
(1) Grey water/septage $0.035 per gallon
(2) Masticated flowable food waste $0.05 to $0.10
per gallon
(3) Wastewater meeting requirements $0.035 to $0.06
per gallon
(4) Pumpout FOG, less than 25%
nonaqueous viscous fats/oils/grease
$0.09 to $0.12
per gallon
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:253
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
(5) Concentrated FOG, 26% to 50%
nonaqueous viscous fats/oils/grease
$0.10 to $0.14
per gallon
(6) Super concentrated FOG, greater than
50% nonaqueous viscous fats/oils/grease
$0.13 to $0.17
per gallon
§ 238-96, reinspection of a premises, building,
structure, or facility for compliance, per
inspection [Added 12-14-2011 by Ord. No.
3322]
$50
§ 238-97, the noncompliance monthly surcharge
assessed, per month or part thereof [Added
12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3322]
$50
Chapter 246, Soil Removal [Amended 2-8-2006 by
Ord. No. 2973]
§ 246-4, for ministerial soil-moving permit $50
For a minor soil-moving permit $125
For a major soil-moving permit $150
Plus, per cubic yard $0.25
Chapter 249, Streets and Sidewalks [Amended
7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2607; 2-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 2973; 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3074;
3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3105; 6-9-2010 by Ord.
No. 3255; 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 3333;
9-16-2015 by Ord. No. 3497]
§ 249-11B, barricade fees:
Barricades for approved residential events $125 per
carricade
Events in the Central Business District or for
groups, churches, businesses or nonprofits
holding events which require multiple
barricades
$500 one-time
charge
Fees to be refunded upon the successful return of all barricades in
good condition to the Village.
§ 249-16B, street access permit $25
§ 249-31A, permit to remove, repair or replace
a curb or sidewalk, per lot
$60
249-31D, annual contractor permit $600
§ 249-45A, application fee for minor street
opening
$50
(12) Fee per parking meter bagged per day
or portion of a day
$10 per day
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:254
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
§ 249-45B, application fee for major street
opening
$150
§ 249-47A, permit fees:
For all paved streets, in addition any
inspection costs related to the proposed
opening
$40
On improved roadways, in addition to any
inspection costs related to the proposed
opening
$10
§ 249-47B, inspection fees
For each inspection up to 1 hour $60
For each additional hour or part thereof $60
Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, per hour
or part thereof
$85
§ 249-75C, Pay telephone permit fees
Per telephone for the first year $200
Per telephone for each year thereafter $50
Chapter 251, Swimming Pools
§ 251-6A, fee per $1,000 cost of construction $15
Minimum fee $50
§ 251-6B, fee for public pool $75
Chapter 256, Taxicabs and Limousines [Amended
3-12-1994 by Ord. No. 2455; 3-10-2004 by Ord.
No. 2868; 6-9-2004 by Ord. No. 2888]
§ 256-3, taxicab owner's license $50
Taxicab driver's license $20
§ 256-18, limousine owner's license $50
Limousine driver's license $20
Chapter 258, Towing [Added 5-9-1994 by Ord.
No. 2463; amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No.
2645; 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3107; 5-11-2011
by Ord. No. 3294; 1-14-2015 by Ord. No. 3454]
§ 258-5C, tow truck driver annual permit $30
258-7F, Schedule of fees: services requested by
Police Department or Village of Ridgewood only.
I. The following is a fee schedule for basic
automobile, motorcycle, motorized bikes, and
heavy-duty towing and recovery:
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:255
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Basic towing services (two-axle vehicle)
under 8,000 pounds gross vehicle weight:
Wheel lift rate $100
Flatbed rate $117
Additional axles, each $37
Wheel lift mileage fee, anywhere in
New Jersey, per mile
$5.30
Flatbed mileage fee, anywhere in New
Jersey, per mile
$5.35
Basic towing services (two-axle vehicle),
8,001 pounds to 16,000 pounds gross
vehicle weight:
Towing rate, per hour $313
Motorcycle rate $117
Motorized bikes (mopeds) $63
Heavy-duty towing (over 16,001 pounds
gross vehicle weight):
Rate per hour, one-hour minimum $345
Driveshaft removal $48
Brake release $48
Air cushion device in heavy-duty
recovery, per hour
$583
II. The following is a fee schedule for storage
services of all types of vehicles:
Inside building, secure storage facility (per
calendar day):
Under 10,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight, no more than two axles, per
day
$48
Each additional axle, per day $21
Outside secure storage facility (per
calendar day):
Under 10,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight, no more than two axles, per
day
$37
Additional axle, per day $22
Over 10,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight, per day
$80
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:256
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Tandem-axle truck, per day $106
Tractor-trailer combo, per day $148
III. The following is a fee schedule for
emergency road services:
Emergency road service call $60
Vehicle lockouts $80
IV. The following is a fee schedule for vehicle
recovery and winching:
Light duty:
Winching (car does not roll or has flat
tires)
$80
Off-road recovery or vehicle uprighting,
per hour
$159
Medium duty:
Winching/off-road recovery or
uprighting, per hour
$265
Heavy duty:
Winching/off-road recovery or
uprighting, per hour
$450
V. The following is a fee schedule for additional
services rendered:
Axle/driveshaft removal $48
Airline hookup $27
Crash wrap (plastic wrap encasement if
windows are broken or will not close:
Per side window $27
Front or rear window $42
Administrative fee, per task (to include but
not limited to sending/receiving of faxes or
e-mails, reviewing vehicles with insurance
adjusters, the taking and supplying of
photographs, inventory reports, etc.)
$37
Yard charge (when applicable) $58
Waiting time (rig downtime on scene) (to
be charged in 15-minute increments with a
15-minute minimum, beginning after the
first 15 minutes on scene), per hour
$106
Scene cleanup fees:
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:257
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Debris cleanup, per vehicle $37
Oil absorbent placement, cleanup, and
disposal per 50-pound bag, first bag
$32
Each additional bag $13
Additional personnel, when required, per
hour per person
$80
Recovery supervisor, Level 3, when
required, per hour
$95
After-hours release of vehicles (release of a
vehicle outside the normal work hours of
8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday through
Friday, upon the vehicle owner’s request)
$64
VI. The following is a fee schedule for towing of
Village-owned or -operated vehicles, in the
Village only:
Light duty $22
Medium duty $32
Heavy duty $52
VII. The following is a fee schedule for towing
of vehicles impounded or seized by the Village
Police Department:
Light duty, per hour $85
Medium duty, per hour $275
Heavy duty, per hour $425
Chapter 260, Trees and Shrubs [Added 8-9-2017
by Ord. No. 3609]
§ 260-9A, tree removal and protection permit $0
§ 260-9B, replacement tree value $225
Chapter 265, Vehicles and Traffic [Amended
11-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3152]
§ 265-29A, on-street parking zones [Amended
3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3465; 8-8-2018 by
Ord. No. 3661; 1-8-2020 by Ord. No. 3763]
On-street parking zones, at a parking
meter
$1.25 per hour
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:258
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
On-street parking zones, per hour, via
payment by wireless cellular
communication device through a
designated vendor authorized by the
Village of Ridgewood, plus designated
vendor fee per transaction
$1.25 per hour
§ 265-29C, off-street parking zones [Amended
12-10-2014 by Ord. No. 3450; 3-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 3465; 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 3467;
1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 3573; 8-8-2018 by Ord.
No. 3661; 1-8-2020 by Ord. No. 3763]
Cottage Place Parking Lot (a.k.a. Lot 15, Block
3703 per tax map)
$1 per hour
Cottage Place Annex Parking Lot (a.k.a. Lot 12,
Block 3703 per tax map)
$1 per hour
Cottage Place Parking Lot (a.k.a. Lot 15, Block
3703 per tax map), via payment by wireless
cellular communication device through a
designated vendor authorized by the Village of
Ridgewood
$1 per hour
Cottage Place Annex Parking Lot (a.k.a. Lot 12,
Block 3703 per tax map), via payment by
wireless cellular communication device through
a designated vendor authorized by the Village
of Ridgewood
$1 per hour
Plus designated vendor fee per transaction
All other Central Business District Parking Lots
At a parking meter $1 per hour
Via payment by wireless cellular
communication device through a designated
vendor authorized and approved by the Village
of Ridgewood
$1 per hour
Plus designated vendor fee per transaction
Non-Central Business District Parking Lots
At a parking meter $1 per hour
Via payment by wireless cellular
communication device through a designated
vendor authorized and approved by the Village
of Ridgewood
$1 per hour
Plus designated vendor fee per transaction
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:259
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
§ 265-29D, multispace parking meter kiosk locations
[Amended 12-10-2014 by Ord. No. 3450;
8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 3661; 1-8-2020 by Ord.
No. 3763]
Street parking, per hour $1.25
Lot parking, per hour $1
§ 265-33C(6), Ridgewood parking permits (RPP).
[Amended 12-10-2014 by Ord. No. 3447;
11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 3558; 1-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 3573; 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 3558;
10-24-2018 by Ord. No. 3675; 7-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 3727; 11-13-2019 by Ord. No. 3751]
Ridgewood residents - premium $1,325 per year
Train Station Plaza Parking Lot; Hudson
Street Parking Lot; Prospect Street Parking
Lot, Route 17 South Park and Ride Lots, as
well as alternate parking for the Hudson
Street Lot when designated, or any parking lot
in the Village
For the purposes of this section, residency in
the Village of Ridgewood shall also mean the
demonstrated ownership of a commercial
property in the Village of Ridgewood Central
Business District wherein the applicant for the
Ridgewood parking permit has a permanent
office. Said office shall be maintained for the
duration of the Ridgewood parking permit.
Upon closure of the said office, the Ridgewood
parking permit shall be null and void.
Ridgewood residents $1,000 per year
Chestnut Street Parking Lot; Walnut Street
Parking Lot; Cottage Place Parking Lot;
Route 17 South Park and Ride Lot
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:260
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
For the purposes of this section, residency
in the Village of Ridgewood shall also mean
the demonstrated ownership of a
commercial property in the Village of
Ridgewood Central Business District
wherein the applicant for the Ridgewood
parking permit has a permanent office.
Said office shall be maintained for the
duration of the Ridgewood parking permit.
Upon closure of the said office, the
Ridgewood parking permit shall be null
and void.
(c) Nonresidents $1,000 per year
Route 17 South Park and Ride Lot only
(d) Nonresidents $1,975 per year
Cottage Place parking lot only
All of the above permits shall be prorated during the year. Each month's
cost shall decline by 1/12 the cost over the prior months. A Ridgewood
resident sticker is required for all residents that purchase RPP's. The
sticker is free.
§ 265-33D, annual on-street commuter parking decal
[Repealed 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3296]
§ 265-33F, permit for parking two-wheeled
motorized vehicles at the Garber Square Train
Station Lot [Added 8-11-2010 by Ord. No. 3259;
amended 1-15-2020 by Ord. No. 3769]
$375 per
calendar year.
Partial year
permits are to be
prorated on a
three-month
interval
Permit for parking two-wheeled motorized
vehicles at the Route 17 Park and Ride Lot
$375 per
calendar year.
Partial year
permits are to be
prorated on a
three-month
interval
The fee for daily parking shall be the same as the regular rate for a
passenger car in the subject locations, with payment only via the
multispace meter (kiosk), with the required fees, or payment of such funds
by means of a wireless cellular communication device through a
designated vendor authorized by the Village of Ridgewood. The fee for
daily parking shall be for the hours of operation specified and on the days
indicated as established by the Village Council.
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:261
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
§ 265-33G, Ridgewood resident daily parking pass,
park in any available parking lot, downloaded from
online, printed and displayed on the vehicle
dashboard, per day; payment may also be made by a
wireless cellular communication device through a
designated vendor authorized and approved by the
Village of Ridgewood [Added 3-25-2015 by Ord.
No. 3467]
$7
§ 265-36B, permit for limited overnight parking at
Van Neste Square Lot, Hudson Street Lot, Wilsey
Square Lot, and Cottage Street Lot
$50 per quarter
§ 265-33H, Hudson Street Parking Lot parking
permit. [Added 2-13-2019 by Ord. No. 3703]
(a) Ridgewood residents
Hudson Street Lot only
$1,300 per year
(b) The above permits shall be prorated during the year. Each month's
cost shall decline by 1/12 the cost over the prior months.
§ 265-42H. Portions of public parking lots
designated for refuse enclosure. [Added 9-9-2009
by Ord. No. 3214]
Permit for a dumpster:
Holding up to 2 cubic yards of material,
measured water level volume
$300 per
calendar year
Holding between 2 to 3 cubic yards of
material, measured water level volume
$350 per
calendar year
Holding between 3 to 4 cubic yards of
material, measured water level volume
$400 per
calendar year
Permit for each waste oil/grease container:
Up to measured 10 gallons in volume $50 per calendar
year
10 gallons up to 20 gallons in volume $100 per
calendar year
20 gallons up to 30 gallons in volume $150 per
calendar year
Each additional 10 gallons of volume
per waste oil/grease container
$50 per calendar
year
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:262
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
§ 265-80B, Central Business District (CBD)
employee parking. [Added 11-9-2016 by Ord. No.
3558; amended 1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 3573;
10-24-2018 by Ord. No. 3675; 11-13-2019 by
Ord. No. 3751]
(1) Required annual CBD employee parking
permit. Permit does not include daily parking
rate. Permit required to utilize CBD employee
designated spaces.
$30 per year
§ 265-80C, Monthly CBD parking permit (hang tags)
for use only in the Walnut Street Parking Lot and
Cottage Street Parking Lot in spaces marked for
CBD employees [Added 1-11-2017 by Ord. No.
3573; amended 10-24-2018 by Ord. No. 3675;
11-13-2019 by Ord. No. 3751]
$105 per month,
$52.50 after the
15th of the month
Chapter 269, Water
§ 269-25D, special temporary service
connection charges
$5
§ 269-25G, minimum deposit for temporary
service
$25
§ 269-33B, calling at premises after 7-day
notice
$2
§ 269-34, rates and charges for metered service
[Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2587;
1-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2816; 8-13-2003 by
Ord. No. 2845; 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2880;
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3236; 6-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 3252; 12-8-2010 by Ord. No. 3272;
7-3-2012 by Ord. No. 3319; 6-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 3636; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3637;
4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 3710]
Minimum service charge by meter size
during 1 calendar quarter:
Meters 5/8 x 3/4 inches $32.98
Meters 3/4 x 3/4 inches $49.47
Meters 1 x 1 1/4 inches $82.44
Meters 1 1/2 inches and less than 2
inches
$164.88
Meters 2 inches and less than 3 inches $263.82
Meters 3 inches and less than 4 inches $494.65
Meters 4 inches $824.42
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:263
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
For all meters, regardless of size, for water
consumed during 1 calendar quarter, per
1,000 gallons44
$4.82
Each year thereafter, the Village, at its sole
discretion, shall increase water rates
effective January 1 of that year, in an
amount not to exceed 3%.
§ 269-35, annual rates and charges for
unmetered service [Amended 1-14-1997 by
Ord. No. 2587; 1-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2816;
8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2845; 12-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 3236; 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 3252;
12-8-2010 by Ord. No. 3272; 7-3-2012 by
Ord. No. 3319; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No.
363645]
Fire hydrants, each (billed annually,
payable September 1), per year
$105.05
Fire service, each connection (payable
semiannually per annum), per year
$283
Flush tank service, each (billed annually,
payable March 1), per year
$15 per year
§ 269-36A, for extension of main installed by
Village Water Department or its authorized
agents [Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No.
2587; 1-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2816]
At cost, plus 20%
§ 269-36B, for premises service connection
installed by Village Water Department or its
authorized agent [Amended 1-14-1997 by
Ord. No. 2587; 1-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2816]
At cost, plus 20%
For trenching and rock excavation by
Water Department or its authorized agents
At cost, plus 20%
§ 269-36C, permit for use of water during
construction periods, not to exceed 90 days; a
meter is installed and charged according to the
meter size [Amended 1-14-1997 by Ord. No.
2587; 1-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2816]
$25 per premises
44.Editor’s Note: This fee was taken from Exhibit E of Ord. No. 3636, adopted 6-27-2018,
which reflects the most current water fees at the time of amendment. Exhibits A to E of
said ordinance are on file with the Village Clerk.
45.Editor’s Note: This ordinance originally stated “As set forth in Exhibits A to E” for the fees
for fire hydrants and fire services. The fees from Exhibit E, effective 2014 through 2017,
are used here, as they are the most current. Exhibits A to E are on file with the Village
Clerk.
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:264
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
For each 90-day extension or fraction
thereof
$25
§ 269-36D, refund for each premises connection $100
§ 269-36E, application for stub connection $40
§ 269-36.1, Water service connections [Added
8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2845; amended
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3236; 6-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 3252; 12-8-2010 by Ord. No. 3272;
7-3-2012 by Ord. No. 3319; 4-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 3710]
§ 269-36.1B, new water service connection Actual cost of
service plus 20%,
plus $3,575 per
service unit
§ 269-36.1C, for reconstruction At cost, plus 20%
§ 269-36.1D, from and after 1-1-2010,
extension of any main
At cost, plus 20%
§ 269-36.1E, from and after 1-1-2010,
premises service connection
At cost, plus 20%
§ 269-36.1F, trenching and rock excavation At cost, plus 20%
§ 269-36.1G, permit for use of water during
construction
Per premises according to meter size $25
Ninety-day extension period $25
§ 269-36.1H, all other work not specifically
referenced
At cost, plus 20%
§ 269-37, miscellaneous services [Amended
1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2587; 1-8-2003 by
Ord. No. 2816; 8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2845;
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3236; 6-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 3252; 12-8-2010 by Ord. No. 3272;
7-3-2012 by Ord. No. 3319; 6-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 3636]
Resumption of service after discontinuance
for nonpayment of bills, violations of
Village Department regulations, or at
request of consumer
Cost, plus 20%
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-6
141:265
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Resumption of service after discontinuance
for nonpayment of bills, violations of
Village Department regulations, or at the
request of consumer, where service occurs
after working hours
Cost, plus 20%
Removing, replacing and resetting of
meters within a period of one year at the
request of consumer:
Cost, plus 20%
Meters 1 1/4 inches and smaller Cost, plus 20%
Meters 1 1/2 inches and larger Cost, plus 20%
Shop testing of meters $50
There shall be a minimum charge for removing and repairing
frozen meters at cost.
Installation of remote meter reading device At cost, plus 20%
After-hours calls for repair of service At cost, plus 20%
Hydrant permit fees $100, plus
consumption
Water search fees $10 per search
New residents list, each page
Pages 1 to 10 $0.75
Pages 11 to 20 $0.50
Pages 20 and up $0.25
Duplicate bill, each $5
Reading any meter and issuance of any
water bill at other than regular billing
intervals
$25
Water usage by landscapers, tree service
companies, etc., for liquid chemical
applications, per 1,000 gallons
$10; $100 per
year minimum
Service order At cost, plus 20%
Bounced check fee $35
Maintenance fee called Service Sentry, for
any single-family premises service
connection between the curbline and the
water meter. The water utility will repair
the water service line and make property
restorations for an annual fee payable in
quarterly installments.
Annual fee $50
§ 145-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-6
141:266
Code Chapter
Section, Type of Application, Permit or License Fee
Quarterly installments $12
Interest on delinquent accounts:
1. The water collector is directed to charge an interest rate of 8%
per annum on the first $1,500, and 18% per annum on the
balance over $1,500, for the nonpayment of bills beyond the due
date for all delinquencies in excess of $50.
2. There shall be a thirty-day grace period for all bills.
3. The water collector is hereby directed to charge a six-percent
penalty on any fiscal year delinquency in excess of $10,000, as is
imposed on taxpayers for the nonpayment of property taxes.
§ 145-7. Late charges. [Added 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 2523; amended
10-28-2009 by Ord. No. 3228]
There shall be a late charge of $50 assessed in addition to the fees set forth
in Chapter 145 of the Ridgewood Village Code for applicants who apply for
their licenses more than 30 days after the due date, as follows:
§ 145-8. Mandatory development fees to fund affordable housing
activities. [Added 10-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2802]
A. Affected fees in § 145-5, General fees, are as follows:
(1) Nursery school.
(2) Food and beverage vending machine, per machine.
(3) Hot tubs.
(4) Swimming pools.
(5) Camps.
B. Affected fees in § 145-6, Enumeration of fees relating to Code chapters,
are as follows:
(1) All fees collected pursuant to Chapter 117, Businesses and
Occupations, of the Ridgewood Village Code.
(2) All fees collected pursuant to Chapter 156, Food and Food-
Handling Establishments, of the Ridgewood Village Code.
(3) All fees collected pursuant to Chapter 165, Garbage, Rubbish,
Refuse and Recycling, of the Ridgewood Village Code.
A. Purpose. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121
N.J. 550 (1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that
mandatory development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of
§ 145-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-8
141:267
1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution subject
to COAH developing rules. The purpose of this section is to establish
standards for the collection, maintenance and expenditure of
development fees pursuant to COAH's rules. Fees collected pursuant
to this section shall be used for the sole purpose of providing low- and
moderate-income housing. This section shall be interpreted within the
framework of COAH's rules on development fees.
B. Applicability; exemptions.
(1) Developers of residential development which creates a new
housing unit or units shall pay a development fee.
(2) Developers of any nonresidential development which results in an
increase in equalized assessed property value shall pay a
development fee.
(3) Developers of low- and moderate-income housing units shall be
exempt from paying development fees for any development
providing such housing units.
(4) Developers that have received preliminary or final approval prior to
the effective date of this section shall be exempt from paying a
development fee unless the developer seeks a substantial change in
the approval.
(5) Developers otherwise exempt by law from paying fees required by
this chapter shall also be exempt from paying a development fee
pursuant to this section.
C. Amount of fees. [Amended 5-9-2007 by Ord. No. 305446]
(1) Residential development fees. For applicable residential
developments, developers shall pay a development fee of 1% of the
increase in the equalized assessed value of the property resulting
from such development. If a D variance is granted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), then the additional residential units
realized (above what is permitted by right under the existing
zoning) will incur a bonus development fee of 6% rather than the
development fee of 1%. However, if the zoning on a site has
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of the D
variance application, the base density for purposes of calculating
the bonus development fee shall be the highest density permitted
by right during that two years preceding the filing of the D variance
application.
46.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall take effect only after receipt of
written approval by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing and after passage and
publication as provided by law, whichever occurs latest. This ordinance shall be null and
void if the Village of Ridgewood fails to petition for third round substantive certification
pursuant to the rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing at N.J.A.C.
5:94-6.14(c)1 by May 15, 2007, or any extension of said date approved by the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing, whichever is later.
§ 145-8 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-8
141:268
(2) Nonresidential development fees. For applicable nonresidential
development, developers shall pay a fee of 2% of the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the property resulting from such
development. If a D variance is granted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(4), then the additional floor area realized (above what
is permitted by right under existing zoning) will incur a bonus
development fee of 6% rather than the development fee of 2%.
However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the two-year
period preceding the filing of the D variance application, the floor
area for purposes of calculating the bonus development fee shall be
the highest floor area permitted by right during that two years
preceding the filing of the D variance application.
D. Collection of fees.
(1) Developers shall pay 50% of the calculated development fee to the
Village of Ridgewood at the time of issuance of building permits.
The development fee shall be estimated by the Tax Assessor prior
to the issuance of building permits.
(2) Developers shall pay the remaining 50% of the fee to the Village of
Ridgewood at the time of issuance of certificates of occupancy.
Prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy, the Tax Assessor
shall calculate the equalized assessed value and the appropriate
development fee. The developer shall be responsible for paying the
difference between the fee calculated at the time of issuance of the
certificate of occupancy and the fee calculated at the time of
issuance of the building permit.
E. Housing Trust Fund.
(1) There is hereby created an interest-bearing Housing Trust Fund in
a bank to be selected by the Village's Chief Financial Officer for the
purpose of receiving development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers. All development fees paid by developers
pursuant to this section shall be deposited in this fund. No money
shall be expended from the Housing Trust Fund unless the
expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved by COAH.
(2) If COAH determines that the Village of Ridgewood is not in
conformance with COAH's rules on development fees, COAH is
authorized to direct the manner in which all development fees
collected pursuant to this section shall be expended. Such
authorization is pursuant to this section, COAH's rules on
development fees and the written authorization from the Village
Council to the selected trust fund bank.
F. Use of funds.
(1) Money deposited in a Housing Trust Fund may be used for any
activity approved by COAH for addressing the Village of
Ridgewood's low- and moderate-income housing obligations. Such
§ 145-8 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-8
141:269
§ 145-9. Rental fees for use of Village facilities. [Added 9-10-2008
by Ord. No. 3143]
activities may include, but are not necessarily limited to, housing
rehabilitation, new construction, regional contribution agreements,
the purchase of land for low- and moderate-income housing,
extensions and/or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
low- and moderate-income housing sites; assistance designed to
render units to be more affordable to low- and moderate-income
households, and administrative costs necessary to implement the
Village of Ridgewood's housing element. The expenditure of all
money shall conform to a spending plan approved by COAH.
(2) The Village of Ridgewood will dedicate not more than 20% of
development fees collected each year for administrative purposes,
including, but not limited to, salaries and benefits for Village
employees or consultant fees necessary to develop or implement a
rehabilitation program, a new construction program, amendments
to the housing element, and an affirmative marketing program.
Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of
households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and
compliance with Council monitoring requirements. Development
fees shall not be used to defray the costs of existing staff.
(3) The Village of Ridgewood will devote at least 30% of development
fees collected each year to render units more affordable, including,
but not limited to down payment assistance, low interest loans and
rental assistance.
(4) No development fees shall be expended to reimburse the Village for
housing activities which occurred prior to the effective date of this
section.
G. Expiration of section. This section shall expire if:
(1) COAH dismisses or denies the Village of Ridgewood's petition for
substantive certification.
(2) COAH revokes substantive certification or its certification of this
section.
A. Graydon Pool. Any person or entity that uses or rents Graydon Pool and
its facilities for private/personal purposes shall pay a fee of $250 per
day or any part thereof and shall be responsible for any or all costs and
expenses incurred by the Village, its employees, staff or designated
persons necessary for the set up, cleanup, supervision and/or support of
the use and/or rental. The fee shall be payable prior to the issuance of
any permit or written approval granting the usage or rental of Graydon
Pool and its facilities, including a deposit in the amount of $250 to cover
the additional costs as described above. Any unused portion of the
deposit shall be returned to the person or entity after completion of said
§ 145-8 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-9
141:270
usage or rental within 10 days after the occurrence of said usage or
rental unless otherwise notified in writing by the Village or its designee
of the extenuating circumstances for the delay.
B. Applications for use of the Garden Room, Senior Lounge and Youth
Center shall be made to the Village Manager at least 30 days in advance
of the requested date on the designated application provided by the
Village and are subject to review under the conditions and limitation
including, but not limited to, those listed below. Payment is required at
the time of approval. The date for the reservation of the use of the space
will be considered open until payment is received. [Added 2-9-2011
by Ord. No. 3278]
(1) Priority.
(a) The use of these rooms and facilities shall be made available to
organizations in accordance with the following order of
priority:
Class Usages
Class A Official business meetings of Village municipal
government agencies; Village Council appointed
boards and committees
Class B Groups meeting under the sole jurisdiction of
the Village of Ridgewood and activities
cosponsored by the Village of Ridgewood
Class C Ridgewood branches of clubs and groups, both
charitable and/or civic in nature [Membership in
this category must be comprised of majority of
Ridgewood residents (60%), and the
organization must have a Ridgewood mailing
address.]
Class D Ridgewood residents and all other groups or
organizations of Ridgewood
Class E Nonresidents
(b) If Village operations require use of one of these rooms, the
Village Manager will prioritize.
(2) Fees.
(a) The following fees are assessed to cover the cost of utilities and
maintenance for the space used.
§ 145-9 FARMERS' MARKET § 145-9
141:271
§ 145-10. Fees for Use of Fields by Sports Camps. [Added 7-8-2009
by Ord. No. 3199]
The following fees are charged for the use of the athletic fields in the
Village by sports camps in accordance with the schedule below. All fees
are due to be paid in full prior to the use of the field. The below fees
are for access to the fields and do not include the costs of the field setup
(infield dragging, painting lines, goal areas or other requested markings)
and garbage removal.
Field Category Key
I = Turf field and RI-IS Stadium.
II = Large Grass.
III = Midsize.
IV = Small.
V = Elementary school field.
Room Room Charge
Class A
Class B
All rooms No charge during regular open
business hours, Monday to
Friday 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
Class C Garden Room $30 per hour for the first two
hours; $15 each additional hour
or portion thereof
Senior
Lounge
$50 per hour for the first two
hours; $25 each additional hour
or portion thereof
Youth Lounge $70 per hour for the first two
hours; $35 each additional hour
or portion thereof
Class D All rooms $150 per hour for the first two
hours; $45 each additional hour
or portion thereof
Class E All rooms $200 per hour for the first two
hours; $75 each additional hour
(b) No security staff charge will be rendered during normal work
hours, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. A
security charge of $50 per hour shall apply during weekends,
public holidays, as well as hours after 4:30 p.m.
(c) Rental of Youth League may require a facility/equipment
deposit of $100. At the conclusion of the event and after a
physical inspection of the room, the deposit may be refunded.
(3) Kitchen use. All classes requesting use of the kitchen facilities will
be charged a flat fee of $25 per period of usage of kitchen.
§ 145-9 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 145-10
141:272
Location
Field
Category
Daily Fee Rate, 9:00
a.m. to
3:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday
Hourly Rate for
Partial
Day Additional
Time
Maple field I $400 $75
BBS Stadium I $400 $75
Ben Franklin II $350 $60
Somerville II $350 $60
Stevens Field II $350 $60
Veterans
North
II $350 $60
Veterans
South
II $350 $60
Brookside II $300 $55
Glen School II $300 $55
Hawes
(lower)
II $300 $55
Hawes
(upper)
II $300 $55
Citizens Field III $250 $45
George
Washington
III $250 $45
Kenilworth III $250 $45
Orchard IV $200 $35
Ridge IV $200 $35
Travell IV $200 $35
Willard IV $200 $35
Chapter 147
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145.
§ 147-1. Purpose.
The Mayor and Council of the Village of Ridgewood recognize that the
Village historic sites, pristine homes and quaint central business district
are attractive to individuals, organizations, groups, commercial filming
§ 145-10 FARMERS' MARKET § 147-1
141:273
businesses and other entities involved in the business of still photography,
motion pictures, television and/or other forms of commercial filming. Such
activities described above may create, particularly when operated or
conducted in a residential zone or central business district, traffic and
safety concerns and other encroachments to the public safety, health and
welfare of the Ridgewood community and its residents. Due to the impact
of these activities, particularly the time, location and duration of the filming
and the accessory vehicles or structures utilized in conjunction therewith,
the Village has decided to regulate such activities through the issuance of
permits. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the requirements and
restrictions governing the issuance of such permits.
§ 147-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film, video
tape or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational purposes,
intended for viewing on video receivers or television or in theaters or for
institutional use or for catalog or magazine layout or other printed medium.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway or sidewalk within
the Village which is within the jurisdiction and control of the Village.
§ 147-3. Permit required.
A. General. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter is required prior to
any person or entity engaging in the activity of filming within the
geographic boundaries of the Village. An application for such permit
must be made and delivered as complete at least seven working days
prior to the first date filming is to take place.
B. Permits shall be obtained from the office of the Village Manager or
other designated office during normal business hours. Applications for
such permits shall be in a form approved by the Village Manager and
shall be accompanied by a permit fee and all required documentation
and information pursuant to this chapter.
C. Permit fee. The Village Manager or his/her designee shall calculate the
permit fee to be paid by an applicant as follows:
(1) Film fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
(2) Traffic control fee. A fee for necessary police services shall be paid
upon the issuance of the permit if the Chief of Police or his/her
designee determines traffic control assistance is necessary
pursuant to § 147-7A at the rates established by Chapter 145,
§ 145-4, for such services. [Amended 1-14-2015 by Ord. No.
3452]
§ 147-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 147-3
141:274
§ 147-4. Application requirements.
§ 147-5. Rules and regulations.
(3) Clean-up deposit. A separate deposit as set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees, shall be paid by the approved applicant and shall be held in
escrow pending review of the clean up of filming sites. Said fee
shall be determined by the Village Manager based solely on his/her
discretion, based upon the perceived extent of filming and work
associated with the proposed filming site.
A. Form. The application form is to be determined by the Village Manager
and may be obtained at the Village Manager's Office or other
designated office.
B. The information requested on the application form shall include,
without limitation, the following:
(1) Name and address of the applicant;
(2) Proposed location, dates and hours of the filming at each location;
(3) Affidavit of owners' consent for filming at each location;
(4) Number of members of the cast and crew who will be present at the
film site for each location;
(5) The number of vehicles to be present at the filming site at each
location, including make and model and license plate of each
vehicle and whether the entire group of vehicles can and will be
legally parked off the street at each location; and
(6) The name, address and telephone number of the individual in
charge of cast and crew.
A. No permit shall be issued for filming in the Village of Ridgewood unless
the applicant for such permit:
(1) Notifies all property owners within 100 feet of each film site in a
residential district at least seven days prior to the date of each
filming of the intent to film at each location. Such property owner
list may be acquired at the Village Assessor's office.
(2) Provides proof of insurance in the name of the applicant, person or
entity with coverage for bodily injury for one person in the amount
of $1,000,000 and an aggregate occurrence of $3,000,000. The
Village of Ridgewood shall be named as an additional insured in the
coverage and a certificate of insurance shall be delivered to the
Village Manager's office at the time the application is submitted.
(3) Agrees in writing to indemnify the Village and hold it harmless from
any and all claims and liability and pay costs of suit and attorneys'
§ 147-3 FARMERS' MARKET § 147-5
141:275
§ 147-6. Term of permit; deviations from plans.
§ 147-7. Traffic control fee.
fees expended by the Village to defend any such claim that may
arise out of the filming activity permitted.
B. Restrictions. No permit shall be issued for filming in the Village that
involves:
(1) Pyrotechnics, explosives, or other activity deemed to be dangerous,
unsafe or a threat to public safety by the Village Manager or his/her
designee;
(2) Filming within 100 feet of any school within one hour before and
after the opening and closing of that school on any day the school is
in session; and
(3) Filming at a time earlier than 8:00 a.m. or later than 7:00 p.m. in
each day designated for filming.
C. Requirements of filming:
(1) The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over
impacted public lands and shall comply with all directives of the
Village Police Department.
(2) The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or intrusion of adjoining property
owners attributable to such filming and shall abate, revise and park
all vehicles associated with filming off public streets. The holder
shall avoid any interference with previously scheduled activities
upon public lands and limit interference with normal public activity
at such public lands.
(3) The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
the creation and spread of debris and other rubbish from the
filming location upon completion for each day.
A. No permit shall issue for filming within the Village at a specified
location for more than three consecutive days and for more than six
days during any one calendar year.
B. Any deviation from the permitted filming plan or application must be
expressly permitted by the Village Manager or his/her designee in
writing.
A. In the event that the Chief of Police or his/her designee determines that
police officers or traffic control officers will be necessary for the
protection of the citizens or for the control of traffic during the filming,
the applicant shall submit to the Village Manager or his/her designee a
fee covering the cost of such police services at the rates established by
§ 147-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 147-7
141:276
§ 147-8. Refusal to issue permit; revocation.
The Village Manager or his/her designee may refuse to issue a permit
or revoke an issued permit whenever he/she determines, on the basis of
objective facts and after a review of the application and/or a report thereon
by the Police Department and by other Village agencies involved with the
proposed filming site, that filming at the location and/or time set forth in
the application would violate any law or ordinance or would unreasonably
interfere with the public's use of public lands, unreasonably interfere with
the use and enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the
free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the
public's health, safety or welfare.
Chapter 145, § 145-4, for such services. Said fees shall be paid in
advance before the issuance of said permit pursuant to Chapter 147,
§ 147-3C(2). [Amended 1-14-2015 by Ord. No. 3452]
B. If the Chief of Police determines that the traffic control fee will be fully
expended prior to the termination of the permit period, the Chief of
Police shall notify the Village Manager. The Village Manager or his/her
designee shall contact the applicant in writing and require payment of
an additional sum of money, said specific amount to be determined by
the Chief of Police based on the number of hours to be worked by the
police and traffic control personnel. Said additional traffic control fee
shall be paid within seven days of the notice. The applicant's failure to
pay such additional fee within said seven-day period shall result in the
Village Manager or his/her designee providing the applicant with
written notice that the permit has been suspended and the date of such
suspension. The applicant's receipt of the Village Manager's suspension
notice shall not be construed as altering the date of suspension set forth
in said written notice, the effective date of the suspension being the day
immediately following the completion of the seven-day notice period.
C. The procedure set forth in Subsection B may be repeated as necessary
to ensure that the applicant pays for all costs incurred by the Village in
providing traffic control services.
D. After termination of the filming, the Chief of Police shall provide the
applicant with a statement regarding the actual cost to the Village of
providing said police officers or traffic control officers. If the actual cost
is less than the moneys that the Village has collected pursuant to
Subsection A, B, or C above, the Village shall remit the balance to the
applicant. If the actual cost is more than the moneys that the Village has
collected pursuant to Subsection A, B, or C, the applicant shall be
responsible for providing the balance to the Village within 30 days of
the termination of the filming or still photography.
E. The Chief of Police shall forward a copy of the statement of actual cost
to the Village Manager or his/her designee who will file said statement
with the original application form.
§ 147-7 FARMERS' MARKET § 147-9
141:277
§ 147-9. Appeal.
Any person or entity aggrieved by a decision of the Village Manager or
his/her designee denying or revoking a permit, such person or entity may
appeal to the Village Council by submitting a written notice of appeal
setting forth the reasons for the appeal which shall be filed with the Village
Clerk. An appeal from any such decision of the Village Manager or his/her
designee shall be filed within 10 days of the date of that decision. The Mayor
and Council shall set the matter down for a hearing within 30 days of the
day on which the notice of appeal was filed. The decision of the Village
Council shall be in the form of a resolution. A resolution memorializing
the decision of the Village Council shall be approved at the first regularly
scheduled public meeting of the Village Council after the hearing on the
appeal unless the appellant agrees in writing to a later date for the decision.
If such a resolution is not adopted within the time required, the decision
of the Village Manager shall be deemed to be reversed and a permit shall
be issued in conformity with the application or the relief requested in the
appeal.
§ 147-10. Waiver.
§ 147-11. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the filming of news stories
within the Village of Ridgewood.
A. The Village Manager or his/her designee may authorize a waiver of any
of the requirements or limitations of this chapter and may authorize
filming other than during the hours herein described or may extend the
duration of a permit or may waive any other limitation or requirement
of this chapter whenever he determines that strict compliance with
such limitations will pose an unreasonable burden upon the applicant
and that such a permit may be issued without endangering the public's
health, safety and welfare.
B. The applicant shall notify the Fire Department and the Police
Department 24 hours before filming takes place and permit the Fire
Department and the Police Department to inspect the site and the
equipment to be used. The applicant shall comply with all fire and
safety instructions issued by the Fire Department and the Police
Department.
§ 147-9 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 147-11
141:278
Chapter 149
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 99.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 125.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Fire zones — See Ch. 151.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 170.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 223.
§ 147-11 FARMERS' MARKET § 147-11
141:279

ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 11-26-1985 by Ord. No. 2012]
§ 149-1. Local enforcement. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
Pursuant to Section 1147 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192
et seq.), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the
Village of Ridgewood.
§ 149-2. Local agency designated.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the
Ridgewood Fire Department.
§ 149-3. Duties of agency.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act48
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Village of Ridgewood,
other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 149-4. Life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 149-2 of this article shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 149-5. Organization.
The local enforcing agency established by § 149-2 of this article shall be a
part of the Village of Ridgewood Fire Department and shall be under the
direct supervision and control of the Fire Official who shall report to the
Chief of the Ridgewood Fire Department.
§ 149-6. Appointment of officials, inspectors and other employees.
A. Appointment of Fire Official. The local enforcing agency shall be under
the supervision of the Fire Official who shall be appointed by the Village
Manager upon the recommendation of the Chief of the Fire
Department.
B. Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and other employees as may
be necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the
47.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
48.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 149-1 FARMERS' MARKET § 149-6
141:281
§ 149-7. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and N.J.S.A. 52:27D-208 of the Uniform
Fire Safety Act, any person aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement
agency shall have the right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals
of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 149-8. Additional required inspection and fees.
§ 149-9. Permit fees.
The permit fees established by the Uniform Fire Code shall be as set forth
in Chapter 145, Fees. Fees for single-event individual permits shall be paid
at the time of application. All other permit fees are annual permit fees and
are to be paid on January 1 of each year for the calendar year but, when
paid, shall cover only the balance of the calendar year for which the same is
paid or payable. Permit fees for the year 1985 for annual permits, however,
shall be assessed at 1/2 of the regular annual rate.
Village Manager upon the recommendation of the Chief of the Fire
Department.
A. Additional fees are not required for life-hazard use structures which are
regulated by the Uniform Construction Code. In addition to the
inspections and fees required pursuant to the Act and regulations of the
Department of Community Affairs, the inspections and fees as set forth
in Chapter 145, Fees, shall be required.
B. Buildings owned by the Board of Education and operated solely for the
Board of Education services, municipal libraries and buildings owned
by the Village of Ridgewood are exempt from the fees imposed by this
section.
C. Owners of real estate, the use of which requires fees to be paid for
inspections, shall be responsible for the payment of those fees.
Inspections shall be conducted annually or more frequently if so
determined by the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 149-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 149-9
141:282
ARTICLE II
Smoke Detectors
[Adopted 8-27-1985 by Ord. No. 2000]
§ 149-10. When required.
§ 149-11. Maintenance responsibility.
§ 149-12. Certificate of compliance required upon transfer.
Upon the sale of one- or two-family residence or the rental, lease or transfer
of any dwelling unit, the seller, landlord or transferor is required to obtain
from the Village of Ridgewood a smoke detector compliance certificate
A. Smoke detectors shall be installed in each dwelling unit, as defined in
N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3, upon the sale, rental, transfer or lease of any
dwelling unit in the Village of Ridgewood.
B. Each dwelling unit sold, rented, leased or transferred shall have a
minimum of one smoke detector on each level. A floor area separated by
three or more risers from another floor area shall be considered a
separate level. Where a basement exists, a smoke detector shall be
installed on the basement ceiling.
C. Smoke detectors shall not be required in an unoccupied attic. In order
to achieve compliance with this article, smoke detectors are required to
be approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or Factory Mutual
Research Corp.
D. Alarm signals from the smoke detectors shall be clearly audible in all
rooms on the level on which the smoke detector is installed when all
intervening doors are closed.
E. Smoke detectors shall be powered by either battery or electricity. The
installation of the smoke detectors shall be governed by the applicable
sections of National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standards No.
72E or 74.
A. Sellers, transferors or lessors of all dwelling units subject to this article
shall be responsible for the correct installation and maintenance of
smoke detectors.
B. The owner of a rental unit shall, at the time of installation of the smoke
detector and thereafter at the commencement of each tenancy, provide
to the tenant at least one copy of written instructions on the operation,
maintenance and testing of the smoke detector, including the
replacement of batteries in the battery-operated unit.
C. The owner of each rental unit shall be responsible for the proper
maintenance of the smoke detectors, including the replacing of
batteries, repair or replacement of the unit in accord with the standards
hereinabove set forth.
§ 149-10 FARMERS' MARKET § 149-12
141:283
certifying that the property is in compliance with the provisions of this
article.
§ 149-13. Fees; inspection. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
The fee for the smoke detector compliance certificate shall be as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees. Applications for smoke detector compliance certificates
shall be submitted to the Village of Ridgewood with the application fee
prepaid. Within 10 business days of the receipt of said application, the
designated official of the Village of Ridgewood shall inspect the premises to
determine whether the same complies with the terms of this article.
§ 149-12 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 149-13
141:284
ARTICLE III
Underground Storage Tanks
[Adopted 12-8-1987 by Ord. No. 2126]
§ 149-14. Testing for leaks required. [Amended 12-13-1988 by Ord.
No. 2188]
All persons, which shall herein be construed to include individuals,
partnerships, corporations or other entities, operating or having custody,
control or ownership of an underground storage tank system, with the
exception of underground storage tank systems which have a capacity of
less than 1,100 gallons and which are used for the purpose of storing fuel
oil for the heating of one or more residences, shall cause said tank and all
connecting piping to be tested for leakage no later than six months after
the effective date of this article. Thereafter, said tank shall be tested at
least once every three years. The owner of the real property on which any
such tank is installed shall have the primary and ultimate responsibility for
compliance with this article.
§ 149-15. Approved testing methods.
The Petro-Tite Tank and Line Test (formerly the Kent-Moore Test) or other
methods approved by Section 329 of the NFPA shall be utilized in testing
for leakage of such underground tanks.
§ 149-16. Testing standards.
Testing shall be performed by a person, firm or corporation duly qualified
to test underground flammable liquid storage tanks. Each test shall be
conducted during normal working hours and under conditions prescribed
by the Bureau of Fire Prevention. All tests shall be conducted to give proof
of tightness to the standards of the NFPA Section 329.
§ 149-17. Report of results; action to be taken.
The person having custody, control or ownership of the tank shall furnish a
written report of the results of each test to the Bureau of Fire Prevention
within 10 days of the completion of the test. In the event that the test
reveals a leakage, the owner or occupant of the land upon which the tank
is located shall immediately remove all of the liquid in said tank and shall
cease to operate said tank until the tank is either replaced or repaired to
correct the leakage. Any tank which must be repaired to correct leakage
shall not be put into operation until after the repairs are completed, and
until a further test is made which reveals that there are no leaks and
until the Bureau of Fire Prevention has certified that the tank may be put
back into service. Within 10 days after the completion of repairs, proof
that the tank has been repaired satisfactorily shall be submitted by the
person responsible to the Bureau of Fire Prevention. In all cases, the Bureau
of Fire Prevention may require that any tank which reveals a leakage be
excavated and removed. When the leaking tank is excavated and removed,
§ 149-14 FARMERS' MARKET § 149-17
141:285
the owner or occupant of the land upon which the tank is located shall
cause any and all contaminated soil to be removed from the site to the
satisfaction of the Bureau of Fire Prevention and the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection. The soil shall be disposed of by
an approved hazardous waste disposing firm, at the cost and expense of the
person responsible, under the direction of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
and the Department of Environmental Protection. If the Bureau of Fire
Prevention requires removal of the tank, said tank shall be removed no
later than 30 days from the date leakage is discovered. All replacement
tanks shall comply with the regulations regarding installation of the same as
promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department
of Environmental Protection.
§ 149-18. Out-of-service or abandoned tanks.
Underground tanks taken out of service or abandoned shall be safeguarded
or disposed of as prescribed by the Uniform Construction Code and under
conditions prescribed by the Fire Subcode Official.
§ 149-19. More-frequent-testing option.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention may require that a tank be tested more
frequently than required by this article if the Bureau has reason to believe
that there may be a leak in the tank.
§ 149-20. Advance notice.
All testing and excavation of tanks shall be conducted only upon a minimum
of 72 hours advance notice to the Bureau of Fire Prevention and under
conditions prescribed by the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 149-21. Fees.
A. The fees as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, shall be due and payable to
the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Village of Ridgewood. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
B. A separate fee shall be due and payable for each separate day that an
inspection is required pursuant to the terms of this article.
§ 149-17 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 149-21
141:286
ARTICLE IV
Fire Extinguisher Training
[Adopted 1-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2970]
§ 149-22. Statement of purpose.
The Village of Ridgewood Fire Prevention Bureau is responsible for insuring
that businesses, restaurants and places of public assembly are in
compliance with the New Jersey Fire Code. The New Jersey Fire Code
requires fire extinguishers to be installed and available for employees'
use in businesses, restaurants and places of public assembly in case of
a small fire. The Occupational Safety & Health Administration (OSHA)
requires employers to provide annual training for employees on the general
principals of fire extinguisher use and hazards involved with incipient stage
fire fighting. [29 CFR 1910.157(g)].
§ 149-23. Certificate of training.
Each employer shall provide a certificate of training for his or her
employees during the annual fire inspection. Said certificate shall be
presented to the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 149-24. Training requirements.
§ 149-25. Training providers.
Employers may have fire extinguisher training provided by any qualified
agency. The Ridgewood Fire Department will, at the request of an employer,
provide this training at the Ridgewood Fire Department at cost of $10 per
employee.
A. The employer shall provide training that meets the following OSHA
guidelines.
B. The employee shall be taught:
(1) The four elements of the fire tetrahedron.
(2) The five classifications of fuel sources that sustain fire.
(3) The different types of fire extinguishers and what fuel sources each
can be safely used on.
(4) The rules for fighting fires, including the PASS system.
(5) The fire extinguisher inspection responsibilities.
C. In addition to the items listed above, employees shall be given a chance
to operate or observe the operation of all types of fire extinguishers on
small fires.
§ 149-22 FARMERS' MARKET § 149-26
141:287
§ 149-26. Administration and enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief, Senior Fire Inspector and Fire
Inspector(s) of the Ridgewood Fire Department to insure employees have
received this training during their annual fire inspections.
§ 149-26 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 149-26
141:288
ARTICLE V
Exterior Identification of Floor or Roof Truss Construction
[Adopted 2-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3239]
§ 149-27. Intent and purpose.
To require the exterior identification of all structures within the Village of
Ridgewood that utilize lightweight wood, wood truss, steel truss, composite
truss, or wood "I" beams as a method to construct, renovate, or alter
any section of an individual structure or dwelling unit. The pre-incident
identification of these buildings will provide fire-suppression crews with
critical strategic and tactical information to be utilized during firefighting
operations and significantly enhance the safety of fire-suppression
personnel operating at emergency incidents. This article shall apply to
all principal and accessory structures consisting of truss components not
currently regulated for identification within the Uniform Construction Code
and Uniform Fire Code of the State of New Jersey.
§ 149-28. Definitions.
§ 149-29. Location and application for residential properties.
The Village Construction Official shall determine if a structure contains
truss construction. All structures containing truss construction must have
a reflective symbol affixed to the structure at one or more of the following
locations:
A. Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purpose of this
article, have the meanings shown herein:
REFLECTIVE SYMBOL — An emblem made of reflective material, in
the shape and form as described by the Uniform Construction Code
(U.C.C.), the Uniform Fire Code (U.F.C); with the noted modifications
in order to maintain continuity throughout the state of New Jersey
identifying a structure as containing truss construction.
TRUSS CONSTRUCTION — Prefabricated I-joists, truss joists, and truss
rafters.
B. All definitions in the U.C.C. and the U.F.C. shall be the same for this
article.
A. Primary location: on or next to the electrical meter. In the event the
electrical meter is inside the structure, the reflective symbol will be
placed at one of the alternate locations below.
B. Secondary location: on or next to the gas meter, plainly visible. In the
event the gas meter is inside the building, the reflective symbol will be
placed at the alternate location below.
C. Third and final location: on the garage door if there is a garage on the
premises. The reflective symbol shall be applied by the Construction
§ 149-27 FARMERS' MARKET § 149-29
141:289
§ 149-30. Location and application for commercial properties.
"The emblem shall be permanently affixed to the left of the main entrance
door at a height between four and six feet above the ground and shall
be installed and maintained by the owner of the building." N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.20(a)2.
§ 149-31. Symbol design and availability.
The symbol shall be made of reflective material, in the shape and form
as described by the U.C.C. The reflective symbol dimensions shall be five
inches by 2.5 inches for residential properties or 12 inches by six inches
for commercial properties. (See Appendix A.49) This shape and design shall
be used in order to maintain continuity throughout the state identifying a
structure as containing truss construction. This reflective symbol will be
supplied by the Village at no expense to residential owners, and at a cost of
$10 per emblem for commercial properties.
§ 149-32. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all structures, including accessory structures,
whether residential, commercial or otherwise, including structures existing
at the time of the effective date of this ordinance. Existing structures shall
be posted according to these guidelines with the owner's consent.
§ 149-33. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Construction Official and the Fire
Official of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 149-34. Maintenance.
It shall be the responsibility of the homeowner to assure the integrity of the
reflective symbol. In the event it is removed, damaged or fades over time, it
shall be the owner's responsibility to contact the Fire Prevention Bureau to
have a new reflective symbol installed.
§ 149-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article by refusing to use the reflective symbol
or by removing or tampering with the reflective symbol shall be subject to
a fine of $250 per violation. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
Official or Fire Official or one of their duly authorized representatives
and shall be a condition of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
in new construction and the certificate approval when a certificate of
occupancy is not required.
49.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 149-29 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 149-35
141:290
Chapter 151
FIRE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 149.
Towing — See Ch. 258.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 265.
§ 151-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for no
parking or standing in designated fire lanes/zones to ensure proper access
for emergency apparatus to and throughout the site.
§ 151-2. Parking or standing prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle,
or place any obstruction, on lands designated as fire lanes/zones, whether
publicly or privately owned, in the Village of Ridgewood after notice has
been posted, as hereinafter provided.
§ 151-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE LANES/ZONES — Areas designated by the Fire Official and properly
posted and marked in accordance with this chapter. The terms "fire zone"
and "fire lane" shall be interchangeable.
FIRE OFFICIAL — The Village of Ridgewood Official or his or her
designated representative, as defined in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety
Act.50
OWNER — A person who owns, manages, rents, leases or exercises control
over a building, structure, premises or use or a portion thereof.
PERSON — Any natural person or individual, or any firm, partnership,
association, limited partnership, sole proprietorship, corporation or any
other business entity or any government agency or entity.
§ 151-4. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Fire
Official of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 151-5. Designation of fire lanes; notification.
50.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 149-35 FARMERS' MARKET § 151-5
141:291
§ 151-6. Removal of obstructions or vehicles.
The Police Department shall have the authority to remove or have removed
all obstructions or vehicles as may be deemed by the Fire Official to violate
this chapter at the expense of the owner of the obstruction or vehicle.
§ 151-7. Posting of signs; marking of lanes.
A. The Fire Official shall (subject to review and written approval by the
Village Manager) designate fire lanes on both private and public
property in the Village of Ridgewood as deemed necessary for public
safety. The Fire Official shall notify, in writing, the owner of said
property, specifically describing the designated fire lanes as well as the
standards of the Village of Ridgewood for posting and marking of fire
lanes in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The marking of fire lanes shall be the responsibility of and at the
expense of the owner and shall be completed within 30 days after
receipt of the notification from the Fire Official.
A. Signs.
(1) All signs shall be 12 inches by 18 inches in size.
(2) Light-reflective material shall be used for the sign background and
lettering.
(3) All signs, whether wall or post-mounted, shall be placed 50 feet
apart, center to center. Whenever the fire lane changes angle or
direction more than 60°, a sign is to be placed at the point of
change, and a sign is required at the beginning and end of the zone.
In all circumstances, a sign shall be visible from another sign.
Additional signs may be required, at the discretion of the Fire
Official.
(4) The sign shall be placed at a height of seven feet, as measured from
the ground surface to the bottom of the sign at an angle of 45°
facing the direction of the flow of traffic.
(5) The fire lane sign shall state "NO PARKING OR STANDING FIRE
LANE."
(6) Signs and striping shall be as identified on Schedule A attached
hereto.51
B. Striping.
(1) Stripes shall be minimum of four inches wide.
(2) All fire lanes shall be striped at a width of four feet, as specified by
the Fire Official.
51.Editor's Note: Schedule A is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 151-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 151-7
141:292
§ 151-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-14-2011 by Ord. No.
3304]
Violations and penalties shall be assessed in accordance with § 1-15 of
the Ridgewood Village Code, or at the discretion of the Fire Official, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-3, 503.4, Uniform Fire Safety Act. In no event
shall the minimum fine for any single violation be less than $75.
Chapter 154
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
(3) The lettering "NO PARKING OR STANDING FIRE ZONE" shall be
placed within the striped outer boundary lines of the fire zone at a
minimum of one-hundred-foot intervals.
(4) The letters shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height and shall be
placed within the center of the fire zone.
(5) Paint for all letters and striping shall be yellow in color.
C. Maintenance of signs and striping. Property owners are responsible for
the maintenance of all fire lane/zone signs and striping. Signs and
striping will be repaired or repainted, as needed, at the owner's
expense, to effectively designate the fire lane/zone.
§ 151-7 FARMERS' MARKET § 151-8
141:293

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
§ 154-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood,
of the County of Bergen, New Jersey does hereby ordain as follows.
§ 154-2. Findings of fact.
§ 154-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Village of Ridgewood are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 154-1 FARMERS' MARKET § 154-3
141:295
§ 154-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 154-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 154-4
141:296
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 154-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1%-annual-chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between
one and three feet. Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) derived from detailed
hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1%-annual-chance shallow
flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are
between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Village Engineer's interpretation of
any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a 1% annual
or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Any land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, VI-30, A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or
AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
§ 154-5 FARMERS' MARKET § 154-5
141:297
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water, and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In an area of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing away of land masses and soil.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 154-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 154-5
141:298
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents. Any required UCC permits must be
obtained from the Village Building Department.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without accumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 154-5 FARMERS' MARKET § 154-5
141:299
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is [i] built on a single chassis;
[ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — [For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348)]52 includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
52.Editor’s Note: See 16 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.
§ 154-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 154-5
141:300
STRUCTURE — Any walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. "Substantial damage" also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions during a tenyear
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market valve of the
structure before the damages occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure during a ten-year period the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. Substantial
improvement also means cumulative substantial improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of
the actual repair work performed or repetitive loss. The term does not,
however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of any structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. Any new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided to the Office of the Village Engineer.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 154-5 FARMERS' MARKET § 154-5
141:301

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 154-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Ridgewood, Bergen County, New Jersey.
§ 154-7. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
§ 154-8. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Ridgewood
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 154-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 154-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Village of Ridgewood,
Community No. 340067, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3742]
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Bergen
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" revised August 28, 2019.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and Panels No. 69, 88, 157, 159,
176, 177, and 178, whose effective date is August 28, 2019.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at the
office of the Village Engineer, Village Hall, Level 3, 131 North Maple
Avenue, Ridgewood, New Jersey 07450.
§ 154-6 FARMERS' MARKET § 154-10
141:303
§ 154-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Village of Ridgewood, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal
Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 154-10 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 154-11
141:304
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 154-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or any
development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within
any area of special flood hazard established in § 154-7. Application for
a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Village
Engineer's office and may include, but not be limited to; plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically,
the following information is required:
§ 154-13. Designation of the local administrator.
The Village Engineer for the Village of Ridgewood is hereby appointed to
administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 154-14. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Duties of the Village Engineer shall include, but not be limited to, the
following.
§ 154-15. Permit review.
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
flood-proofed. Elevations shall be prepared by a New Jersey licensed
land surveyor;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 154-31; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
B. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
C. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 154-34A are met.
§ 154-12 FARMERS' MARKET § 154-16
141:305
§ 154-16. Use of other base flood and floodway data.
When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with § 154-7, Basis for establishing the areas of special flood
hazard, the Village Engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state
or other source, in order to administer § 154-31, Specific standards,
residential construction, § 154-34, Specific standards, nonresidential
construction.
§ 154-17. Information to be obtained and maintained.
§ 154-18. Alteration of watercourses.
§ 154-19. Substantial damage review.
A. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially
improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a
basement.
B. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(1) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(2) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 154-12C.
C. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of
this chapter.
A. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control and the Land Use
Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administration.
B. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity is not
diminished.
A. After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
B. Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
C. Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of § 154-31,
Specific standards, residential construction, § 154-32, Specific
standards, nonresidential construction and § 154-33, Specific
standards, manufactured homes.
§ 154-16 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 154-20
141:306
§ 154-20. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries.
Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
§ 154-21.
§ 154-21. Variance procedure.53
§ 154-22. Appeal Board.
A. The Bergen County Construction Board of Appeals is hereby designated
by the Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood to hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
B. The Bergen County Construction Board of Appeals shall hear and
decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Office of the Village Engineer in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Bergen County Construction
Board of Appeals, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the
Superior Court of the State of New Jersey.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Bergen County Construction
Board of Appeals, shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
53.Editor's Note: See §§ 154-22 and 154-23.
§ 154-20 FARMERS' MARKET § 154-22
141:307
§ 154-23. Conditions for variances.
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 154-22D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Bergen County Construction Board of Appeals may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
F. The Office of the Village Engineer shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in § 154-22D(1)
through (11) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing
the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
§ 154-22 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 154-23
141:308
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in § 154-22D or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
F. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 154-23 FARMERS' MARKET § 154-23
141:309

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 154-24. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required.
§ 154-25. Anchoring.
§ 154-26. Construction materials and methods.
§ 154-27. Utilities.
§ 154-28. Subdivision proposals.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
B. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
B. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
A. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
B. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
C. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding; and
D. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and
other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
A. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be
consistent with the need so as to minimize flood damage;
§ 154-24 FARMERS' MARKET § 154-28
141:311
§ 154-29. Enclosure openings.
All new construction and substantial improvements having fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two
exterior walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
§ 154-30. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 154-7, Basis for establishing the areas of
special flood hazard or in § 154-16, Use of other base flood and floodway
data, the following standards are required.
§ 154-31. Residential construction.
B. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems located and constructed so as to minimize flood damage;
C. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
have adequate drainage provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
D. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed new development which contain at least five lots or
two acres (whichever is less).
A. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities (including all
electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service
equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the more
restrictive base flood elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/
SEI 24-14, Table 2-1.
B. Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with
the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated above the depth
number specified in feet plus one foot, above the highest adjacent
§ 154-28 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 154-31
141:312
§ 154-32. Nonresidential construction.
In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor, including
basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities as
well as all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service
equipment:
§ 154-33. Manufactured homes.
grade, at least three feet if no depth number is specified, and require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
A. Either:
(1) Elevated at or above the more restrictive base flood elevation plus
one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1; and
(2) Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's DFIRM to
elevate above the depth number specified in feet plus one foot,
above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified), and, require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures;
B. Or:
(1) Be floodproofed so that below the more restrictive, base flood
elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table
6-1, the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(3) Be certified by a New Jersey registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
applicable provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 154-17B(2).
A. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with § 154-25B.
B. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within
an area of special flood hazard shall:
(1) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
§ 154-31 FARMERS' MARKET § 154-33
141:313
§ 154-34. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 154-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(3) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage;
(4) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the more restrictive base flood elevation
plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1;
(5) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 154-34A, is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 2/10 of a foot at any
point.
§ 154-33 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 154-34
141:314
ARTICLE VI
Severability
§ 154-35. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the ordinance, which shall remain
in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 154-35 FARMERS' MARKET § 154-35
141:315
Chapter 156
FOOD AND FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 101.
Businesses and occupations — See Ch. 117.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
§ 154-35 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 154-35
141:316
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 156-1. Applicability.
Without in any way limiting the generality of any other provisions of this
chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to include the
manufacture, production, packing, possession, exposure, offer for sale, sale,
dispensing or giving away of any articles of food or beverages.
§ 156-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CARRIER — Any person who harbors an infectious agent of disease but
who may or may not have symptoms of the disease.
CLEANING — The thorough removal of contaminating material.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES — Any infectious, contagious or
communicable diseases, so declared or defined by law or by this
chapter or which has been or may hereafter be declared as
"communicable diseases" by the Division or by the State Department of
Health.
CONTAINER — Shall be synonymous with the term "package," as
defined in this section.
DISINFECTION — The application of any disinfected materials to
infected materials in sufficient concentration and for a sufficient length
of time to destroy pathogenic organisms.
FISH — Includes every part of any marine or water-dwelling animal.
FOOD — Includes any article used for food or beverage for humans
or other animals, and every ingredient therein, including, without
limitation, all confectionery, condiments, flavorings and other
components of any such article.[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any bakery, confectionery,
cannery, packing house, slaughterhouse, dairy, creamery, cheese
factory, restaurant, hotel, grocery, meat market, fish market,
delicatessen or other place or vehicle used in the production,
preparation, transportation or handling of food intended for sale or
distribution.
GARBAGE — The accumulation of animal or vegetable matter, or both,
liquid or otherwise, that tends to decay.
GRADE A FOOD — Food which has neither been decomposed nor
contaminated and which is of superior quality.
§ 156-1 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-2
141:317
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer, executive officer or other
officer duly appointed or designated by the Division of Health to enforce
this chapter or supervise work on behalf of the Division.
LABEL — A display of written, printed or graphic matter upon or affixed
to the immediate container, not including the liners, of any article.
LABELING — All labels and other written, printed or graphic matter
upon an article or any of its containers or wrappers or accompanying
such article.
MARKET — Includes every store, cellar, stand or place at or in which
the business of buying, selling or keeping for sale any meat, dairy
products, poultry, fish, vegetables or fruit for human or animal food is
conducted or maintained.
MEAT — Includes every part of any animal, whether mixed or not with
any other substance.
PACKAGE — Includes any wrapper, case, basket, hamper, can, bottle,
jar, tube, cask, vessel, tub, firkin, keg, jug, barrel or other receptacle,
but shall not include open containers which permit a visual and physical
inspection by a purchaser at retail nor bags and other receptacles
which are filled in the presence of a purchaser at retail.
PERMIT or LICENSE — A duly authorized permit or license of the
Board, issued in accordance with this chapter or the regulations of the
Division.
PROPERTY and PREMISES — Unless restricted or limited by the
context to either real or personal property they shall include both.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes any public place, as well as any restaurant,
and every other establishment or place where food or beverage is sold
or offered for sale to the public for consumption on the premises, and
any camp, tourist home or public recreation place or any other place
of business where toilet facilities or water for drinking or culinary
purposes are available for the use of the public.
REGULATIONS — Includes any regulations, whether general or special,
which the Division may from time to time lawfully adopt and issue.
RESTAURANT — Includes any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, shortorder
cafe, lunchroom, lunch wagon, diner, soda fountain, snack bar,
luncheonette, tavern, bar, grill, cocktail lounge, hotel, club,
boardinghouse, sandwich stand, refreshment stand and every other
place or establishment stationary or mobile, in which food or beverage
is sold for consumption on or near the premises or at the time.
SANITIZE — The submerging of multi-use utensils in water having a
temperature of 180° F. for a period of one minute.
STATE BOARD AND STATE DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Public
Health Council or State Department of Health or any successor agency
thereto.
§ 156-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-2
141:318
§ 156-3. Application for license, permit or health certificates.
All applications for licenses, permits or health certificates required by this
chapter shall be made at the Office of the Division of Health during regular
office hours, and the fees for every license, permit or health certificate shall
be paid in advance at the time of making the application therefor.
§ 156-4. Investigation of applicant or premises.
The granting of any license, permit or health certificate may be withheld, at
the direction of the Division of Health, pending examination, investigation
or inspection of the person who or the premises which may be the subject
matter of the license, permit or health certificate under consideration.
§ 156-5. Term of license; nontransferability.
All licenses, permits or health certificates issued under this chapter shall
be valid only for the balance of the calendar year in which they are issued,
unless otherwise provided in this chapter. No such license, permit or health
certificate shall be transferable or assignable.
§ 156-6. Exemption from fee.
No fee for any license, permit or health certificate issued under this chapter
shall be required of any person declared by state law to be exempt from the
payment of any such fee.
§ 156-7. Issuance of evidence by Division of Health.
The Division of Health shall evidence the granting of any license, permit or
health certificate issued by furnishing to the licensee, permittee or health
certificate holder a suitable card, sign, placard, disc, plat or other writing
which shall convey information concerning the nature of such license,
permit or health certificate, the serial number of the same, the name of the
person to whom the same has been issued, the year in which the same is so
issued, the premises or vehicle so licensed, if that be material or required,
and such other information as the Division may deem pertinent.
§ 156-8. Display of license.
Every license, permit or health certificate issued by the Division of Health
shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the establishment, premises or
other place for which the same is issued and shall likewise be so displayed
on every vehicle or conveyance so licensed for the period that such license,
permit or health certificate shall be in force unless the Division shall
otherwise prescribe.
B. It is intended that the terms "license" and "permit," wherever used
within this chapter, be synonymous if, in the interpretation of any part
hereof, such synonym is required to carry out the manifest intent and
purpose of this chapter.
§ 156-2 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-9
141:319
§ 156-9. Suspension of license.
§ 156-10. Revocation of license.
A. Every license, permit or health certificate issued under this chapter
may, at any time during the term for which the same is so issued, be
suspended by the Division of Health or, in an emergency, by the Health
Officer, pending a hearing to be granted the holder thereof, pursuant to
a notice to show cause by the Division why such license, permit or
health certificate should not be suspended further or revoked.
B. No such license, permit or health certificate shall be suspended unless
the Health Officer shall file with the division a complaint or charges
evidencing one or more violations of this chapter under which such
license, permit or health certificate was originally issued.
C. Every suspension ordered under this section shall automatically
terminate two weeks from the date thereof unless the continuance of
such suspension shall be ordered by the Division, and then such
suspension shall continue only during the period of any such
continuance so ordered by the division.
D. During the period of any such suspension or ordered continuance
thereof, every license, permit or health certificate so suspended shall be
ineffective, and the holder thereof shall, during the entire period of
such suspension, cease the operation of any business or discontinue
every activity or use permitted under the license, permit or health
certificate suspended.
A. Any license, permit or health certificate issued under the provisions of
this chapter may be revoked at any time by the Division of Health for
just cause or if the licensee, permittee or health certificate holder or
any of the employees, agents or servants of such licensee, permittee or
health certificate holder shall violate:
(1) Any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Sanitary Code of the State Department of Health specifically
applicable to the subject matter for or upon which such license,
permit or health certificate was issued.
B. Before any license, permit or health certificate may be revoked, the
holder thereof shall be given a hearing and an opportunity to be heard
on the complaint made or violation charged against him.
C. The time and place for such hearing shall be fixed at the discretion of
the Division, provided that an unreasonable time shall not be permitted
to elapse between the date of any suspension of license and the date
fixed for the hearing.
D. Notice of the time and place of any hearing held under this section shall
be given by the Division to the holder of the license, permit or health
§ 156-9 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-10
141:320
§ 156-11. Inspection of licensed establishments.
§ 156-12. Adulterated food. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
For the purpose of this chapter, food or beverages shall be deemed
adulterated if either of them falls within the definition, construction,
context, intent or meaning of N.J.S.A. 24:5-8 or any amendments thereto or
supplements thereof.
§ 156-13. Misbranded food. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
For the purpose of this chapter, food or beverages shall be deemed
misbranded if either of them would be deemed misbranded within the
definition, construction, context, intent or meaning of N.J.S.A. 24:5-16 and
N.J.S.A. 24:5-17, or any amendments thereto or supplements thereof.
§ 156-14. Prohibited acts.
No person shall:
certificate so involved, in writing, and served either personally or sent
to him by registered mail, addressed to him at the address stated in the
license, permit or health certificate.
E. A licensee, permittee or health certificate holder who fails to appear at
the time and place fixed for such hearing shall not be entitled to any
further hearing, and in that event, his license, permit or health
certificate may, as a matter of course, be forthwith revoked.
A. At least once every 12 months, the Health Officer shall inspect all
establishments licensed under the provisions of this chapter. In case the
Health Officer discovers the violation of any item of sanitation, he shall
make a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems
necessary for the defect to be remedied, and the second inspection shall
be used in determining compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. Any violation of the same item of this chapter shall call for
immediate suspension of license. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No.
1955]
B. A copy of the inspection report shall be filed and kept by the
establishment for a period of one year, and the original shall be filed in
the records of the Division.
C. The person operating the establishment shall, upon request of the
health officer, permit access to all parts of the establishment.
A. Manufacture, expose for sale, offer for sale, sell, use or keep any food or
beverage for human use or consumption which has been exposed to any
contamination or infection from any communicable disease or is
believed to have been exposed to contamination or infection from any
§ 156-10 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-14
141:321
§ 156-15. Selling from vehicles. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No.
1955]
communicable disease or which is unfit, unwholesome, impure,
decayed, diseased, mislabeled or adulterated.
B. Distribute or sell or offer or expose for sale or have in his possession
with intent to sell or manufacture for distribution or sale any food or
drink which differs in purity, quality or strength from the standards
adopted and published in accordance with Title 24 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated or any amendments thereto or supplements thereof.
C. Handle or dispense any food or beverages within the Village while
suffering from or possessed of any communicable diseases.
D. Keep any dog, cat or other animal in or allow or permit it to enter any
store, building, place or establishment within the Village where food or
beverages are kept, manufactured, sold or handled for commercial
purposes.
E. Place or transport a child in baskets furnished by a food
establishment.54
A. No person shall sell, peddle or deliver any article of food or beverage
from any wagon, pushcart, truck or other vehicle or from house to
house or in or at any public place without first having obtained a license
from the Division of Health so to do. Such peddling, selling or delivering
shall be limited to the articles of food covered by the license.
B. The fees for license shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The fees
are intended to be annual fees but, when paid, shall cover only the
balance of the calendar year during which the same are paid or
payable. [Amended 3-28-1989 by Ord. No. 2202; 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
C. No person shall sell or peddle any article of food or beverage from any
wagon, pushcart, truck or other vehicle on the following delineated
streets, avenues or public places in the Village of Ridgewood: [Added
6-9-1998 by Ord. No. 2634]
Name of Street Location
Ackerman Avenue All
Bellair Road Lincoln Avenue to Ackerman Avenue
Chestnut Street All
Corsa Terrace All
Cottage Place All
Dayton Street Prospect Street to South Maple Avenue
54.Editor's Note: Former Sections 13-16 through 13-19, providing various regulations, were
deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
§ 156-14 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-15
141:322
Name of Street Location
Doremus Avenue All
Douglas Place All
East Glen Avenue All
East Ridgewood Avenue All
East Saddle River Road All
Franklin Avenue All
Franklin Turnpike All
Garber Square All
Godwin Avenue All
Goffle Road All
Grove Street All
Heermance Place All
Hillcrest Road West Glen Avenue to North Monroe
Street
Hudson Street All
Lake Avenue All
Library Place All
Lincoln Avenue All
Linwood Avenue All
Maltbie Avenue All
Morningside Road All
North Broad Street All
North Irving Street All
North Maple Avenue All
North Monroe Street All
North Pleasant Avenue All
North Van Dien Avenue All
North Walnut Street East Ridgewood Avenue to Franklin
Avenue
Northern Parkway North Irving Street to East Glen Avenue
Oak Street East Ridgewood Avenue to East Glen
Avenue
Paramus Road All
Passaic Street All
Prospect Street All
Race Track Road All
§ 156-15 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-15
141:323
§ 156-16. Display of plate or card on vehicle.
There shall be displayed on all vehicles used for any of the purposes
mentioned in § 156-15 such plate or card as may be furnished by the
Division of Health evidencing the permission of the Division to use the
vehicle for the purposes aforesaid.
§ 156-17. Food not to be handled before purchase; exceptions.
Food offered or exposed for sale, except such as are protected by containers
or wrappings, shall not be handled or permitted to be handled by any
customer or prospective customer prior to the actual purchase thereof.
Placards containing this section shall be posted if required by the Division
of Health.
§ 156-18. Minimum sanitary standards.
The owner, proprietor or other person in charge of any food establishment,
vehicle or other place where food or beverages are stored, kept, handled,
prepared, sold or distributed shall maintain and observe all of the following
minimum sanitary standards:
Name of Street Location
Robinson Lane All
Somerville Road All
South Broad Street All
South Maple Avenue All
South Monroe Street All
South Pleasant Avenue Grove Street to East Ridgewood Avenue
South Van Dien Avenue Grove Street to East Ridgewood Avenue
South Walnut Street All
Spring Avenue Prospect Street to Somerville Road
Union Street All
Van Emburgh Avenue All
Van Neste Square All
West Glen Avenue All
West Ridgewood Avenue All
West Saddle River Road All
Wilsey Square All
A. All foods and beverages shall at all times be adequately protected from
flies, dust, dirt and other contamination.
§ 156-15 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-18
141:324
B. Food and beverages likely to spoil shall be kept in such manner and at
such temperature as to prevent spoilage, 45° F. maximum. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
C. The interior of all places, rooms, compartments and vehicles shall be
adequately ventilated and lighted and shall be maintained in a clean
condition.
D. All counters, tabletops, shelves, boxes, refrigerators and other
receptacles in or upon which food or beverages are stored, prepared,
handled, displayed or served shall be kept clean. All countertops and
tabletops shall be constructed of nonabsorbent materials.
E. Clean outer garments shall be worn by all persons when engaged in the
handling, preparation, sale or serving of food or beverages.
F. Adequate facilities for washing hands, including clean hot water,
powdered or liquid soap and clean individual towels, shall be provided
at a place convenient for the use of all persons engaged in the handling,
preparation, sale or serving of food or beverages. All persons engaged
in the handling, preparation, sale or serving of food or beverages shall
wash their hands thoroughly with soap and water before commencing
work and after using the toilet.
G. All dishes and other utensils in or with which food or beverages come in
contact or which are used by customers and all knives, forks, spoons,
cups, glasses and similar articles used by customers in the consumption
of food or beverages, except single-service utensils, shall, after such
contact or use and before reuse, be thoroughly cleansed for at least two
minutes in hot soapy water or a hot alkaline solution and immediately
rinsed or immersed in clean water of a temperature of at least 180° F.
for at least one minute or shall be cleansed and treated in some other
manner approved by the Health Officer.
H. An abundant supply of hot and cold drinking water for the proper
conduct of the business shall be readily available at all times.
I. Water used or made available for use for drinking or culinary purposes
or for the cleansing of any utensils shall be of a quality safe for such use
and shall meet all standards of quality fixed by the Commissioner of
Health of the state.
J. Adequate toilet facilities shall be provided for all employees.
K. Every toilet, toilet room or washroom maintained in or in connection
with such premises shall be kept clean.
L. All toilet rooms and compartments shall be ventilated by a window or
duct opening to the outer air and be so located and constructed so that
the odors therefrom will be prevented from reaching any room in which
food or beverage is stored, prepared or served. All toilet room and
compartment doors shall be provided with self-closing devices.
§ 156-18 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-18
141:325
§ 156-19. Unwholesome foods.
No person shall sell or expose for sale any food or beverage that is decayed,
putrefied or has become chemically or physically changed so that it is
unwholesome or unfit for consumption or that has been exposed to
contamination or infection of any communicable disease.
M. All garbage, decomposable or waste animal and vegetable material, all
refuse incident to the conduct of every food or beverage-vending or
food or beverage preparation establishment and all single-service
utensils and paper cellophane and similar wrappings which have come
in contact with food must at all times be kept in watertight containers
with tight-fitting covers to prevent access of insects, rodents, vermin
and escape of foul odors. All garbage and decomposable or waste
animal and vegetable material shall be removed from the premises
daily.
N. All means shall be employed to keep all rooms, places or compartments
free from rats, mice, roaches and other vermin.
O. Single-service utensils or single-service containers shall not be used a
second time.
P. No common drinking cup shall be furnished to nor kept where
accessible to customers or employees.
Q. Towels and soap furnished or made available for the use of employees
or customers shall be of the single-service type.
R. No dishwater, drainage from plumbing fixtures or other foul or
putrescible waste liquids from or produced in connection with such
premises shall be permitted to accumulate on the surface of the ground
or be disposed of in a manner which may pollute any water supply or
create a nuisance.
S. No person shall live or sleep or be allowed to live or sleep in any room,
compartment, vehicle or conveyance where food intended for sale or
distribution is handled, produced, manufactured, packed, distributed or
sold.
T. No exposed food shall be offered for sale from shelves, counters or
other containers which shall be less than 10 inches from the floor of the
store or place in which the same is exposed for sale.
U. No food shall be stored, displayed, sold or exposed for sale from or on
the sidewalk, entrance, passageway or other surfaces outside of any
building.
V. No bottles or other containers used for the delivery of food or
beverages shall be stored or left standing in any public place in the
Village.
§ 156-18 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-20
141:326
§ 156-20. Permit required; fees. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No.
1955; 2-12-1985 by Ord. No. 1966]
§ 156-21. Compliance with sanitary regulations.
Every establishment referred to in this chapter shall, at all times, conform
to and comply with all sanitary regulations contained in this chapter and
affecting or concerning the handling, manufacture, preparation, storage,
sale or exposure of all food or beverage.
§ 156-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord.
No. 1955; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
A. No person shall operate any food establishment in the Village without
having first obtained a permit from the Division of Health so to do.
B. All such food establishments shall be operated subject to the provisions
of this Code and of the State Sanitary Code and all rules and regulations
thereunder. Except as hereinafter provided, the fees for such permit
shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The square footage shall be
determined by measuring the interior dimensions of the food
establishment. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
C. Food establishments which conduct solely the sale of packaged food,
packaged beverages, or both, in an area containing less than 250
square feet shall be operated subject to the provisions of this Code and
of the State Sanitary Code and to all rules and regulations thereunder
and shall obtain a permit, the fee for which shall be as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees, per year. [Amended 3-28-1989 by Ord. No. 2202;
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
D. The fees are intended to be annual fees but, when paid, shall cover only
the balances of the calendar year during which the same are paid or
payable.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who shall do
or commit any act prohibited by the terms of this chapter; or do or
commit any act for which a license, permit or health certificate is
required without having secured and being in possession of a valid
license, permit or health certificate at the time of the doing or
commission thereof; or omit to do or perform any act required by him to
be so done or performed by this chapter; or maintain any place,
establishment, vehicle, conveyance, equipment or article in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter; or fail to maintain any condition,
equipment or facility required to be maintained by this chapter; or fail
to install any article of a particular type, kind, quality or specification
where such installation is required; or in any manner, by deed, act, act
of commission or act of omission, violate any one or more of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof or upon
conviction of any violation of the provisions hereof, be subject to a
§ 156-20 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-22
141:327
penalty or judgment as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I, of this Code.
B. In the event that any violation of this chapter shall also be a violation of
a state law for which is provided a greater penalty or judgment than
that contained in said Chapter 1, the Municipal Judge or trial judge
before whom any complaint is brought based upon such violation shall,
in his discretion, have the right to impose, in the place and in lieu of any
penalty provided for herein, that so provided in the state law which has
been so violated.55
55.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Horse Meat and Horse Flesh, as amended, was deleted
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
§ 156-22 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-22
141:328
ARTICLE II
Meat and Meat Products
§ 156-23. Examination of animals.
No person shall expose for sale or offer for sale or otherwise dispose of or
have in his possession for sale or disposal within the Village any meat or any
part of any animal from which meat is obtained unless such animal has been
examined, both before and after slaughter, by the veterinary inspector or
other qualified officer of the United States government or by the veterinary
inspector or other qualified officer of the Board of Health of a municipality
having a system of inspection equal to that adopted by the United States
Bureau of Animal Husbandry.
§ 156-24. Reinspection and condemnation.
All meat or meat products offered for sale in the Village shall be subject at
all times to reinspection and condemnation by the Health Officer.
§ 156-25. Approval required.
No person shall offer or expose for sale or sell or otherwise dispose of within
the Village or be possessed of any meat or meat products unless the factory
or establishment where the same are manufactured, processed or put up
bears the approval of the United States Bureau of Animal Husbandry or the
approval of the Board of Health of the municipality in which the same is
located, whose standards are equal to those adopted by the United States
Bureau of Animal Husbandry.
§ 156-26. Sale from vehicles prohibited.
No person shall sell, expose for sale or offer for sale or cut or process any
meat on a vehicle or on the public streets within the Village.
§ 156-23 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-26
141:329

ARTICLE III
Fish
§ 156-27. Sanitary requirements.
It shall be unlawful to sell, expose for sale or offer for sale any fish within
the Village unless the place from which the same is sold, exposed or offered
for sale fully complies in all respects with all of the following sanitary
requirements:
A. All floors thereof shall be of nonabsorbent material.
B. Ice refrigerators shall have drains permanently connected indirectly
into a proper trap and vented fixture to a sanitary sewer line and shall
be flushed daily with fresh water.
C. All tabletops and countertops shall be of nonabsorbent material.
Portable wooden cutting or chopping boards are permitted, but they
must be thoroughly washed and scrubbed daily and kept reasonably
smooth.
D. All fish markets or places where fish is sold shall have thorough
ventilation, self-closing doors, running water (separate from washing
basins) and at least two metal garbage cans of adequate size and fitted
with tight covers for fish scraps, which cans shall be removed and
emptied daily.
E. Screen doors shall be provided with self-closing devices. All doors and
windows shall be screened from April 1 to November 30 in each year.
Window screens shall be of a permanent type.
F. Toilet and hand-washing facilities shall be provided for fish handlers.
G. Only wholesome and edible fish and fish products shall be sold for
human consumption.
H. All fish showcases shall be internally lined with nonabsorbent material.
§ 156-27 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-27
141:331

ARTICLE IV
Frozen Foods
§ 156-28. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of processing,
selling, distributing, storing or delivering of frozen foods in the Village
without first having obtained from the Division of Health a license so to do.
§ 156-29. Wholesale fees. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1955;
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
The fee for a license to conduct the processing and wholesale of frozen
food shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The fees are intended to
be annual fees but, when paid, shall cover only the balance of the calendar
year during which the same are paid or payable.
§ 156-30. Retail fees. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1955]
The fee for a license to conduct the retail sale of frozen food shall be
governed by § 156-20.
§ 156-31. Refrigeration and regulation of temperature.
In every frozen food processing plant, locker plant, storage plant,
distribution store or plant or any type of frozen food establishment or retail
vehicle where frozen food is handled or held there shall be a complete
refrigeration system with adequate capacity and accurate and reliable
controls for automatic maintenance of uniform temperature under extreme
conditions of outside temperature and under peak load conditions in normal
operation of not more than 0° F. Vehicles in which frozen foods are
transported either for moving, distribution or sale shall be adequately
refrigerated and closed to maintain temperatures no higher than 0° F. with
a tolerance of 10° F. when frozen food is being taken out or placed in the
vehicle.
§ 156-32. Accurate thermometer required.
An accurate direct-reading thermometer shall be provided in the locker
room or locker compartment, frozen food storage rooms or compartments
and in each display case, counter or vehicle for frozen food.
§ 156-33. Proper packaging and labeling required.
All frozen food products must be properly packaged and must have an easily
legible printed label, containing thereon a list of ingredients, the name and
address of the processor and the date of processing and freezing.
§ 156-28 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-34
141:333
§ 156-34. Labeling to comply with state laws. [Amended 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375]
All labeling shall conform to the provisions of the N.J.S.A. 24:5-1 et seq., and
as the same may hereafter be amended or supplemented.
§ 156-35. Quality of food.
Only food of Grade A quality shall be processed, sold or offered for sale as
frozen food.
§ 156-36. Lockers or other spaces prohibited; exception.
No locker or space shall be used in any frozen food processing plant for any
other purpose except for the storage of food for human consumption, unless
a separate storage room, apart from the food room, is maintained, and then
only such separate storage room may be so used.
§ 156-37. Labeling of foods not intended for human consumption.
Foods not intended for human consumption shall bear a label or tag plainly
and conspicuously bearing the words "not for human consumption."
§ 156-38. Improperly wrapped meat.
No improperly wrapped meat shall be placed in storage lockers, rooms,
display cases or vehicles.
§ 156-39. Storage conditions.
No article of food shall be stored in such condition or in such a manner as
to cause injury or deterioration to any other article of food.
§ 156-34 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-39
141:334
ARTICLE V
Ice
§ 156-40. License required.
No person shall manufacture, sell, offer for sale or deliver any ice without
first having obtained a license therefor from the Division of Health so to
do and covering each premises or place from or on which ice is to be sold,
offered for sale, delivered or manufactured.
§ 156-41. Fee. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1955; 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375]
The fee for a license to conduct the manufacture, sale, etc., of ice shall be as
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The fee is intended to be an annual fee but,
when paid, shall cover only the balance of the calendar year during which
the same is paid or payable.
§ 156-42. Application for license required.
No such license shall be issued unless there is an application therefor, in
writing, signed by the applicant, setting forth the source of the ice supply
and the source of the water from which the ice is made or intended to be
made.
§ 156-43. Separate application for each establishment or vehicle.
A separate application shall be made for and a separate license shall be
required for each wagon, truck, vehicle, ice depot or plant, place or
premises used or to be used in the sale, delivery or manufacture of ice.
§ 156-44. Change in source of supply.
No ice shall be sold, delivered or manufactured if the source of supply of
such ice or the source of the water used in the manufacture thereof shall
be changed or shall be different from that set forth in the application for
the aforesaid license. However, the Division of Health, upon notice of such
change, may authorize the manufacture, sale and delivery of such ice under
the then existing license.
§ 156-45. Ice made from impure water prohibited.
No person shall manufacture, sell or deliver ice which has been cut or made
from any impure or polluted water or which has been obtained or made
from a source not approved by the Division of Health or which has otherwise
become unfit for use.
§ 156-46. Samples to be made available.
Every licensee shall at all times and upon request of any authorized
representative of the Division of Health make available samples of the ice
§ 156-40 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-46
141:335
manufactured, sold or delivered and, in the case of manufacture of ice, of
the water from which the same is manufactured.
§ 156-47. Vehicles to be sanitary.
Wagons, trucks or vehicles used for the transportation of ice shall be kept
clean and free from contaminating material.
§ 156-46 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-47
141:336
ARTICLE VI
Restaurants
§ 156-48. License required.
No person shall operate any restaurant without having first obtained from
the Division of Health a license to do so, covering the premises in which
every such restaurant is operated or intended to be so operated.
§ 156-49. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a restaurant operated for
a temporary period not exceeding two days in connection with a public
exhibition, charitable or club function or other group or organization affair,
provided that the operator of such public exhibition, charitable or club
function or other group or organization affair shall first have secured from
the Division of Health written permission to so operate the same without
such license.
§ 156-50. Fees. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1955]
§ 156-51. Sanitary requirements.
All restaurants shall comply with all of the following sanitary requirements:
A. The fee for a license to operate a restaurant shall be as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
B. The fees are intended to be annual fees but, when paid, shall cover only
the balance of the calendar year during which the same are paid or
payable. It is not intended by this article that a restaurant shall be
required to pay a fee as a restaurant and an additional fee as a food
establishment.
A. The floors of all rooms in which food or beverages are stored, prepared
or served or in which utensils are washed shall be of such construction
as to be easily cleaned, shall be smooth and shall be kept clean and in
good repair at all times.
B. Walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean and in good repair.
The walls of all rooms in which food or beverages are prepared or
utensils are washed shall have a smooth washable surface up to the
level reached by splash spray.
C. Counters, shelves, tables, sinks, chopping blocks and other equipment
shall be constructed of smooth materials without cracks, and any joints
shall be so constructed that food will not lodge therein.
D. All openings into the outer air shall be effectively screened from April 1
to November 30, and doors shall be self-closing unless other effective
means approved by the Health Officer are provided to prevent the
entrance of flies.
§ 156-48 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-51
141:337
E. All rooms in which food or beverages are stored, prepared or served or
in which utensils are washed shall be well-ventilated so as to be
reasonably free of disagreeable odors. When natural ventilation is
inadequate or creates a nuisance to neighboring property, a system of
forced draft ventilation may be required with the outlet at roof level or
some other point so as to avoid any nuisance to neighboring properties.
F. Every restaurant shall be provided with at least one washroom, and
every restaurant having seating capacity for six or more persons shall
have at least two washrooms, one for each sex. In restaurants hereafter
constructed, washrooms shall not open directly into any room in which
food, beverages or utensils are handled or stored. Each washroom shall
be provided with an adequate number of toilets and handbasins and
urinals, as required. The doors of all washrooms shall be self-closing.
Washrooms shall be kept in a clean condition, in good repair and welllighted
and ventilated. Hand-washing signs shall be posted in each
washroom used for employees. Adequate convenient hand-washing
facilities shall be provided, including hot and cold running water, liquid
or powdered soap in approved dispensers and approved sanitary towels
and receptacles for disposing of used towels. The use of common towels
is prohibited. No employee shall resume work after using the toilet or
urinal without first washing his hands. The preceding requirement shall
be posted in all rest rooms.
G. All employees shall wear clean outer garments and shall keep their
hands clean at all times while engaged in handling food, beverages,
utensils or equipment. Employees shall not smoke while preparing,
selling or serving food or beverages. Employees shall wear caps while
preparing food, and employees having long hair shall wear caps or hair
nets while serving food.
H. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided for employees'
clothing and shall be kept clean at all times.
I. Soiled linens, coats and aprons shall be kept in containers provided for
that purpose.
J. All multi-use utensils and all show and display cases or windows,
counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating equipment, sinks and other
equipment or utensils used in connection with the operation of a
restaurant shall be so constructed as to be easily cleaned and shall be
kept in good repair. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium or lead
shall not be used; however, solder containing lead may be used for
jointing.
K. All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters, shelves,
tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods and sinks, shall be kept clean and
free from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating materials. All
cloths used by waiters, chefs and other employees shall be clean.
Single-service containers shall be used only once.
§ 156-51 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-51
141:338
§ 156-52. Regulation of certain foods.
L. All multi-use eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleansed
and sanitized by submerging utensils in hot water at a temperature of
180° F. for a period of one minute. In all establishments where multi-use
utensils are used, a three-compartment sink shall be provided with
sanitizing facilities in the third compartment.
M. No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide
preparation or other poisonous material shall be used for the cleaning
or polishing of utensils.
N. All multi-use utensils shall demonstrate a swab test count of less than
100 colonies of bacteria per utensil, under standard laboratory
procedure.
O. After treatment, utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place protected
from flies, dust and other contamination and shall be handled in such a
manner as to prevent contamination as far as practicable. Singleservice
utensils shall be purchased only in sanitary containers, shall be
stored therein in a clean, dry place until used and shall be handled in a
sanitary manner. All cups and glasses shall be stored in an inverted
position.
P. All readily perishable food and beverages shall be kept at or below 50°
F. except when being prepared or served.
Q. Wastewater from refrigeration equipment shall be disposed of in a
manner approved by the Health Officer.
R. Immersion of food or beverages is specifically prohibited.
S. All food and beverage shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage and
so prepared as to be safe for human consumption.
T. All food and beverages shall be so stored, displayed and served as to be
protected from dust, flies, vermin, depredation or pollution by rodents,
unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage and other
contamination. All means necessary for the elimination of flies, roaches
and rodents shall be used. Cats, dogs and other small animals shall be
excluded from restaurants.
A. All milk, fluid milk products, ice cream and other frozen desserts served
shall be from approved sources.
B. Milk and fluid milk products shall be served in the individual original
containers in which they are received from the distributor, and the
container shall not be unsealed or opened by the seller or server except
in the presence of the purchaser, provided that this requirement shall
not apply to cream, which may be served from the original container or
in a manner approved by the Health Officer.
§ 156-51 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-52
141:339
§ 156-53. Samples.
Samples of food, beverages and other substance may be taken and
examined by the Health Officer as may be necessary for the detection of
unwholesomeness or adulteration.
§ 156-54. Condemnation of unwholesome food.
The Health Officer may condemn and forbid the sale of or cause to be
removed and destroyed any food or beverage which is unwholesome or
adulterated.
§ 156-55. Employment of diseased persons prohibited.
C. All oysters, clams and mussels shall be obtained from approved sources
and, if shucked, shall be kept, until used, in the containers in which they
were placed at the shucking plant.
A. No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable form or
who is a carrier of such disease shall work in any restaurant, and no
restaurant shall employ any such person or any person suspected of
being affected with any disease in a communicable form or of being a
carrier of such disease.
B. If the restaurant manager suspects that any employee has contacted
any disease in a communicable form or is a carrier or has become a
carrier of such disease, he shall notify the Health Officer immediately.
C. When reasonable suspicion exists as to the possibility of transmission of
infection from any restaurant employee, the Health Officer is
authorized to require any or all of the following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from all restaurants.
(2) The immediate closing of the restaurant concerned until no further
danger of disease outbreak exists in the opinion of the Health
Officer.
(3) Adequate medical examinations of the employee and of his
associates, with such laboratory examinations as may be indicated.
§ 156-52 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-55
141:340
ARTICLE VII
Food-Handler Certificates
[Added 2-25-1975 by Ord. No. 1558]
§ 156-56. Definitions. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1955]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health and Welfare of the Village.
FOOD — Any edible matter, including any drink or beverage intended for
human consumption on or off the premises.
§ 156-57. When required. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1955]
§ 156-58. Procedure for obtaining certificate. [Amended 12-13-2000
by Ord. No. 2718]
§ 156-59. List of approved instructors to be maintained. [Amended
12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1955]
A list of approved agencies and/or municipalities conducting such a course
of instruction shall be maintained in the office of the Department and be
available for public inspection during normal business hours.
§ 156-60. (Reserved)56
A. Each person engaged within the Village in the business of preparing,
selling or processing exposed food is required to obtain a food-handler's
certificate, which shall be conspicuously displayed within the
establishment or premises at or upon which such business is conducted.
B. This article shall not apply to any person subject to federal, state or
county health regulations as to food handling upon satisfactory proof of
compliance with such regulations being approved by the Department of
Health and Welfare.
A. A food-handler's certificate shall be obtained from the Department of
Health upon proof of successful completion of a course of instruction in
health education, sanitation, personal hygiene, food poisoning,
dishwashing procedures, insects, rodents and other related matters.
B. All food handlers are required to attend a food-handler's course of
instruction within three months of employment. Any person who fails to
successfully complete the course for any reason shall reapply for the
next scheduled food-handler's course in the Village, in the county or in
any other municipality offering certification.
56.Editor's Note: Former § 156-60, Temporary certificates, as amended 12-11-1984 by Ord.
No. 1955, was repealed 12-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2718.
§ 156-56 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-61
141:341
§ 156-61. Revocation. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1955]
The Department of Health and Welfare shall have the authority to revoke
any food-handler's certificate issued pursuant to this article but only for
cause and after notice to and hearing granted to the person holding such
certificate.
§ 156-62. Employer's records. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No.
1955]
All employers of persons required to hold food-handler certificates pursuant
to this article shall maintain records of each such employee, listing his name
and address, date of employment and number and date of the food-handler's
certificate. Such records are to be made available to the Department of
Health and Welfare or its authorized representatives at all times.
§ 156-63. Fees. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1955; 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375; 12-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2718]
Each person required to obtain a food-handler's certificate shall pay a fee as
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, in order to attend the food-handler's course.
§ 156-64. Nontransferability. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No.
1955]
No person to whom a food-handler's certificate is issued shall give, loan,
transfer or sell to or permit the same to be used by any other person.57
§ 156-65. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person subject to federal, state or county
health regulations as to food handling upon satisfactory proof of compliance
with such regulations to the Department.
§ 156-65.1. Renewal of certificates. [Added 12-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2718]
Any person engaged or employed in the business of preparing, selling or
processing exposed food and having successfully completed a course of
instruction in food handling is required to reattend a food-handler's course
of instruction within a period of five years after the satisfactory completion
of a course.
§ 156-65.2. Requirement of managers/supervisors to attend course.
[Added 12-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2718]
Any food establishment in the business of preparing, selling or processing
exposed food which fails the health inspection two consecutive times within
a period of one year shall require the managers and supervisors of each
57.Editor's Note: Original Section 10, regarding violations, was deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375.
§ 156-61 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-65.2
141:342
department (if applicable) to attend a twenty-hour food manager's
certification course offered by the County Department of Health Services.
§ 156-65.3. Revocation of license to operate. [Added 12-13-2000 by
Ord. No. 2718]
In the event that, pursuant to § 156-65.2, all managers or supervisors of
the business fail to attend a food manager's course within three months of
notification by the Department of Health, the Department of Health shall
cite the establishment and conduct a hearing, the subject of which shall be
revocation of the establishment's license to operate.
§ 156-65.2 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-65.3
141:343

ARTICLE VIII
Outdoor Cafes
[Added 6-7-1993 by Ord. No. 2412; amended 4-11-1995 by Ord. No.
2515; 2-13-2001 by Ord. No. 2730; 7-18-2007 by Ord. No. 3071;
8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 3659; 2-13-2019 by Ord. No. 3700]
§ 156-66. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a procedure and authorize rules
and regulations thereunder for the licensing of outdoor cafes in the B-1 and
B-2 Zones of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 156-67. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed in this section:
MOVEABLE BARRIER — A barrier of the kind and type approved by this
article that can be physically moved about the sidewalk by one average
human being (person) without the aid of a mechanized lifting device or
machine.
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served or consumed outside the interior of the eating
establishment on private property or upon the public right-of-way, namely,
the sidewalks immediately in front of any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria or place
of business where food and/or other refreshments are served or consumed
or where permitted on private property pursuant to Chapter 190, Land Use
and Development.
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way reserved for pedestrian
traffic from the curb to the front line of the building housing an eating
establishment.
§ 156-68. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or organization of any kind (hereinafter collectively referred to
as "person") to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged
in the business of conducting an outdoor cafe upon the sidewalks of the
Village of Ridgewood, or on private property, unless such person shall hold
a currently valid license issued pursuant to the terms of this article.
§ 156-69. Location.
A. When located within the public right-of-way, outdoor cafes shall only be
located on the public sidewalk directly in front of the eating
establishment to which the outdoor cafe is accessory. For purposes of
administering this provision, the term "directly in front of" shall be
construed to mean the area represented by an extension of each side of
the store occupied by the eating establishment projected directly to the
curb line immediately in front thereof. Such cafes shall be required to
§ 156-66 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-69
141:345
§ 156-70. Application for license.
Application for the license required hereunder shall be made to the
Department of Buildings and Inspections and shall be signed by the
applicant. The application shall contain the following information:
maintain an unobstructed paved surface for pedestrian traffic at least
52 inches wide, located on the public sidewalk, around or through such
outdoor cafe.
B. Outdoor dining shall only be permitted in front of the business it is
approved for. Outdoor dining areas shall not be permitted to encroach
into the frontage of a neighboring (adjoining) business (with or without
dining).
C. When located on private property, outdoor cafes may be located in front
of, on the side of and/or to the rear of the eating establishment to which
the outdoor cafe is accessory. Such cafes shall be located on the
property containing the eating establishment and/or within the public
right-of-way as permitted by Subsection A above. In the case of outdoor
cafes that are located on properties containing multiple tenants, such
cafes shall not be permitted to be located in front of, on the side of and/
or to the rear of any other establishment on the same property unless
both the property owner and other tenant(s) give their consent in
writing prior to the issuance of the license for the outdoor cafe. Such
consent shall be valid only for the term specified in the consent or for
the term of the license, whichever is less, and such consent shall be
required to be renewed prior to the renewal of the license. Such cafes
shall be required to maintain an unobstructed paved surface for
pedestrian traffic at least 52 inches wide around or through such
outdoor cafe.
D. For any outdoor cafes located on a corner property, meaning at the
intersection of two Village streets, all features and physical objects of
the outdoor cafe shall comply with § 190-119E, Physical or visual
obstructions. [Added 4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 3717]
A. The name, residence address and telephone number of each individual,
owner or partner, or if a domestic corporation, the names, residence
addresses and telephone numbers of the directors and officers owning a
10% or greater interest in the corporation and the chief operating
executive of the corporation, and if a nondomestic corporation, the
name, residence address and telephone number of the managing officer
for service of process within the State of New Jersey.
B. The address and description of each place where the applicant intends
to establish or operate an outdoor cafe.
C. The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other than
the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to the
application.
§ 156-69 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-70
141:346
D. Layout plan. [Amended 3-6-2019 by Ord. No. 3704; 4-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 3717]
(1) Three sets of a proposed layout plan containing scaled drawings
clearly illustrating the number, type of materials, color and location
of all tables, chairs, umbrellas or other furnishings or fixtures
intended to be located in the outdoor cafe. The outdoor cafe shall
be defined and set off by portable-type barriers (moveable barrier,
as defined by this article), which may include live plantings.
(2) The moveable barrier shall define the area to be used as an outdoor
cafe and shall separate it from pedestrians traversing the adjacent
sidewalk. However, a moveable barrier between the outdoor cafe
and the pedestrians traversing the sidewalk shall not be required
where there are tables placed at the curb. The moveable barrier
shall not contain doors or windows nor air conditioning or heating
equipment and shall be open at all times to the air from a height of
not more than four feet.
(3) The maximum four feet for height shall include the height of any
plants if they are part of the barrier. All curbside moveable barriers
must be placed a minimum of 2.5 feet or 30 inches in from the face
of the curb, except those areas adjacent to loading zones and areas
where there is no curbside parking where the curbside barrier of
the outdoor cafe can be placed within six inches of the face of the
curb. For streets that have angled parking, the curbside barrier of
the outdoor cafe can be placed within six inches of the face of the
curb if and only if the barrier has a three feet wide opening for
every eight feet of barrier placed.
(4) All curbside moveable barriers must have a minimum three-footwide
horizontal opening for every eight feet of horizontal barrier to
allow for pedestrian traffic. All moveable barriers must be weighted
to prevent them from blowing over in the wind.
(5) The scaled drawings shall also illustrate the following:
(a) The location of any doors leading from the eating
establishment to the outdoor cafe. No such doors may be
obstructed in any manner.
(b) The number of feet and location of unobstructed space
permitting free passage of pedestrian traffic around or through
each outdoor cafe.
(c) Food preparation is only permitted within the restaurant.
Hostess stations or wait stations for the outdoor cafe must be
indicated on the plans.
(d) An illustration of the barrier delineating the serving area of
each outdoor cafe.
§ 156-70 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-70
141:347
§ 156-71. Review of application.
The Department of Buildings and Inspections will review the application
for completeness and compliance with the terms of this article. Once the
application is deemed complete, the Department of Buildings and
Inspections shall issue the outdoor cafe permit within 10 calendar days.
Once an application is approved, no changes are permitted unless it is
resubmitted. Unauthorized changes to the approved plan may result in
administrative action.
§ 156-72. Issuance of license.
If the application complies with the article, the Department of Buildings and
Inspections shall issue a license strictly subject to the terms and conditions
of this article.
§ 156-73. Transfer of license.
The license is personal to the applicant, and any change or transfer of
ownership of the outdoor cafe shall terminate the license and shall require
a new application and a new license in conformance with all of the
requirements of this article.
§ 156-74. Inspections.
Acceptance of the license by the applicant shall operate as a consent to
the Health, Fire, Police and Building Officials of the Village to inspect the
outdoor cafe for continued compliance with the terms and conditions of
(e) The location of all fire hydrants, parking meters, utility poles,
benches, handicap ramps, street furniture, trees, and any
other fixtures permanently located on the sidewalk in front of
the eating establishment or within 10 feet thereof on either or
any side.
(f) The type and location of any proposed outdoor lighting and
fixtures.
(g) The layout must show the location of any proposed portable
heaters. A Fire Prevention Bureau permit is required for any
portable heaters and proof of same must be included with the
outdoor cafe application.
(h) For streets that do not permit public parking alongside of the
curb that an outdoor cafe fronts to, or if there is a defined
parallel parking or loading zone along the curb in front of an
outdoor cafe, the moveable barrier shall be permitted to be six
inches from the face of the curb instead of 30 inches.
E. An application fee as set forth in chapter 145, Fees, of the Ridgewood
Village Code.
§ 156-70 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-74
141:348
this article and any federal, state, county or local law, article or regulation
affecting the same.
§ 156-75. Indemnification of Village.
No license required by this article shall be granted to any person to operate
an outdoor cafe until such person has filed with the Department of Buildings
and Inspections a statement agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the
Village of Ridgewood, its agents, servants, representatives or employees
from any or all claims, damages, judgement costs or expenses, including
attorneys' fees, which they or any of them may incur or be required to
pay because of any personal injury, including death, or property damaged
suffered by any person or persons as a result of or related in any way to
the operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe for which the license is
issued.
§ 156-76. Liability insurance requirement.
A. No license required by this article shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have first filed with the
Department of Buildings and Inspections a comprehensive general
liability policy issued to such person by a public liability insurance
company authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey affording
the coverages set forth below in the amounts specified. Such insurance
policy shall name the Village of Ridgewood, 131 North Maple Avenue,
Ridgewood, New Jersey 07451, its agents, officers, servants,
representatives and employees as additional insured with respect to the
operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe in the following
amounts:
(1) Bodily injury.
(a) Each person: $300,000.
(b) Each accident: $1,000,000.
(2) Property damage.
(a) Each person: $300,000.
(b) Each accident: $1,000,000.
B. The insurance coverage required by this section shall at all times be
maintained for the full amount. The policy of insurance required by this
section to be filed with the Department of Buildings and Inspections
shall contain a clause obligating the company issuing the same to give
not less than 30 days' written notice to the Village Clerk before
cancellation or amendments of any of the terms thereof. Notice of
cancellation shall not relieve the company issuing such policy of liability
for any injury or claim arising before the cancellation becomes
effective. The cancellation of any such policy shall have the immediate
effect of suspending the license of such person to operate the outdoor
§ 156-74 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-76
141:349
§ 156-77. Conditions of policy.
Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision for
continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof notwithstanding
any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insured shall not be affected
by the insolvency of the bankruptcy of the insured, and that until the
policy is canceled the insurance company will not be relieved from liability
on account of nonpayment of premium or of any act or omission by the
named insured. Such policy of insurance shall be further conditioned for the
payment of any and all judgements up to the limits of such policy.
§ 156-78. Revocation or suspension of license.
§ 156-79. Operation without license unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor cafe after the
suspension or termination of the applicable license or without ever the
issuance of a license.
§ 156-80. Property maintenance.
Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor cafe and the
adjacent walks and streets free and clear of any debris or litter occasioned
by the cafe. Areas must be cleaned as needed and at the time that business
is closed and at the beginning of each business day, but not later than
9:00 a.m. Sidewalks shall be washed and kept free of all debris. All foreign
substances shall be removed from the sidewalk surface and disposed of
properly.
cafe covered thereby until a new policy complying the provisions of this
section is filed with the Department of Buildings and Inspections and
a letter in writing confirming the new effective date of the license is
issued by the Department of Buildings and Inspections.
A. Any license issued hereunder is issued solely as a revocable license,
which shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the Village
Manager for failure of any licensee to comply with this article or for
violation of any other applicable federal, state, county or municipal law,
regulation or article. Any license issued hereunder is issued upon the
express understanding that the licensee obtains no property rights
thereunder, nor any interest in the continuation of said license.
B. Any licensee subject to three separate violations of any provisions of
this article during the outdoor dining season as defined elsewhere in
this article, shall have their license revoked by the Village Manager for
a period of not less than 30 calendar days. Licensees may apply for
reinstatement after the 30 calendar day revocation period and only
upon submission of a new application and payment of appropriate
fee(s).
§ 156-76 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-81
141:350
§ 156-81. Vending machines prohibited.
No vending machines of any kind are permitted on the exterior of any
building operating an outdoor cafe or within the outdoor cafe area.
§ 156-82. Signs.
No signs shall be permitted in the area of the outdoor cafe except signs on
the awnings complying with the Sign Ordinance58 of the Ridgewood Village
Code. Outdoor umbrellas located in the outdoor cafe shall be exempt from
the Sign Ordinance of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 156-83. Additional rights of the Village.
In addition to the powers of suspension or revocation as set forth above,
the Village reserves the right to modify, suspend or revoke any license on
10 calendar days' written notice if the Village determines that pedestrian
traffic is, in fact negatively impacted, impeded or made unsafe because
of the operation of the outdoor cafe or because of any other safety issue
which the Village determines adversely affects the Village because of such
operation. The license may also be suspended or revoked on 10 calendar
days' written notice, in the event that the Village determines that it is
necessary to utilize the area or any part thereof for the maintenance or
installation of underground utilities. In the event of an emergency, which
emergency is certified by the Village Manager, the license may be
suspended or revoked without notice.
§ 156-84. Alcoholic beverage control license.
If the applicant is the holder of an alcoholic beverage control license
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey, it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to cause the alcohol beverage control license to be amended
to include the premises utilized for outdoor cafe purposes in order to serve
alcoholic beverages therein.
§ 156-85. Seasonal operation; duration of license. [Amended
4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 3717]
Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to operate March 1 through December
31. No dining items (tables, barriers, equipment, etc.) would be permitted
outside from January 1 through February 28/29 on the public sidewalk or
right-of-way.
§ 156-86. Equipment.
No tables, chairs, benches or other equipment used in the outdoor cafe shall
be attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, curb or
sidewalk or property of the Village of Ridgewood within or near the license
area.
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Land Use and Development, § 190-122.
§ 156-81 FARMERS' MARKET § 156-87
141:351
§ 156-87. Vacation of sidewalk space; removal of property by
Village.
The licensee agrees at the end of the license period, or in the event that
the license is temporarily or permanently suspended or revoked, that the
licensee will at his own cost and expense vacate the sidewalk space and
promptly remove any property placed thereon. Failure to do so on five
calendar days' written notice shall grant to the Village the right to remove
any property on the sidewalk, and the licensee agrees to reimburse the
Village for the cost of removing and storing the same.
§ 156-88. Noise.
The licensee shall not direct or permit to be directed to or from the area
occupied by the outdoor cafe any bell, chime, siren, whistle, loudspeaker,
public address system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device.
§ 156-89. Hours of operation.
No outdoor cafe shall be open for business prior to 7:00 a.m. nor remain
open for business after 12:00 midnight. All persons occupying the outdoor
cafe shall vacate the same no later than 12:30 a.m.
§ 156-90. Table service.
No food or drinks served or consumed at outdoor cafes located either on
public or private property shall be prepared or stored other than in the
interior of the eating establishment. Table service is required at restaurants
only.
§ 156-91. Terms and conditions of permit.
The Village of Ridgewood shall issue a permit certificate upon payment in
full of the appropriate annual fee and compliance by the applicant of the
prerequisites set forth in this article. The licensee is required to display
the permit certificate prominently in the front window facing toward the
sidewalk of the establishment. Failure to properly display the requisite
permit certificate shall result in suspension or termination of the license by
order of the Village Manager.
§ 156-92. Enforcement.
The provisions of Chapter 156, Article VIII, shall be enforced by the Village's
Department of Buildings and Inspections, the Department of Health, the
Engineering Division, the Fire Prevention Bureau, and the Police
Department in accordance with the provisions set forth.
§ 156-87 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 156-92
141:352
Chapter 161
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 103.
§ 161-1. Law adopted by referendum.
The Raffles Licensing Law was adopted by referendum to be operative in
the Village of Ridgewood pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.
§ 161-2. Authorization.
The Village of Ridgewood is hereby authorized to license bona fide
organizations or associations permitted to be licensed under the Raffles
Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.) and the regulations adopted
thereunder and contained in N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1.
§ 161-3. Village Clerk as "issuing authority" of licenses. [Amended
6-13-2007 by Ord. No. 3064]
The Village Clerk of the Village of Ridgewood is hereby designated as the
"issuing authority" pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1 and is authorized and
directed to issue licenses as permitted by law and the regulations adopted
thereunder.
§ 161-4. Compliance required; Sunday games.
Licenses shall be issued upon compliance with the provisions of the Act and
the regulations hereinabove cited and upon payment of the license fees set
forth therein. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-58, if requested, raffles may be held,
operated and conducted on Sunday when specifically provided in the license
authorized by this chapter and issued by the Village Clerk.
Chapter 163
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and special sales — See Ch. 107.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 215.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 218.
Sidewalk sales — See Ch. 239.
§ 156-92 GAMES OF CHANCE § 163-1
161:353
§ 163-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALES — Includes all sales in residential zones of the Village
of Ridgewood under the following categories: garage sale, lawn sale, attic
sale, rummage sale, flea market sale, estate sale or any casual sale of
tangible personal property which is advertised by any means where the
public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
GOODS — Includes any goods, merchandise or other property capable of
being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
§ 163-2. Permits and fees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale within the
Village of Ridgewood without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Village Clerk. The fee for such permit shall be as set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees, per garage sale. No garage sale shall be licensed for more than two
days, which shall be consecutive. No person shall conduct more than two
garage sales in any one calendar year. No premises shall be the subject of
more than two garage sales in any one calendar year.
§ 163-3. Display of license.
Each license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter is required to
be prominently displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is
conducted throughout the entire period of the licensed sale.
§ 163-4. Information to be filed with Village Clerk.
The information to be filed with the Village Clerk, pursuant to this chapter,
shall be as follows:
A. The name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting the sale.
B. The name of owner of the property on which said sale is to be
conducted, and consent of owner if applicant is other than owner.
C. The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
D. The number of days of sale (not to exceed two days).
E. The date and nature of any past sale.
F. The relationship or connection the applicant may have had with any
other person, firm, group, organization, association or corporation
conducting said sale and the date or dates of such sales.
§ 163-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 163-4
163:354
§ 163-5. Hours of sale.
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
sundown.
§ 163-6. Signs.
Temporary signs are permitted only on the days of the sale and only on
the premises on which the sale is to take place. No temporary signs are
permitted on public property or within any public right-of-way or sidewalk.
This requirement extends to trees, telephone poles and street or traffic
signs. All temporary signs are to be removed simultaneously with the ending
of the sale. No more than two signs advertising the garage sale shall be
permitted on the premises, and no sign shall be more than four square feet
in size.
§ 163-7. Persons and sales excepted.
The following persons and sales shall be excepted:
G. Whether or not applicant has been issued any other vendor's license by
any local, state or federal agency.
H. The number, nature and location of signs.
I. A sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by Chapter 190, Land Use and Development, of the Code of
the Village of Ridgewood or under the protection of the nonconforming
use section thereof, or any other sale conducted by a manufacturer,
dealer or vendor and which sale would be conducted from properly
zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in the ordinances.
E. Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization; provided, however, that the
burden of establishing the exemption under this subsection shall be on
the organization or institution claiming the exemption. Any such sale
shall be conducted only on the premises owned or occupied for exempt
purposes by the exempt organization. This exclusion shall not exclude
§ 163-4 GARAGE SALES § 163-7
163:355
§ 163-8. Enforcement.
This chapter may be enforced by any officer of the Village of Ridgewood,
including the Department of Police and the Department of Buildings and
Inspections. It shall be the duty of such officer to investigate any reported
violation.
§ 163-9. Responsibility for maintenance of good order.
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on
the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such person shall
permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises or permit vehicles
to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such
premises.
Chapter 165
GARBAGE, RUBBISH, REFUSE AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Hazardous substances — See Ch. 170.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
the organizations set forth herein from complying with the provisions
of the solicitation ordinance of the Village of Ridgewood, Chapter 218,
Peddling and Soliciting.
§ 163-7 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 163-9
163:356
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 165-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
GARBAGE — The accumulation of animal or vegetable matter, or both,
liquid or otherwise, that tends to decay.59
PROPERTY and PREMISES — Unless restricted or limited by the context to
either real or personal property, they shall include both.
PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC BUILDING — Severally mean any and every
public place or building within the Village which is within the jurisdiction
and control of the Village, is or may be in general use by all citizens and in
which all persons have an equal right of passage at will.
RUBBISH — Includes coal or wood ashes, all loose material and all waste
material accumulated from buildings or from the cleaning of
buildings.[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
SANITARIAN — Includes every officer appointed by the Division to aid
in the enforcement of the sanitary laws of the state or to aid in the
enforcement of the rules, regulations and ordinances of the Division except
the Health Officer, Secretary, Registrar or other persons performing
principally clerical duties in the Office of the Division.
TENANT — Any person occupying any house, building or portion thereof
which is returned, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as a house,
residence or a business establishment.
§ 165-2. Deposit on public property.
No person shall put, deposit or leave any rubbish, refuse or other material
in or upon any of the sidewalks or gutters of streets, public places, parking
lots or public buildings.
§ 165-3. Deposit on private property.
No person shall put, deposit or leave any rubbish, refuse or offensive
material and equipment in or upon his private property or upon the private
property of another whereby the same may be detrimental to the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
§ 165-4. Duty of owner or tenant.
Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any building or
premises shall keep the sidewalks, air shafts, areaways, backyards, courts
59.Editor's Note: The definition of "Health Officer," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375. See now definition of "Sanitarian."
§ 165-1 GARAGE SALES § 165-4
163:357
and alleys free from garbage, refuse, rubbish, litter and other offensive
material.
§ 165-5. Placement of receptacles. [Amended 5-9-1988 by Ord. No.
2151]
Except as required by this chapter and pursuant to rules and regulations
promulgated by the Village Manager, no person shall cause to be placed any
receptacle for refuse, garbage, rubbish, litter and other offensive material
outside any commercial building, etc., that is visible from a public street or
adjoining property unless an enclosure is provided for storage.
§ 165-6. Public receptacles required. [Amended 5-9-1988 by Ord.
No. 2151]
§ 165-7. Littering. [Amended 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2963]
A. To comply with the standards promulgated by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Clean Communities Program,
litter receptacles are required to be kept and maintained at the
following public places in the Village:
(1) Pedestrian sidewalks adjacent to commercial areas to the extent
that there shall be no single linear quarter-mile without a litter
receptacle.
(2) Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
governmental buildings, railroad and bus stations, parks, drive-in
restaurant areas, construction sites, gasoline service stations and
gasoline service station islands, shopping centers, parking lots,
beaches and bathing areas, and, in addition, at special events to
which the public is invited, including sporting events, parades,
carnivals, circuses and festivals.
B. It is the intention of this section that adequate receptacles as
prescribed by rules and regulations promulgated by the Village
Manager shall be placed and maintained for the purpose of collecting
and disposing of pedestrian litter.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish requirements to
control littering in the Village of Ridgewood so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
B. Definitions and word usage. For the purpose of this section, the
following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this section
clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words
used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used
§ 165-4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 165-7
163:358
§ 165-8. Distribution of advertising matter.
No person shall throw, cast or distribute or cause or permit to be thrown,
cast or distributed any handbill, circular, card, booklet, placard or other
advertising matter whatsoever in or upon any street or public place or in
a front yard or courtyard or on any stoop or in the vestibule of any hall
in any building or in a letter box therein, provided that nothing herein
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any
top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted
cigarette, cigar, match or any lighted/flaming or glowing material or
any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other
lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or
paper containers or other packaging, or construction materials; or any
dirt, sand, gravel, clay, loam, stone or building rubbish, hay, straw, oats,
sawdust, shavings or other light materials of any sort of manufacturing,
or ashes, manure, or other organic refuse or other offensive matter.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of
litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
C. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or
otherwise place any litter of any nature upon any public street;
public place; private property or any vacant or unused land not
owned by said person.
(2) Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this section, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have
violated this section.
D. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Village of Ridgewood Police Department, and/or the Construction
Official, and/or the Health Department Sanitarian, and/or the Director
of Public Works or his/her designate representative.
E. Violations and penalties: Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000. Chapter 165, § 165-48 of the Code of the Village of Ridgewood
shall be modified by this section to establish a minimum fine of $25 and
a maximum fine of $1,000.
§ 165-7 GARAGE SALES § 165-8
163:359
contained shall be deemed to prohibit or otherwise regulate the delivery
of any such matter by the United States Postal Service or prohibit the
distribution of sample copies of newspapers regularly sold by the copy or
by annual subscription. This section is not intended to prevent the lawful
distribution of anything other than commercial and business advertising
matter.
§ 165-9. Interference with cleaning; authorized persons.
§ 165-10. Storage rooms required in certain establishments.
All food establishments, restaurants and food processing places and all
retail and wholesale business establishments shall provide a room to store
garbage or refuse; the floor of such room is to be concrete at finish grade
level. The room may be attached to the main structure with no opening
directly to the main building. The structure of such room must be of
masonry construction, properly ventilated, insect- and rodentproof. The size
of such room is to be determined by the estimated volume of garbage and/
or refuse. The provisions of this section shall apply only to new construction
or material alterations of existing structures.
§ 165-11. Removal of landscape and construction waste.
§ 165-12. Waste as landfill prohibited.
No person shall dump or permit to be dumped or used as landfill any waste
within the Village.
A. No person shall prevent or interfere with any employee of the Division
of Solid Waste Control in the sweeping or cleaning of any street or in
the removal of sweepings, ashes, garbage, rubbish, snow, ice or other
refuse material.
B. No person other than an authorized employee or agent of the Division
of Solid Waste Control shall disturb or remove any ashes, garbage or
light refuse or rubbish placed by householders or their tenants or by
occupants or their servants within the stoop or area line or in front of
houses or lots for removal, unless requested by residents of such
houses.
A. Any person engaged in the business of commercial landscaper, tree
surgeon, arborist, gardener or horticulturist performing services within
the Village shall remove all waste resulting from any such service
rendered.
B. Any person constructing new structures or altering existing structures
within the Village shall remove all waste resulting from such activity.
§ 165-8 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 165-13
163:360
§ 165-13. Uncovered vehicles. [Added 9-13-1988 by Ord. No. 2178]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any highway unless such a vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent
any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects
have fallen or escaped which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle
or otherwise endanger travelers or public property shall immediately cause
the public property to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay the
costs therefor.
§ 165-14. Notice to remove.
Pursuant to the authority contained in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.13 and 40:48-2.14,
the owner or tenant of any land or premises lying within the Village, where
it shall be necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public health,
safety, general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard, shall remove from
such lands brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris within 10 days after written notice
to remove the same is sent to the last known post office address of such
owner or tenant by registered mail.
§ 165-15. Method of service of notice; contents. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375; 8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 3658]
The notice provided by § 165-14 shall be sent by the Department of Health
and Welfare, the Village Sanitarian, the Village's designated Code
Enforcement Officer, the Parks and Recreation Department, and/or the
Engineering Division of the Department of Public Works. The notice shall
describe the articles or matter to be removed and shall provide an
opportunity to such owner or tenant within 10 days of the date mailing of
such notice to show cause before the department representative sending
such notice why the removal therein required should not be complied with.
§ 165-16. Failure to comply.
A. In case any owner or tenant shall fail to remove any such article or
matter within the ten-day period after receipt of such notice or within
such time as may be granted after appearing before the officer sending
the same as above provided, then the Department of Health and
Welfare or the Sanitarian may, on behalf of the Village, cause such land
and premises to be entered upon and such articles or matter removed
and disposed of as may be necessary or expedient. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
B. Whenever the Director of Public Safety, his agent or deputy shall cause
the removal of any article or matter pursuant to the provisions of this
section, such officer shall certify the cost thereof to the Village Council,
which shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the
cost as shown thereon to be charged against such lands; the amount so
charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be
§ 165-13 GARAGE SALES § 165-16
163:361
§ 165-17. Enforcement. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375;
8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 3658]
This chapter may be enforced by the Construction Official, the Village
Sanitarian, the Village's designated Code Enforcement Officer, the Parks
and Recreation Department, and the Engineering Division of the
Department of Public Works and/or members of the Police Department and
Fire Department of the Village in accordance with the provisions set forth.
added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed
and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate
as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and
in the same manner as taxes.
§ 165-16 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 165-17
163:362
ARTICLE II
Waste Collection
§ 165-18. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ASHES — Residue from the burning of solid fuel, and including soot.
BULK REFUSE — Household appliances, fixtures, furniture, screens, storm
windows, mattresses, box springs, carpeting, and other waste of a similar
nature and kind, not including, however, tree stumps, bathtubs, swings, old
and discarded automobiles or major parts thereof, building materials, dirt,
stones and rocks, hazardous materials, and any other items the aggregate
weight of which exceeds 100 pounds.[Amended 2-19-2020 by Ord. No.
3779]
CONTAINER — A watertight metal or plastic waste can with a tight-fitting
cover, a plastic disposal bag of no less than three mills thickness, suitably
tied, a kraft paper disposable bag of 100 pounds wet strength or any
other receptacle as may be approved from time to time by the rules and
regulations promulgated under this article.
CURBSIDE — The area within three feet of the existing curbline of a public
street abutting the premises to be served.
GARBAGE — Any accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable waste matter
resulting from the use, storage or consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS COLLECTION CONDITIONS — Weather or environmental
conditions along the collection route, including premises served by the
Village of Ridgewood Division of Solid Waste Control, that can result in
injury to Village employees. The Village Manager, Director of Operations,
Supervisor of Operations, Supervisor of Sanitation, or the Director of Public
Works or their designees shall make the determination if and when
hazardous collection conditions exist and collection efforts shall be
suspended.[Added 2-19-2014 by Ord. No. 3404]
PRIVATE CONTRACTOR — Any person engaged in the business of waste
collection and disposal.
RUBBISH — Wastepaper, cans, bottles, crockery, glass, glassware, rags,
cartons, boxes, crates and any other ordinary waste, excluding
recyclables.[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
WASTE — All refuse, and shall also include but not be limited to garbage,
ashes, yard waste, bulk refuse, rubbish, litter and dead animals, excluding,
however, organic human waste or parts and recyclables.[Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
YARD WASTES — Lawn and garden refuse, grass and hedge clippings,
weeds and shrubbery resulting from normal maintenance of lawns, gardens
and grounds.
§ 165-18 GARAGE SALES § 165-19
163:363
§ 165-19. Container specifications and setout requirements.
[Amended 9-13-1988 by Ord. No. 2178; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375; 2-19-2020 by Ord. No. 3780]
§ 165-20. Rusted or damaged containers.
No waste shall be stored in or collected from containers which are rusted
or damaged to the extent they are not water-, fly-, or rodent tight.
§ 165-21. Inspection of vehicles and receptacles. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
All vehicles and receptacles mentioned in this article shall be available for
inspection by the Sanitarian at all reasonable hours.
§ 165-22. Collection schedule. [Amended 11-10-1987 by Ord. No.
2119; 2-19-2014 by Ord. No. 3404]
A. Garbage and rubbish shall be stored in and collected from watertight
metal or plastic waste cans not to exceed 32 gallons in capacity and 80
pounds in gross weight.
B. Yard waste shall be stored in and collected from watertight metal or
plastic waste cans not to exceed 32 gallons in capacity and 80 pounds in
gross weight or in biodegradable paper bags of a minimum of 100
pounds wet strength, suitably sealed, which shall be collected with the
contents thereof.
C. Loose bulk refuse shall be placed out in disposal containers. The
containers shall be suitable so that materials will not spill or overflow in
the course of pickup.
D. It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner,
occupant or lessee to permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on
his or her property.
E. Carpet shall be cut into four-foot lengths, rolled, and securely taped or
tied into bundles of 12 inches or less in height.
F. All mattresses, regardless of fabrication or size, must be contained in
plastic mattress disposal bags prior to curbside set out.
A. The Village of Ridgewood Division of Solid Waste Control shall collect
solid waste from designated premises in the Village. The Village
Manager is authorized and empowered to adopt rules and regulations
from time to time in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare
governing collection procedures and the manner, time and location of
the placement for collection. Any such rule or regulation shall become
effective after publication once in a newspaper circulating in the
Village, and all rules and regulations shall be kept in the office of the
Village Clerk for examination by the public during regular business
hours.
§ 165-19 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 165-22
163:364
§ 165-23. Private contractors.
B. In the event hazardous collection conditions exist along a collection
route, as determined by the Village Manager, Director of Operations,
Supervisor of Operations, Supervisor of Sanitation, or the Director of
Public Works, or their designees, the Village shall suspend collection of
solid waste and recyclables on all or part of that route until such time
the hazardous collection conditions have been fully ameliorated so as to
not cause injury to Village employees.
C. Collection routes that have all or part of their service suspended due to
hazardous collection conditions shall have those materials picked up on
the next scheduled collection date.
A. Any person engaged as a private waste collection contractor in the
Village shall, prior to commencing service, file a statement with the
Village Clerk setting forth his name and address and telephone number
of his office for transaction of business, together with the serial number
and dates of expiration of all licenses, permits, certificates of authority
or public convenience and registration approvals as may be required by
law.
B. No private contractor shall render any service in the Village unless all
equipment to be used for collection shall be equipped with covered
watertight metal bodies constructed in a manner so as to eliminate
spillage and unnecessary noise; provided, however, that this provision
shall not apply to any vehicle engaged exclusively in the collection of
corrugated or waste paper.
§ 165-22 GARAGE SALES § 165-23
163:365

ARTICLE III
Removal of Fat, Bones and Refuse
§ 165-24. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of removing fat, bones or refuse
from any butcher shop, meat market or other food establishment without
first having obtained from the Division of Health a license for that purpose.
§ 165-25. License fee. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
The fee for a license to conduct the removal of fat, bones and refuse shall
be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The fee is intended to be an annual
fee but, when paid, shall cover only the balance of the calendar year during
which the same is paid or payable.
§ 165-26. Exemptions.
No fee for any license issued under this article shall be required of any
person declared by state law to be exempt from the payment of any such
fee.
§ 165-27. Application for license.
All applications for licenses required by this article shall be made at the
Office of the Division of Health during regular office hours, and the fees for
every license shall be paid in advance at the time of making the application
therefor.
§ 165-28. Investigation of applicant or premises.
The granting of any license may be withheld at the direction of the Division
of Health, pending examination, investigation or inspection of the person
who or the premises which may be the subject matter of the license under
consideration.
§ 165-29. Term of license; nontransferability.
All licenses issued under this article shall be valid only for the balance of
the calendar year in which they are issued unless otherwise provided in this
article. No such license shall be transferable or assignable.
§ 165-30. Issuance of evidence by Division of Health.
The Division of Health shall evidence the granting of any license issued
by furnishing to the licensee a suitable card, sign, placard, disc, plate or
other writing which shall convey information concerning the nature of such
license, the serial number of the same, the name of the person to whom
the same has been issued, the year in which the same is so issued, the
premises or vehicle so licensed, if that be material or required, and such
other information as the Division may deem pertinent.
§ 165-24 GARAGE SALES § 165-31
163:367
§ 165-31. Display of license.
Every license issued by the Division of Health shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place in the establishment, premises or other place for which
the same is issued and shall likewise be so displayed on every vehicle or
conveyance so licensed for the period that such license shall be in force
unless the Division shall otherwise prescribe.
§ 165-32. Suspension of license.
§ 165-33. Revocation of license.
A. Every license issued under this article may, at any time during the term
for which the same is so issued, be suspended by the Division of Health
or in an emergency by the Health Officer, pending a hearing to be
granted the holder thereof pursuant to a notice to show cause by the
Division why such license should not be suspended further or revoked.
B. No such license shall be suspended unless the Health Officer shall file
with the Division a complaint or charges evidencing one or more
violations of this article under which such license was originally issued.
C. Every suspension ordered under this section shall automatically
terminate two weeks from the date thereof unless the continuance of
such suspension shall be ordered by the Division, and then such
suspension shall continue only during the period of any such
continuance so ordered by the Division.
D. During the period of any such suspension or ordered continuance
thereof, every license so suspended shall be ineffective, and the holder
there of shall, during the entire period of each suspension, cease the
operation of any business or discontinue every activity or use permitted
under the license suspended.
A. Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked at
any time by the Division of Health for just cause or if the licensee or any
of the employees, agents or servants of such licensee shall violate:
(1) Any of the provisions of this article.
(2) The Sanitary Code of the State Department of Health specifically
applicable to the subject matter for or upon which such license was
issued.
B. Before any license may be revoked, the holder thereof shall be given a
hearing and an opportunity to be heard on the complaint made or
violation charged against him.
C. The time and place for such hearing shall be fixed at the discretion of
the Division, provided that an unreasonable time shall not be permitted
to elapse between the date of any suspension of license and the date
fixed for the hearing.
§ 165-31 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 165-33
163:368
§ 165-34. Investigation of licensed establishments.
§ 165-35. Violations and penalties.
D. Notice of the time and place of any hearing held under this section shall
be given by the Division to the holder of the license so involved, in
writing, and served either personally or sent to him by registered mail,
addressed to him at the address stated in the license.
E. A licensee who fails to appear at the time and place fixed for such
hearing shall not be entitled to any further hearing, and in that event
his license may, as a matter of course, be forthwith revoked.
A. At least once every three months the Health Officer shall inspect all
establishments licensed under the provisions of this article. In case the
Health Officer discovers the violation of any item of sanitation, he shall
make a second inspection after the lapse of such time as he deems
necessary for the defect to be remedied, and the second inspection shall
be used in determining compliance with the requirements of this
article. Any violation of the same item of this article shall call for
immediate suspension of license.
B. A copy of the inspection report shall be filed and kept by the
establishment for a period of one year, and the original shall be filed in
the records of the Division of Health.
C. The person operating the establishment shall, upon request of the
Health Officer, permit access to all parts of the establishment.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who shall: do or
commit any act prohibited by the terms of the Article; or do or commit
any act for which a license is required without having secured and
being in possession of a valid license at the time of the doing or
commission thereof; or omit to do or perform any act required by him to
be so done or performed by this article; or maintain any place,
establishment, vehicle, conveyance, equipment or article in violation of
any of the provisions of this article; or fail to maintain any condition,
equipment or facility required to be maintained by this article; or fail to
install any article of a particular type, kind, quality or specification
where such installation is required; or in any manner, by deed, act, act
of commission or act of omission, violate any one or more of the
provisions of this article; shall, upon conviction thereof or upon
conviction of any violation of the provisions hereof, be subject to a
penalty or judgment of not more than $100 and, upon conviction and
refusal or neglect to pay the amount of such penalty or judgment, to be
committed to the county jail for a period of time not exceeding 90 days
or, if he shall have been twice convicted within the space of six months
of the violation of this article and due proof of that fact is made, he may
be imprisoned in the county jail or county workhouse for any number of
days not exceeding one day for each dollar of the penalty in addition to
the imposition of the penalty prescribed above, all in the discretion of
§ 165-33 GARAGE SALES § 165-35
163:369
§ 165-36. Containers.
All containers used for the collection and removal of fat, bones or other
refuse from any meat market, butcher shop or other establishment shall be
made of metal and with suitable tight-fitting covers.
§ 165-37. Vehicle regulation.
§ 165-38. Construction sites. [Added 9-13-1988 by Ord. No. 2178]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It shall
be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or non-flyable
debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and to maintain
and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as
to prevent spillage of refuse.
the Municipal Judge or other officer before whom the complaint shall
be brought.
B. In the event that any violation of this article shall also be a violation of a
state law for which is provided a greater penalty or judgment than that
contained in this section, the Municipal Judge or trial judge before
whom any complaint is brought based upon such violation shall in his
discretion have the right to impose, in the place and in lieu of any
penalty provided for herein, that so provided in the state law which has
been so violated.
A. All vehicles used for the collection or transporting of any such fat,
bones or refuse shall be fully closed, excepting when engaged in the
actual collection thereof.
B. No vehicle used in any business permitted by this article under a
license granted by the Division of Health shall remain or be permitted
to remain in any place for any period longer than that necessarily
required to transact the particular business for which a license was
issued.
§ 165-35 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 165-38
163:370
ARTICLE IV
Recycling
[Added 10-9-1990 by Ord. No. 2284]
§ 165-39. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Includes only 100% aluminum beverage containers.
COMMINGLED — Includes all aluminum cans, glass, tin/steel cans and
plastic containers.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — "Construction and
demolition debris" shall mean source-separated, nonputrescible recyclable
material generated from the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance
and/or demolition of structures within the Village of Ridgewood. This
material shall include concrete, bricks, block, ferrous and nonferrous scrap,
asphalt, asphalt shingles, trees (including stumps, branches and
shrubbery), recyclable wood scrap and any and all other material generated
from the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, and/or demolition of
a structure or structures within the Village of Ridgewood which are deemed
recyclable.[Added 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 3201]
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Includes cardboard of the type used to
make cardboard boxes, cartons, pasteboard and similar corrugated and
kraft paper (brown paper bags) material.
FERROUS, NONFERROUS METALS AND WHITE GOODS — Domestic or
household bulk items, such as washing machines, refrigerators, stoves,
dryers, air conditioners, metal household appliances, and includes any other
ferrous or nonferrous metals. Expressly excluded, however, are automobile
mufflers, catalytic converters, and automobile parts containing oil, fluids or
gasoline.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone
which are transparent or translucent and used for packaging or bottling
of various matter, and all other materials commonly known as "glass,"
excluding, however, light bulbs, blue glass, plate and flat glass commonly
known as "window glass," drinking glasses and mirrored glass.60
HOUSEHOLD BATTERIES — Any type of button, coin, cylindrical,
rectangular or other shaped enclosed device or sealed container consisting
of a combination of two or more voltaic or galvanic cells, electrically
connected to produce electric energy, composed of lead, lithium,
manganese, mercury, mercuric oxide, silver oxide, cadmium, zinc, copper or
other metals or any combination thereof, and designed for household use,
including any alkaline, manganese, lithium, mercuric oxide, silver oxide,
60.Editor's Note: The definition of "high-grade paper," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 2510.
§ 165-39 GARAGE SALES § 165-39
163:371
zinc-air or zinc-carbon battery, nickel-cadmium rechargeable battery or
sealed lead rechargeable battery.61[Added 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 2510]
MIXED PAPER — All periodicals and catalogs printed on glossy stock or
paper of heavier quality than that commonly recognized as newsprint; highgrade
paper, nonnewsprint inserts from newspapers, materials received in
the mail which are made of paper, specifically including catalogs, color
inserts, magazines, brochures and other magazine-type mail printed on
paper of heavier quality than that commonly recognized as newsprint. The
term "high-grade paper" as used herein shall include computer printout,
ledger and bond paper, such as is used in copy machines, typing and
carbonless forms. Expressly excluded, however, are newsprint, corrugated
cardboard, kraft paper and carbon paper.[Added 2-14-1995 by Ord. No.
2510; amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 2655]
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Polyethylene terephthalate (PETE) and highdensity
polyethylene (HDPE) containers used in the packaging of potables,
such as soda, milk, juices, drinks and water. Expressly excluded, however,
are bleach, oil, antifreeze, detergent and other plastic containers with
chemical residue.
RECYCLING CONTAINERS — Containers provided by the Village for the
purpose of recycling or other containers expressly approved by the Village
Manager for the purpose of placement of recyclables or vegetative waste
for pickup by the Village.
REGULATIONS — Such rules, implementation dates, schedule times and
such other requirements promulgated by the Village Manager as may be
necessary to carry out the purposes and objective of this article.
TIN/STEEL CANS — Includes 100% tin/steel household cans and bimetal
beverage containers. Expressly excluded, however, are paint cans and cans
containing chemical residue.
USED NEWSPAPER/NEWSPRINT — Includes all paper of the type
commonly referred to as "newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals,
usually daily or weekly, having printed thereon news and opinions and
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Nonnewsprint inserts shall be removed and recycled along with mixed
papers.[Amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 2655]
VEGETATIVE WASTE — Includes leaves, grass clippings, brush and
vegetative matter not exceeding four inches in diameter and/or over four
feet in length.
§ 165-40. General obligations of property owner. [Amended
2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 2510; 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 2655; 7-8-2009
by Ord. No. 3201]
All persons who are owners, lessees or occupants of residential or
institutional property, places of worship, schools and commercial property
61.Editor's Note: The definitions of "junk mail" and "magazines," which immediately followed
this definition, were repealed 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 2510.
§ 165-39 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 165-40
163:372
in the Village shall separate used newspaper/newsprint, mixed paper,
corrugated cardboard, tin/steel cans, aluminum cans, glass, plastic
containers, white goods, vegetative waste, ferrous and nonferrous metals,
and construction and demolition debris from any other trash and garbage
produced from any such residences, institutions, schools, places of worship
and commercial property and shall prepare the same for pickup, collection
and recycling in accordance with all applicable regulations. Physically
disabled individuals shall contact the Recycling Coordinator for assistance.
§ 165-41. Separation of waste materials and placement in
containers. [Amended 2-14-1995 by Ord. No. 2510]
A. Used newspaper/newsprint and mixed paper. All used newspaper/
newsprint shall be separated from mixed papers, corrugated cardboard
and kraft bags and placed in the Village's newsprint crate or secured by
twine in separate bundles not to exceed 12 inches in height. All mixed
paper shall be separated from newspaper/newsprint, corrugated
cardboard and kraft bags and placed in the Village's mixed papers crate
or secured by twine in separate bundles not to exceed 12 inches in
height. Such bundles shall not be contained in plastic bags or paper
bags. Used newspaper/newsprint and mixed paper shall be placed at
curbside in separate bundles for pickup, collection and recycling in
strict conformity with regulations promulgated by the Village Manager.
[Amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 2655]
B. White goods, ferrous and nonferrous metals. White goods, ferrous and
nonferrous metals shall be separated and placed at curbside for
collection by the Village in accord with regulations to be promulgated
by the Village Manager.
C. Glass, aluminum cans, tin/steel cans and plastic containers. Glass
containers, aluminum cans, tin/steel cans and plastic containers shall
be combined in recycling containers approved by the Village and placed
at curbside for collection by the Village in accord with regulations to be
promulgated by the Village Manager. All materials must be washed or
rinsed.
D. Corrugated cardboard. Corrugated or cardboard boxes and kraft
(brown) paper bags shall be placed at curbside in accord with
regulations to be promulgated by the Village Manager. Such materials
must be free of trash, foam, plastic or packing materials.
E. Household batteries. Household batteries shall be delivered to the
recycling center or to one of the Bergen County Utilities Authoritysponsored
household hazardous waste collection programs.
F. Construction and demolition debris. Construction and demolition debris
shall be separated and disposed of by private contractor, commercial
recycler, or property owner. Upon acquiring the necessary Uniform
Construction Code permit(s) for construction or demolition, it shall be
the responsibility of the permit holder, owner, occupant or lessee of said
§ 165-40 GARAGE SALES § 165-41
163:373
§ 165-42. Separation, collection and disposal in multiunit buildings.
Effective November 15, 1990, it shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees
and occupants of garden apartment, condominium, cooperative and
townhouse residential properties to comply with all the requirements
contained in this article. It shall be the obligation of the owner of the
apartment complex or the condominium/cooperative/townhouse association
to provide an on-site storage and collection point for the recyclable
materials. The Recycling Coordinator and the owner/association
representative shall determine a schedule and method for the collection of
materials.
§ 165-43. Pickup and collection of separated recyclables.
The Village Manager shall promulgate reasonable regulations establishing
the commencement dates for mandatory separation of recyclables and the
manner, dates and times for the collection of the same or delivery of
the same to a recycling center or drop-off center. Any such regulations
promulgated by the Village Manager may be changed, modified, repealed
or amended, in whole or in part. A copy of the regulations, as promulgated,
shall be available for public inspection at the office of the Village Clerk
during regular office hours.
§ 165-44. Recyclable materials to be property of Village.
From the time of placement at the curb for pickup, collection or recycling or
delivery to a recycling or drop-off center, recyclables shall be the property
of the Village of Ridgewood or its duly authorized agent. No person
unauthorized by the Village of Ridgewood shall collect or pick up or cause
to be collected or picked up any such recyclables. Each collection or pickup
of recyclables in violation hereof from one or more residences, institutions,
schools, places of worship or commercial properties shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 165-45. Sales of recyclable materials. [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
No provision herein shall be construed to prohibit groups or individuals
who shall be authorized by the Village Manager from collecting or picking
up recyclables at curbside or otherwise in such manner and under such
conditions as shall be prescribed by the Village Manager. No such collection
or pickup shall conflict or interfere with pickup and collection by the Village
and its duly authorized agent. Any collection or pickup made by groups
property to recycle said materials as defined in § 165-39, Definitions.
All subsequent records, and or weight slips documenting the recycling
of said materials shall be given to the Village of Ridgewood Municipal
Recycling Coordinator before a certificate of occupancy can be issued.
[Added 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 3201]
§ 165-41 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 165-45
163:374
or individuals authorized by the Village Manager shall require that the
tonnage of the pickup be recorded and reported to the Village Manager.
§ 165-46. Placement and removal of containers.
Recyclables or vegetative waste shall not be placed at the curb prior to
5:00 p.m. on the night before scheduled collection or after 6:00 a.m. on the
date of scheduled collection. By 12:00 midnight on the day of collection, all
containers must be removed from the curbside.
§ 165-47. Enforcement.
The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility
of the Recycling Coordinator, the Sanitation Enforcement Officer and any
officer duly appointed by the Village Manager.
§ 165-48. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375; 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2963; 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 3201]
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with
any of the provisions of this article or any rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant thereto shall be subject to punishment in accord with Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article I, of the Ridgewood Village Code, with the
exception that there is established hereunder a minimum fine of $25 for any
violation of this article or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, and
a maximum fine of $1,000, except for construction and demolition debris.
In the matter of construction and demolition debris recycling, failure to
recycle said materials as defined in § 165-39, Definitions, will result in a
minimum fine of $1,000.
§ 165-45 GARAGE SALES § 165-48
163:375

ARTICLE V
Removal of Bulk Refuse
[Added 9-10-2008 by Ord. No. 3141]
§ 165-49. Curbside collection.
Bulk refuse, as defined in § 165-18, shall not be placed on curbside of
any lands within the Village for collection more than 48 hours prior to
the scheduled bulk refuse collection date and time and must be placed in
containers consistent with § 165-19C, where applicable, or other approved
manner established by the Village Manager.
§ 165-50. Notice to remove.
Where it should be necessary and expedient for the preservation of public
health, safety, general welfare or to eliminate a fire or safety hazard, the
owner or tenant of any land or premises within the Village shall remove
from such land(s) bulk refuse within 24 hours after written notice to remove
same is sent to the last known post office address of such owner or tenant
by registered mail.
§ 165-51. Method of service of notice.
Notice provided by § 165-50 above shall be sent by the Director of the
Department of Sanitation or his/her designee, shall describe the articles or
matter to be removed, and shall provide an opportunity to such owner or
tenant within one day of receipt of such notice to show cause before the
officer sending such notice why the removal therein required should not be
complied with.
§ 165-52. Failure to comply.
A. In case any owner or tenant shall fail to remove any such bulk refuse
within the twenty-four-hour period after receipt of such notice or within
such time as may be granted by the Village official who sent the notice
as above provided, then the Department of Sanitation may, on behalf of
the Village, cause such premises and land to be entered upon and such
articles or matter removed and disposed of as may be necessary or
expedient.
B. Whenever the Director of the Department of Sanitation or his/her
designee shall cause the removal of any article or matter pursuant to
the provisions of this section, such officer shall certify the cost thereof
to the Village Council, which shall examine the certificate and, if found
correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against
such lands; the amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon
such lands and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes
next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear
interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced
by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 165-49 GARAGE SALES § 165-52
163:377
Chapter 170
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 149. Garbage, rubbish, refuse and recycling — See
Ch. 165.
§ 165-52 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 165-52
170:378
ARTICLE I
Cleanup of Discharges
[Adopted 12-9-1986 by Ord. No. 2072]
§ 170-1. Fire Department authorized to clean up and remove.
The Fire Department is hereby authorized and directed to clean up and
remove any discharge of hazardous substances which occurs within the
Village of Ridgewood and, when authorized by agreement between the
Village and any other governing body or as directed by the Village Manager
or the Director of the Department of Fire, to clean up and remove
discharges of hazardous substances outside of the boundaries of the Village.
§ 170-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLEANUP AND REMOVAL COSTS — All costs associated with a discharge
of hazardous substances incurred by the Village or its authorized agents
in the removal or attempted removal of hazardous substances; or in the
taking of reasonable measures to prevent or mitigate damage to public
health, safety or welfare, including but not limited to public and private
property, surface waters, subsurface waters, water columns and bottom
sediments, soils and other affected property, including wildlife and other
natural resources.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or
dumping of hazardous substances into the waters, onto the lands or into
the air, which may or does cause damage or results in damage to the lands,
waters, air or natural resources.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES — Such elements and compounds, including
petroleum products, which are defined as such by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the State of New Jersey or as are defined in the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Guide of Hazardous Materials
or as are set forth in the list of hazardous substances adopted by the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency or as are defined on the list of toxic
pollutants designated by Congress or the Environmental Protection Agency;
provided, however, that sewage and sewage sludge shall not be considered
as "hazardous substances" for the purpose of this article.
PERSON — Public or private corporations, companies, associations,
societies, firms, partnerships, joint-stock companies, individuals or any
other entity.
PETROLEUM — Oil or petroleum of any kind and in any form, including
but not limited to oil, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, oil sludge, oil
refuse, oil mixed with other wastes, crude oils and substantives or additives
utilized in the refining or blending of crude, petroleum or petroleum stock.
§ 170-1 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 170-3
170:379
§ 170-3. Liability for payment of costs of cleanup.
Any person who causes, by act or omission, or is otherwise responsible
for the discharge of hazardous substances which requires cleanup or
abatement by the Fire Department shall be liable for the payment of all
costs incurred by the Fire Department as a result of such cleanup or
abatement activity. The owner of real or personal property from which a
discharge of hazardous substances occurs is responsible for the cost of
cleanup or abatement. The remedy provided by this article shall be in
addition to any other remedies provided by law.
§ 170-4. Enumeration of costs.
For the purposes of this article, costs incurred by the Fire Department
shall include but shall not necessarily be limited to the following: actual
labor costs of Fire Department personnel, including workers' compensation
benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead; cost of equipment
operation; cost of materials; and the cost of any outside contract for labor
and materials.
§ 170-5. Reimbursable materials.
The cost of materials to be reimbursed to the Department of Fire shall
include, without limitation, fire-fighting foam, chemical extinguishing
agents, absorbent material, sand recovery drums and specialized protective
equipment including acid suits, acid gloves, goggles and protective
clothing.
§ 170-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 170-5
170:380
Chapter 172
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 105.
Businesses and occupations — See Ch. 117.
Food and food-handling establishments — See
Ch. 156.
Garbage, rubbish, refuse and recycling — See
Ch. 165.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 238.
§ 172-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CAMP — Includes any house, place or establishment intended to be used or
occupied temporarily as living quarters for or by five or more persons for a
period of three or more consecutive days.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES — Any infectious, contagious or
communicable diseases so declared or defined by law or which have been
or may hereafter be declared as "communicable diseases" by the Division of
Health or by the State Department of Health.
DENSE SMOKE — Smoke which is so heavy and thick as to prevent the
seeing of objects through it at the point of emission into the external air or
the equivalent of No. 3 grade of the Ringlemann Smoke Chart, the standard
device used by the United States Bureau of Mines.
GARBAGE — The accumulation of animal or vegetable matter, or both,
liquid or otherwise, that tends to decay.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer, executive officer or other officer
duly appointed or designated by the Division to assist in the enforcement of
this chapter or supervise work on behalf of the Board.
ISOLATION — The separation of a person infected or suspected of being
infected with a communicable disease or a carrier of the infectious or
causative agent of a communicable disease from other persons in such
manner as will prevent the direct or indirect conveyance of the infectious or
causative agent to other persons.
NUISANCE — Any condition which is dangerous to human life or health or
that which renders air, water, soil or any type of food hazardous or injurious
to human life or health.
NURSE — A person licensed as such under the laws of the state.
PUBLIC PLACES — Includes any public place as well as any restaurant and
every other establishment or place where food or beverage is sold or offered
for sale to the public for consumption on the premises and any camp, tourist
§ 170-5 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 172-1
170:381
home or public recreation place or any other place of business where toilet
facilities or water for drinking or culinary purposes is available for the use
of the public.
§ 172-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
Violations of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article I.
§ 172-3. Camps and temporary living quarters.
§ 172-4. Public places.
A. No person shall establish, construct or maintain any construction camp,
labor camp or other temporary living quarters for working men or any
trailer camp or tourist camp.
B. No person shall establish or maintain any camp or temporary living
quarters not specifically prohibited by Subsection A and intended to be
occupied by four or more persons for a period of two or more days
unless he shall first notify the Division of Health, in writing, of his
intention so to do and shall set forth in such writing the exact location of
such camp or temporary living quarters, the approximate number of
occupants and the purpose for which such camp or living quarters is
intended to be used.
C. Sanitary requirements.
(1) Every camp or temporary living quarters shall have adequate
provisions for disposal of garbage and waste materials.
(2) Every such camp or temporary living quarters shall at all times be
kept clean and free from refuse and accumulation and when
vacated shall be left clean and free from any refuse, accumulation
or other condition detrimental to health.
D. At least two days before any camp shall be vacated, the owner, manager
or person in charge thereof shall notify, in writing, the Division of
Health and in such notice shall specify the time when such place is
intended to be vacated.
A. The owner, tenant, manager and all other persons maintaining,
operating or in charge or control of any public places shall at all times
keep and maintain every such public place and all parts thereof in a
clean and sanitary condition and open to inspection by the Health
Officer.
B. Every public place shall contain the following:
(1) Proper lavatory facilities for the use of persons patronizing the
place.
§ 172-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 172-4
170:382
§ 172-5. Air pollution.
(2) A washroom, comfort station or other place of a like nature.
(3) A sufficient quantity of toilet tissue.
(4) Individual towels.
(5) A sanitary waste receptacle for towels customarily discarded after
usage.
(6) Separate toilets for male and female patrons.62
(7) A mechanical dispenser for liquid or powdered soap of a type
approved by the Division of Health.
C. In all public places there is prohibited:
(1) The use of cake soap in common.
(2) The use of any drinking cup in common.
(3) The use of towels in common.
D. Use of cleansing agents containing hydrocyanic acid or other poisonous
ingredients is specifically prohibited.
A. Every person and every employee of every such person in either actual
or constructive control, maintenance or supervision thereof shall at all
times so maintain, control and supervise all boilers, furnaces, engines,
devices, contrivances, smokestacks and chimneys located in, passing
through or which may be a part of any house, building, place or
premises or vehicle so that the same does not emit dense smoke or
other solids, gasses or fumes that may cause discomfort or injury to
health. This section shall also apply to the chimney, stacks or exhaust of
locomotives, steamrollers, steam shovels, steam hoisting engines, tar
kettles, busses or any other machine, device or contrivance.
B. Each and every day or part thereof that such smoke, solids, gasses or
fumes shall be emitted in violation of this section shall be deemed to be
a separate violation unless an extension of time to continue such
violation is granted by the Division of Health therefor based upon a
factually supported claim that extensive alterations are required for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this section and based
further upon the promise that such alterations will be made within such
time as the Division may determine to be reasonable. The granting or
denial of such extension of time shall at all times be discretionary with
the Division.63
62.Editor's Note: Former Section 16-8(g), regarding sterilized towels, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
63.Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Venereal Diseases, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
§ 172-4 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 172-6
170:383
§ 172-6. Nuisances enumerated.
A. The following specific acts or omissions or the maintenance or
allowance of any of the following conditions is hereby prohibited and is
declared to be or to constitute a nuisance:
(1) Depositing, maintaining or permitting to exist any foul, decaying,
odorous or offensive matter in or upon any lot, yard, street, house,
building, premises or place, whether public or private.
(2) Maintaining any excavation or any cans, barrels or other
receptacles where water may stagnate or mosquito larvae may
breed.
(3) Throwing or overflowing of any slops, stable drainage, liquid filth
or septic tank, cesspool or privy contents upon any public or private
property.
(4) Maintaining any polluted well, spring, stream or supply of drinking
water.
(5) Taking or allowing of any dog, cat or other animal to enter any store
where food is handled or sold.
(6) Maintaining any chimney, smokestack, pipe or flue or any part
thereof that is out of repair and so defective as to allow coal gas or
noxious fumes to escape into the building where it is situated or
into any adjacent building.
(7) Allowing to exist any unclean or unsanitary conditions in any cellar,
room or building or any imperfect plumbing or sewer appliances or
connection from which any foul or noxious odors or liquids may
escape.
(8) Keeping cattle, poultry or small animals in any building used as a
human habitation, except as to small animals or birds commonly
used as household pets.
(9) Expectorating upon the steps, halls, floors or other parts of any
public building or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, street, park,
playground, public conveyance or other public place.
(10) Maintaining any vehicle used for hire or for a public conveyance in
a dirty or unsanitary condition.
(11) Permitting a growth of or failing to remove goldenrod, ragweed and
other noxious weeds, poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac,
contact with or the pollen from which is capable of causing
discomfort or injury to health.
(12) Burying or causing to be buried any dead animal under any
property, private or public, in the Village without a permit from the
Board.
§ 172-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 172-6
170:384
Chapter 174
HOLIDAY DISPLAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs — See Ch. 190, § 190-122.
§ 174-1. Display regulations.
The display of nonsecular, unattended, privately funded holiday displays
shall be permitted subject to certain criteria and notification procedures as
follows:
(13) Permitting the emission of dust, gasses, cinders, lint or other
particles or dense smoke in sufficient quantities to cause
discomfort or injury to health.
(14) Maintaining or causing the maintenance or existence of any
offensive matter, foul or noxious odors, gasses or vapors or any
cause of disease or other injury to the health of the inhabitants of
the Village.
(15) Polluting or permitting to be polluted any spring, well, cistern or
other source of water supply which is used for domestic or potable
purposes or is on the watershed which is the source of drinking
water.
(16) Maintaining or permitting to exist any manure pile or manure pit
which is not tightly enclosed and covered.
(17) Maintaining any building which is infested with rats, mice or other
rodents or with insects or other vermin.
(18) Unnecessary blowing of whistles, sirens and horns and ringing of
bells at any time and the loud playing of radios, bands or music,
after 11:00 p.m. Any radio, band or music shall be deemed to be
playing loudly if the noise from the same is of sufficient volume to
disturb the sleep of persons in the immediate vicinity. [Amended
6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 3648]
B. All sunken lots or marsh lands or lots below grade where stagnant
water gathers or is collected are hereby declared nuisances, and any
owner or owners or agent or tenant of any such lot or lots or lands shall,
on written notice from the Division of Health, correct and abate such
nuisance in the manner prescribed by the Division in such notice.64
64.Editor's Note: Former Section 16-19, which immediately followed this section, regarding
penalties, was deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375. See current penalty provisions in
§ 172-2.
§ 172-6 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES § 174-1
170:385
A. No nonsecular, unattended, privately funded holiday displays shall be
permitted on Village property except at Memorial Park at Van Neste
Square (hereinafter "Park") at or near the northwest corner of the park,
facing East Ridgewood Avenue and/or the northerly lane of traffic along
Van Neste Square, extending in a generally easterly and westerly
direction from the public walkway leading directly into the park from
the northwest corner of the Park, for a distance of approximately 36
feet in each direction from the walkway, or such additional distance as
shall be determined by the Council, beginning at a point 25 feet up the
walkway from the row of darker-colored bricks entering the park, near
the intersection of the walkway with the public sidewalks along East
Ridgewood Avenue and the northerly lane of traffic along Van Neste
Square; [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 3502]
B. Such displays may be no larger than 12 feet in height, 12 feet in width
(length) and 12 feet in depth;
C. The period of time in which such displays shall be permitted shall be no
earlier than November 22 of each year and extend to January 8 of the
following year;
D. Applications for permission for such displays are required to be
submitted to the Village Clerk's office no earlier than October 1 of each
year. No applications shall be accepted after October 31 of each year.
All permitting fees, including any electrical and/or structural permits
for inspections, must be paid in full prior to the issuance of any permit;
E. Such displays are subject to electrical and structural inspections after
the display is erected. If the display fails to meet the standards of such
inspection, the display must be dismantled or remedied within 48 hours
of receipt of notice of such failure;
F. Each applicant shall be required to execute a hold harmless,
indemnification and agreement to defend the Village against any and all
claims that may be brought as a result of the request and placement of
the display on Village property;
G. Each applicant shall be required produce proof of insurance for the
display showing $1,000,000 coverage for each occurrence and
$2,000,000 in aggregate coverage. The proof of insurance must show
the Village of Ridgewood listed as an additional insured.
H. Any exception to the requirements of Subsections C and D above shall
only be permitted by the Village Council upon request of an individual
or group that provides proper notification and permitting in accordance
with this chapter. Proper notification for any such exception must be
made to the Village Council at least 60 days prior to the desired date of
placement of any such display on Village property;
I. In the event of a fully compliant application request to place a display
that identifies a nonsecular belief that is also requested by another fully
compliant application from a different individual or entity for that given
§ 174-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 174-1
170:386
§ 174-2. Applications.65
Any application for such permit may be obtained at and must be submitted
to the Village Clerk's office and must include, but may not be necessarily
limited to, the following information:
Chapter 175
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 31.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 125.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 172.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 223.
year, only one such display shall be considered for approval. In such
instances, a preference shall be given to applicants who reside or are
located in the Village of Ridgewood and the timing of the submittal of
the fully compliant application.
J. No display will be permitted that has an electric power demand greater
than 110 volts, 20 amps. [Added 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 3502]
A. A brief description of the nature of the display, the dimensions,
preferred location, materials of which the display is made, whether any
electrical connection or other assistance is required or part of the
display;
B. The dates on which the applicant wishes to erect the display and
remove same;
C. Any dates and times on which the applicant intends to have any
ceremony or celebration at the display, the number of persons
anticipated and a brief description of the ceremony or celebration;
D. The name of the individual or person who shall be the responsible party
for notices, communication and information pertaining to each
applicant.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145 for applicable permit fees.
§ 174-1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 174-2
175:387

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 175-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CELLAR — The lowest story of any building, dwelling or tenement house of
which 1/3 or more of the height from the floor to the ceiling is below ground
level.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Includes every house, building or portion
thereof which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or is
occupied as a house, home or residence by three or more families living
independently of one another and having facilities for doing their cooking
and sleeping upon the premises.
PROPERTY and PREMISES — Unless restricted or limited by the context to
either real or personal property, they shall include both.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — Includes every house or a portion thereof
which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as a house, home
or residence of one family, be there one or more persons living therein
and having facilities for doing their cooking and sleeping upon the
premises.[Added 3-26-1985 by Ord. No. 1978]
TENANT — Any person occupying any house, building or portion thereof
which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as a house, residence
or a business establishment.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — Includes every house or a portion thereof
which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as a house, home
or residence by two families living independently of one another and having
facilities for doing their cooking and sleeping upon the premises.[Added
3-26-1985 by Ord. No. 1978]
§ 175-1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 175-1
175:389

ARTICLE II
Single-Family, Two-Family and Multifamily Dwellings
[Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1956; 3-26-1985 by Ord. No.
1978]
§ 175-2. Heating requirements.
§ 175-3. Responsibility to furnish heat.
For the purpose of the provisions of this article pertaining to heating,
wherever any building or part thereof so concerned is heated by means of
a furnace, boiler or other apparatus under the control of the owner, agent
or lessor, in the absence of an agreement to the contrary with the tenant or
occupant, such owner, agent or lessor shall be deemed to have contracted,
undertaken or bound himself or herself to furnish heat in accordance with
the provisions of this article pertaining to heating.
§ 175-4. Temperature and hours.
A. It shall be the duty of every person who shall have contracted or shall
be otherwise bound or legally obligated to heat or to furnish heat for
any building, part of any building, apartment or space occupied as a
home or place or residence of one or more persons or as a business
establishment where one or more persons are employed to so heat or to
so furnish heat to every occupied portion of such building so that a
minimum temperature of 68° F. is maintained therein at all times,
provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to buildings
or parts thereof used and occupied for trades, business or occupations
where high or low temperatures area essential and unavoidable.
B. At no time, however, shall the minimum temperature be permitted to
fall below 65° F. in any building, apartment, part of any building or
apartment or other space wherein or wherefor there shall be any
obligation to furnish heat. It shall be the duty of every person who shall
have such obligation to so furnish such heat to so maintain the same in
accordance with this and all the other sections of this article pertaining
to heating. [Amended 12-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1956]
A. With respect to the obligation or duty to furnish heat to or in a building,
apartment or portion thereof occupied as a home or place of residence,
the term "at all times," as used in the provisions of this article
pertaining to heating, shall mean that from October 1 to May 1 between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., the person obliged to furnish
heat shall maintain a minimum of 68° F. and from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m. a minimum of 65° F. in every habitable room.
B. With respect to the obligation or duty to furnish heat to a building or
portion thereof used and occupied as a business establishment, the
term "at all times," as used in the provisions of this article pertaining to
§ 175-2 HOUSING STANDARDS § 175-4
175:391
§ 175-5. Contract for heat.
The term "contracted," as used in the provisions of this article pertaining
to heating, shall be taken to mean and include an obligation arising by a
written, verbal or implied contract; and the presence of heating outlets,
radiators, risers or returns in any hall or apartment or subdivision of a
house shall be prima facie evidence of an implied contract.
§ 175-6. Hot water standards.
In all buildings occupied for residential purposes by two or more families
and when the owner thereof shall have agreed to supply hot water, sufficient
hot water of a temperature of at least 140° F. shall at all times be supplied.
§ 175-7. Refrigeration facilities.
In all buildings occupied as residence by two or more families and when the
owner or lessor thereof shall have agreed to supply refrigeration facilities,
he shall be and is hereby required to supply and maintain such refrigeration
facilities at all times and in such manner as may be necessary for the proper
and wholesome preservation of foodstuffs.66
§ 175-8. Sanitary regulations.
heating, shall mean the usual working hours established and
maintained in the building or portion thereof so involved.
A. No person having the right or power to prevent the same shall
knowingly cause or permit any person to sleep or remain in any cellar
or in any place dangerous or prejudicial to health by reason of a want of
ventilation or drainage or by reason of the presence of any poisonous,
noxious or offensive substance or by reason of lack of suitable sanitary
facilities.
B. No owner, tenant, agent or lessee of any building or any part thereof
shall lease, let or hire out the same or any portion thereof to be
occupied by any person or allow the same to be occupied as a dwelling
or lodging place unless such building or parts thereof so occupied are
sufficiently lighted and ventilated and have available suitable sanitary
facilities and are in all respects in that condition of cleanliness and
wholesomeness required by this Code and by all applicable laws of this
state.
C. No owner nor other person in charge or control of any tenement or any
other building shall permit any building or part thereof to be occupied
or inhabited if the same is unfit for human occupation by reason of its
being infected with vermin or by reason of its being in a condition
66.Editor's Note: Former Section 17-8, Construction requirements for vaults and cellars, etc.,
occupied separately as dwelling, which immediately followed this section, was deleted
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
§ 175-4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 175-8
175:392
§ 175-9. Separation of mercantile and living quarters.
No part of any building occupied in whole or in part for store or mercantile
purposes shall be used for living or sleeping accommodations unless the
same are separated by solid walls or partitions from the part occupied for
store or mercantile purposes.
dangerous to health or otherwise likely to cause disease among its
inhabitants.
D. The owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of every building or structure,
within the right or ability of either to remedy or prevent the same, shall
not cause or allow any matter of thing to be done in or about any such
building or structure dangerous or prejudicial to health.
§ 175-8 HOUSING STANDARDS § 175-9
175:393

ARTICLE III
Unfit Dwellings
§ 175-10. Adoption of codes. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375; 12-13-2000 by Ord. No. 2725]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, the Uniform Construction
Code is hereby accepted, adopted and established as a standard to be used
as a guide in determining the fitness of a building for human habitation or
occupancy or use. A copy of said code is annexed to this article, and three
copies of the same have been placed on file in the Office of the Village Clerk
and are available to all persons desiring to use and examine the same.
§ 175-11. Compliance required. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or rent to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not conform to the provisions of this article and the Uniform
Construction Code and the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code,
established hereby as the standard to be used in determining whether a
dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
§ 175-12. Powers and duties of Construction Code Official.
The Construction Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered to
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out
and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this article, including the
following in addition to others herein granted:
§ 175-13. Determination of unfitness.
For the purpose of this article, the Construction Code Official may
determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he finds that
conditions exist in such dwelling which are dangerous or injurious to the
health or safety of the occupants of such dwelling, the occupants of
neighboring dwellings or other residents of the Village; such conditions
may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing):
defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities;
lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation;
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Village in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses and to
receive evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
§ 175-10 HOUSING STANDARDS § 175-13
175:395
disrepair as to constitute a blighting factor; structural defects; or
uncleanliness.
§ 175-14. Neighborhood standards to be maintained.
The exterior of any building shall be maintained so that the appearance of
the premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance
in keeping with the standards of the neighborhood and such that the
appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting
factor for adjoining property owners nor an element leading to the
progressive deterioration and downgrading of the neighborhood with the
accompanying diminution of property values. Failure to do so shall
constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to the penalties outlined in this
article.
§ 175-15. Notice to appear; rules of evidence. [Amended 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Code Official by a public
authority, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of
the Village charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation or
constitutes a blight factor, as herein defined, or whenever it appears to the
Construction Code Official (on his own motion) that any dwelling is unfit
for human habitation, as herein defined, or constitutes a blighting factor,
he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges,
issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in
such dwelling a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing
a notice that a hearing which shall be open to the public will be held before
the Construction Code Official or his designated agent at a place therein
fixed not less than seven days nor more than 30 days after the serving
of such complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given
the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or
otherwise and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint;
and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not
be controlling in hearings before the Construction Code Official.
§ 175-16. Findings; order to repair or remove.
If after such notice and hearing the Construction Code Official determines
that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, as
herein defined, or constitutes a blighting factor, he shall state, in writing,
his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and
cause to be served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order
requiring:
A. The repair, alteration or improvement of such building to be made by
the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or to have such building
vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
§ 175-13 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 175-16
175:396
§ 175-17. Failure to comply.
§ 175-18. Lien; disposition of proceeds.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve such building within the time specified in the
order, that the owner remove or demolish such building within a
reasonable time as specified in such order of removal.
A. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
Construction Code Official may cause such building to be repaired,
altered or improved or to be vacated and closed and the Construction
Code Official may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any
building so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of
this building is prohibited and unlawful."
B. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Construction Code Official may cause such building to be
removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
A. The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this article determined in favor of the Village
and such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements or vacating
and closing or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the
balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized
from the sale of materials derived from such building or from any
contract for removal or demolition thereof shall be a Village lien against
the real property upon which such cost was incurred.
B. If the building is removed or demolished by the Construction Code
Official, he shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be
credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the
proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any
contract for the removal or demolition of the building.
C. If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the
total of such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the
amount so due shall be filed with the Village Tax Assessor or other
custodian of the records of tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be
forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the
credits exceed such costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in
the Superior Court by the Construction Code Official, shall be secured
in such manner as may be directed by such Court and shall be
disbursed according to the order or judgment of the Court to the
persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such
Court, provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to impair
§ 175-16 HOUSING STANDARDS § 175-18
175:397
§ 175-19. Service of complaints and orders. [Amended 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375]
Complaints or orders issued by the Construction Code Official pursuant to
this article shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by the Official, in the exercise of reasonable diligence
and the Official shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of
such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same once in a newspaper printed and published in the Village. A copy
of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected by the complaint or order, and a copy of such complaint or
order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the county recording
officer of the county in which the dwelling is located.
or limit in any way the power of the Village to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary
proceedings or otherwise.
D. Any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the
filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the Village lien certificate. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
§ 175-18 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 175-19
175:398
Chapter 186
LANDSCAPERS AND LANDSCAPING SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Garbage, rubbish, refuse and recycling — See
Ch. 165.
Power tools, landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment — See Ch. 222.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 223.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 260.
Yard Waste — See Ch. 275.
§ 186-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for the permitting
and registration of landscapers and landscaping services operating within
the Village of Ridgewood, so as to assist the Village with its compliance with
requirements of the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit NJPDES
Permit No. NJ0141852. The Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood
finds that the permitting and registration of landscapers and landscaping
services provides a means for the timely notification of critical information
regarding the collection of yard waste in the Village to such services and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply with these requirements.
§ 186-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely discretionary.
ANNOUNCED COLLECTION DATE — The scheduled calendar date of
pickup of noncontainerized yard waste by the Village of Ridgewood in
specified sections of the Village. The announced collection date may be
modified by weather or environmental conditions, at which time a new date
will be announced for specified sections of the Village of Ridgewood on the
Village's Web site, cable television access channel, and through the official
publications of the Village of Ridgewood. Announced collection dates will
also be mailed and e-mailed to all holders of the annual permit.
ANNUAL FEE — The fee charged by and payable to the Village Clerk of the
Village of Ridgewood to obtain an annual permit for the purposes stated.
ANNUAL PERMIT — A permit issued by the office of the Village Clerk of the
Village of Ridgewood for the purposes stated, upon a registrant's filling out
and submitting of a registration application form with the requisite fee(s).
§ 175-19 HOUSING STANDARDS § 186-2
175:399
CONTAINERIZED YARD WASTE — The placement of yard waste in a trash
can, bucket, biodegradable paper bag or other such container, such as to
prevent the yard waste from spilling, blowing out, or releasing into the
street and coming into contact with stormwater.
CUSTOMER — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
or association who employs the services of a landscaper to remove for
depositing in the street leaves and vegetated yard waste from property(s) in
the Village of Ridgewood.[Amended 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3357]
FACILITY ACCEPTANCE TICKETS — Tickets that can be purchased from
the Village Finance Department permit holders to dump leaves from Village
residents at the Lakeview Composting Facility. Tickets will he required as
follows:
Truck Volume
(cubic yards)
Number of
Tickets
1 - 10 1
10 - 20 2
LANDSCAPER — Any person or entity, commercial or otherwise, whose
business undertakes any or all of the following services performed for
customers within the Village of Ridgewood for financial
consideration:[Amended 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3357]
PERMIT HOLDER — A landscaper that has been issued a permit to operate
within the Village of Ridgewood pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
STREET — Any paved street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct,
drive, or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, which may be comprised of pavement, shoulders, gutters,
curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street's right-ofway
limit lines.
VEHICLE — Any vehicle, including any trailer, required to be registered
with the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles for use on local roads
and highways and used by a landscaper in the performance of his work in
the Village of Ridgewood.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, leaves, and other vegetative debris
removed from a property by a landscaper engaged to provide lawn care,
tree, or shrub care, or landscaping services and deposited in the street for
subsequent collection and removal by the Village of Ridgewood.[Amended
11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3357]
§ 186-3. Permit required. [Amended 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3357;
4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 3715]
Collection, consolidation, and depositing of yard waste in the street for
subsequent collection and removal by the Village of Ridgewood.
A.
§ 186-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 186-3
175:400
§ 186-4. Permit fee. [Amended 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3357;
4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 3715]
A. All landscapers and landscaping firms desiring to deposit yard waste
created by their operations in the Village of Ridgewood, at the Village of
Ridgewood's Lakeview Compost Facility, shall display an annual decal
on their vehicles. The annual decal shall be evidence of a current
annual permit, as required by the provisions of this chapter, which will
be issued to each registered firm (permit holder). The decal shall be
displayed by the registered firm (permit holder) on each vehicle the
registered firm owns or operates within the Village of Ridgewood that
desires to transport leaves from Village residents to the Lakeview
Compost Facility.
B. The permit issued for depositing collected yard waste and leaves at the
Lakeview Compost Facility by a landscaper shall be valid only during
the period of time the Village designates as the leaf collection season of
leaves deposited on the streets of the Village.
C. The annual decal issued entitles a landscaper to purchase facility
acceptance tickets, which are required to bring yard waste to the
compost facility in accordance with the rates established in Chapter
145, Fees.
A. The registration fee for the annual permit, permitting the permit holder
to transport and deposit yard waste and leaves at the Village's Lakeview
Compost Facility during the leaf collection season as defined and
announced by the Village, required pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees, upon filing a registration
application with the Village Clerk.
B. The permit fee grants each landscaper five decals for their vehicles that
will be transporting yard waste to Lakeview. Permits shall be issued
upon presentation of a valid New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles
or any other State Department of Motor Vehicle Services vehicle
registration for each vehicle a decal is requested for.
C. Additional vehicle decals are available for each permit holder for the
fee as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees, upon presentation of a valid New
Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles or any other State Department of
Motor Vehicle Services vehicle registration for each vehicle an
additional decal is requested for.
D. Facility acceptance tickets will be issued to registered landscapers only.
Each ticket is good for one load of up to 10 cubic yards in volume of
yard waste material. Vehicles larger than 10 cubic yards in volume shall
use additional facility acceptance tickets, with one ticket required for
every 10 cubic yards of volume or part thereof. Cost for facility
acceptance tickets is as stated in Chapter 145, Fees.
§ 186-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 186-5
175:401
§ 186-5. Term of permit. [Amended 4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 3715]
All permits shall be issued on a yearly basis. Permits shall be issued,
starting March 1 of each year. All permits shall expire on February 28 of the
following year. Permits shall only be valid during the Village's defined and
announced leaf collection season in the fall of the year for depositing yard
waste at Lakeview Compost Facility. Permits are not transferable, nor shall
they be sold.
§ 186-6. Conditions of permit. [Amended 11-28-2012 by Ord. No.
3357]
§ 186-7. Application procedure and required information.
[Amended 11-28-2012 by Ord. No. 3357; 4-10-2019 by Ord. No.
3715]
A. All permit holders (landscapers) responsible for the placement of yard
waste in the street from their customers, either containerized or
noncontainerized, shall adhere to the schedule of the Village of
Ridgewood's announced collection dates. Noncontainerized yard waste
or debris shall not be permitted to be placed in the street more than
seven days prior to an announced collection date.
B. At all times, grass clippings shall be kept separate of other types and
kinds of yard waste and shall not be comingled with other types of yard
waste, either containerized or noncontainerized.
C. All permit holders shall clearly display the decal issued. The decal shall
be affixed on the driver's side door of the vehicle, underneath the
window. For trailers, the decal shall be affixed on the driver's side above
the trailer's wheels.
D. All vehicles used by permit holders shall maintain a covering tarp at all
times over yard waste and debris when the vehicle is in transit so as to
prevent any debris from spilling, blowing, falling, or otherwise
discharging from the vehicle onto the streets of the Village of
Ridgewood. Permit holders shall be responsible for cleanup of any
debris spilled from their vehicles.
E. All permit holders shall adhere to the provisions and requirements of
the Village of Ridgewood Yard Waste Ordinance.67
A. All applications for the annual permit registrations and/or renewal
applications for transport of leaves and yard waste to the Lakeview
Compost Facility shall be on the forms provided by the Office of the
Village Clerk. All forms submitted must be signed by the owner of the
landscaper firm or entity or their designated and authorized agent with
the appropriate fee. Each registration application and/or renewal
application shall provide the following information:
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 275, Yard Waste.
§ 186-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 186-7
175:402
§ 186-8. Permit holder's use of composting facility.
(1) Name, address, telephone number, email address of the applicant.
(2) The applicant's contact person, including telephone numbers and
an email address.
(3) The name under which the business is operated.
(4) The name, make, model, year and license plate of each motor
vehicle or trailer to be used by the permit holder within the Village
of Ridgewood to transport yard waste to Lakeview Compost
Facility.
(5) Copy of the landscaper's insurance declaration page or certificate
of insurance with the Village of Ridgewood named as an additional
insured.
(6) Any other such information deemed pertinent as necessary and
prescribed by the Village Clerk.
(7) The correct fee, according to Ch. 145.
B. All applications for permits shall be received by the Village Clerk and
reviewed for completeness. Once complete, the Village Clerk shall issue
the permit and requisite vehicle decals to the landscaper.
C. Applicants who have been denied a permit shall have the right to appeal
the decision to the Village Manager. The Village Manager's decision
shall be deemed final.
A. Landscapers registered with the Village shall have the option of
transporting the leaves collected only from their Village of Ridgewood
customers to the Lakeview Composting Facility (herein after known as
"Lakeview") during the scheduled hours of operation. Facility
acceptance tickets shall be required with every load in accordance with
the requirements stated in § 186-2. The facility acceptance tickets
submitted with each load of leaves brought to the Lakeview shall have
the following information on them: printed name and signature of the
driver delivering the leaves, addresses from which the leaves were
collected, and date of delivery to Lakeview.
B. All loads of leaves brought to Lakeview shall be subject to inspection.
Loads containing materials other then leaves shall be rejected and
removed from Lakeview by the landscaper. Failure to permit inspection
of loads brought to Lakeview will result in the cancellation of the permit
holder's use of the composting facility. For all permit holders, after the
fourth load from a permit holder is rejected, said permit holder shall be
denied use of Lakeview for the remainder of the permit period.
C. The facility acceptance tickets will be sold in books of five tickets for
$150. Tickets have no expiration date and are valid from year to year.
§ 186-7 HOUSING STANDARDS § 186-8
175:403
§ 186-9. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Village of Ridgewood Police
Department, and/or the Director of the Department of Public Works or
his/her designated representative, and/or the Village Manager or his/her
designated representative, and/or the Director of Operations for the Village
or his/her designated representative.
§ 186-10. Violations and penalties.
Any permit holders or other person(s) or entity found to be in violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of $200 per
violation, per vehicle, operated by a landscaping company.
§ 186-11. Effect on fees.
Except as herein amended and supplemented, Chapter 145, Fees, of The
Code of the Village of Ridgewood remains in full force and effect.
Chapter 187
FERTILIZER APPLICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Landscapes and landscaping — See Ch. 186.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 190,
§ 190-83.
Environmental provisions — See Ch. 190,
§ 190-120.
Soil removal — See Ch. 246.
Water — See Ch. 269.
Yard waste — See Ch. 275.
§ 187-1. Purpose; findings.
Unused tickets can be used the following leaf acceptance season by
permit holders.
A. An ordinance to regulate the outdoor application of fertilizer so as to
reduce the overall amount of excess nutrients entering the Village's
various waterways, thereby helping to protect and improve surface
water quality. This chapter is part of the Village of Ridgewood's
requirements for compliance with requirements of the Tier A municipal
stormwater general permit NJPDES Permit No. NJG0152170.
B. The Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood finds that the regulation
of fertilizer application in the Village will assist in reducing elevated
levels of nutrients, particularly phosphorus, in surface water bodies
which can result in excess and accelerated growth of algae and aquatic
plants (eutrophication) in the receiving bodies of water. Excess plant
growth can result in diurnal variations and extremes in dissolved
§ 186-8 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 187-1
175:404
§ 187-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUFFER — The land area, minimum of 10 feet in width, for properties in the
R-1, R-2, and R-125 Zoning Districts of the Village, adjacent to any water
body.
FERTILIZER — A fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other substance
containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its
plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed to have value in
promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for sale, or intended for
sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any street, highway, parking lot, sidewalk,
driveway, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive, or other way
which has been covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant
to infiltration by water. An impervious surface shall also mean any material
that prevents the infiltration of water into the soil.
PERSON — Any individual, property owner, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association or political subdivision of the State of New
Jersey subject to the municipal jurisdiction of the Village of Ridgewood.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P205, with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero, except
that it shall not be considered to include animal (including human) or
vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood ashes that have
not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATER BODY — Any surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary.
§ 187-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person, entity, business or commercial venture, or organization may
perform the following:
oxygen and pH levels, which, in turn, can be detrimental to aquatic
life. The presence of excessive plant matter can also restrict use of the
affected water for recreation and water supply. This chapter provides
a means to regulate fertilizer application and to prescribe penalties for
the failure to comply.
§ 187-1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 187-3
175:405
§ 187-4. Phosphorus fertilizer application and use.
A. Apply fertilizer when a runoff-producing rainfall event is occurring or
predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer
migration off site exists.
B. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the
target surface or returned to either its original or another appropriate,
properly labeled container for reuse.
C. Apply fertilizer within the established buffer of any water body in the
Village of Ridgewood.
D. Apply fertilizer more than 15 calendar days prior to the start of or at
any time after the end of the recognized growing season. According to
the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Plant Hardiness
Zone Maps, available in the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey, July 1999 edition, the Village of Ridgewood shall
be considered in Growing Season Zone 6b, with the effective dates of
March 1 to November 15 of each year.
E. Apply fertilizer to any property or portion of a property that is within
stream buffer corridor by any means other than a drop spreader or lowpressure
hand-applied liquid fertilizer, with the discharging nozzle held
vertically no more then three feet above the vegetation being fertilized.
A. No person, entity, business or commercial venture, or organization may
perform the following:
(1) Apply phosphorus containing fertilizer in an outdoor area, except
as demonstrated to be needed for the specific soils and target
vegetation in accordance with a laboratory analysis of the soil and
the associated annual fertilizer recommendation issued by the
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension service.
B. Permitted exceptions.
(1) Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
(a) Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided that the application is in accordance
with the requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules;
(b) Establishing vegetation after a project that has been issued a
Village of Ridgewood site grading permit in accordance with
Ordinance No. 3035 has been completed;
(c) Reestablishing or repairing a turf area.
§ 187-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 187-5
175:406
§ 187-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Village of Ridgewood Police
Department and/or the Director of the Department of Public Works and/
or his/her designated representative and/or the Village of Ridgewood
designated property maintenance enforcing agent.
§ 187-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, property owner, agent of a property owner, landscaper,
commercial entity, organization or such found to be in violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of $100 per
violation, not to exceed $2,000.
Chapter 190
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic Preservation Commission — See Ch.
29.
Condominium conversion — See Ch. 123.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 125.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 154.
Housing standards — See Ch. 175.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 223.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 238.
Soil removal — See Ch. 246.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 249.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 251.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 260.
§ 187-5 HOUSING STANDARDS § 187-6
175:407

ARTICLE I
Purpose and Scope
§ 190-1. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to:
A. Encourage action to guide the appropriate use or development of all
lands in the Village, in a manner which will promote the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare.
B. Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. Provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. Ensure that the development of Ridgewood does not conflict with the
development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities.
E. Promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods and the entire municipality as well as the preservation
of the environment.
F. Encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by
the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open
space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements.
H. Encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
I. Promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
J. Promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space,
energy resources and to prevent the degradation of the environment,
including but not limited to the air, water and visual environment,
through improper use of land.
K. Encourage diverse types of housing construction.
L. Establish orderly and uniform procedures relating to land use and
development regulation.
M. Promote utilization of renewable energy sources.
N. Promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of recyclable
materials from municipal solid waste.
§ 190-1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-2
175:409
§ 190-2. Scope.
The scope of this chapter as it relates to other laws, ordinances, regulations,
rules or other restrictions is as follows:
A. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those repealed expressly or by necessary implication hereby, or
to affect any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant,
deed or other private agreement unless repugnant hereto.
B. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or coverage by
above-grade structures or improvements or requires greater lot area or
longer yards or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such
rules, regulations or permits or by such private restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall control. [Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord.
No. 2670]
C. Municipal uses and facilities. All uses and facilities of the Village of
Ridgewood shall be permitted in all zone districts in the Village, and
shall be exempt from the regulations of this chapter. This provision shall
apply to and include, but not be limited to, all facilities owned and
operated by the various departments of the Village government and
administration, including but not limited to the Ridgewood Water
Department. [Added 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3579]
D. Public utilities within the street right-of-way. All public utility facilities
owned, operated, leased and/or authorized by the Village of Ridgewood
within the right-of-way of public streets shall be permitted in all zone
districts in the Village and shall be exempt from the regulations of this
chapter; provided, however, that public utility structures located within
the street right-of-way constructed to serve uses and structures on
private property shall be required to comply with the requirements for
site plans and subdivisions in this chapter. [Added 2-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 3579]
§ 190-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-2
175:410
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 190-3. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings described below, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning. The term "shall" indicates a mandatory requirement, and
the term "may" indicates a permissive action.
ABOVE-GRADE STRUCTURE — Any building, roofed structure or other
structure which has a height above the ground of at least one foot. If only
part of said structure is one foot or higher above the ground, then only
that part shall be considered an "above-grade structure." This definition
shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, swimming pools, hot tubs,
ornamental pools, porches, decks, balconies, tanks, fireplaces and barbecue
pits, roofed arbors and trellises, any or all of which are located above grade,
as defined herein. Notwithstanding the above, the following shall not be
construed to be above-grade structures for the purposes of this chapter:
fences, freestanding or retaining walls and the earth retained by such walls,
flagpoles, mail boxes, signs and lawn ornaments.[Amended 2-11-2004 by
Ord. No. 2862]
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure on
the same lot with and subordinate to a principal building, occupied or
devoted exclusively to an accessory use. Where an accessory building is
integrated into the principal building, as with an attached garage having
access between the garage and the principal building, such accessory
building shall be considered part of the principal building. Notwithstanding
the above, a structure shall be construed as being accessory to a principal
use or structure although it is located on a different lot than said principal
use or structure, when such location is specifically permitted by this
chapter.[Amended 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2862]
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use upon any premises.
ADVERTISE — When used in reference to signs, the giving or attempting
or intending to give any notice or information or any activity which gives or
attempts to give or intends to give notice, information or warning.
AFFORDABLE — Having a sales price or rent within the means of a lowor
moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, as may be
amended; in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be
amended and supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent
for the unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as
may be amended and supplemented.[Added 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2891;
amended 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3493]
ALTER; ALTERATION — "Alter" means any action which changes or
modifies in a perceptible manner any aspect of development which is
regulated by this chapter. "Alteration" means the result of any such action.
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:411
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, interior
partitions, as well as any change in doors or windows, or any addition to or
diminution of the dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls
of a building.
AMATEUR RADIO STATION — A noncommercial facility involving the
arrangement of wires or metal rods used in the sending and receiving
of electromagnetic waves, and including any support structures, and
operating in the Amateur Radio service under license by the Federal
Communications Commission.[Added 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643]
AMENDED APPROVAL — An action of the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, as applicable, that amends the subject, terms and/or conditions
of a prior approval and which occurs prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, certificate of continued occupancy, the filing of a subdivision
plat or deed with the county recording officer, or any other perfection of the
such prior approval. Amended approval is by resolution of the Board and
involves only minor modifications from the original application. Applications
that, in the opinion of the reviewing board, deviate substantially from
the initial application are not properly the subject of amended approval;
rather, such applications are to be considered new applications and are
subject to the same requirements for approval as if there had been no prior
approval.[Added 7-18-2007 by Ord. No. 3066]
APARTMENT — One or more dwelling rooms, with private bath and kitchen
facilities, comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit in a larger
building.
APPLICANT — Any developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction for the issuance of a permit pursuant to § 190-31 or
190-32.
AREA OF SIGN — The area within a line drawn around the surface of a sign,
including all decorations, but excluding any supports, whether decorative or
not, and in computing sign area, the area of all surfaces used or employed
or designed for use as a sign for sign purposes shall be included and totaled.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD/SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA —
The land in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
ATTIC — The open, nonhabitable space between the ceiling beams of the
top habitable story and the roof rafters in any building.
AWNING — A lightweight roof-like cover made of fabric over a frame, which
projects from the wall of a building, the purposes for which may include the
shielding of a doorway, window or sidewalk from the elements and, when
permitted, the display of signs.[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:412
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — An interior space or a portion of an interior space having
a floor level at least three feet below the average elevation of the finished
ground level at the foundation wall of the structure in which it is
contained.[Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 3083; 5-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 3120]
BLADE SIGN — A type of projecting sign mounted on a building facade or
storefront pole or attached to a surface perpendicular to the normal flow of
traffic.[Added 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 3647]
BUILDABLE AREA — A rectangular area on a lot, located and having
dimensions as specified by the zone district regulations, and encompassing
as much as possible of the principal building and above-grade structures
attached to the principal building. In the case of a substandard lot having a
rectangular area with dimensions less than required, the usable area shall
be construed to be the largest rectangular area having dimensions less
than or equal to the required dimensions, and encompassing as much as
possible of the principal building and above-grade structures attached to
the principal building.[Added 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — That portion of a lot within which a principal
building is permitted to be located by law. The building envelope excludes
the minimum front, side and rear yards required by the zoning regulations
as well as wetlands, approved wetland transition areas, floodways, utility
easements, access easements, conservation easements and all other areas
within which buildings are prohibited.[Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
2713]
CANOPY — A roof-like cover made of rigid building materials and which
projects from the wall of a building, the purpose for which may include
the shielding of a doorway, window or sidewalk from the elements. In the
case of a gasoline service station, a "canopy" is also a roof-like cover that
is supported by one or more columns or stanchions, does not have any side
walls and is used primarily to shield the pumps from the elements. The
definition of "canopy" includes marquees, but excludes awnings.[Amended
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — An antenna that is
intended for commercial transmission or reception of personal wireless
telephone services communications, and including commercial mobile
services communications, unlicensed wireless services communications and
common carrier wireless exchange access services, and also including any
tower or other supporting structures and equipment necessary for such
transmission or reception, as may be permitted by this chapter.[Added
10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643]
CERTIFICATE OF CONTINUED OCCUPANCY — A certificate stating that
the continued occupancy of an existing building or structure may occur.
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:413
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate stating that all work has
been completed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and
the Uniform Construction Code and that the building or structure may be
occupied or used.
CHANGE OF USE — Any use which substantially differs from the previous
use of a building or land. A change of use does not necessarily involve
modifications to existing improvements, or construction of new
improvements.
CHANNEL — The bed and banks of a watercourse which convey the normal
flow of the stream.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — Any facility which is maintained for the care,
development or supervision of six or more children who attend the facility
for less than 24 hours a day, and which is licensed as a child-care center by
the Department of Human Services. This term shall not include any of those
facilities or uses which are not included within the definition of "child-care
center" contained in the Child Care Center Licensing Act (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1
to 30:5B-15).
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES AND SHELTERS — A community residence for
the developmentally disabled, community shelter for victims of domestic
violence, community residence for the terminally ill, community residence
for persons with head injuries, or adult family-care homes for elderly
persons and physically disabled adults, all as defined and regulated by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and -66.2 and N.J.S.A. 26:2Y-3.[Added 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 26436869; amended 2-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3240; 4-12-2017
by Ord. No. 3591]
CONCEPT/INFORMAL PLAN — The optional, initial development plan for
subdivisions and/or site plans of sufficient accuracy and detail to be used
for the purpose of informal review, evaluation and nonbinding comment by
the Planning Board and meeting the requirements of this chapter.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in this chapter, and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor
by the Planning Board.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — A qualified person appointed by the Village
Council pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code, Chapter 23, Title 5,
to enforce and administer the regulations within the jurisdiction of the
enforcing agency.
68.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the former definitions of "community
residence for persons with head injuries," "community residence for the developmentally
disabled," and "community shelter for victims of domestic violence," which were
previously included in this section.
69.Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it shall take effect after execution of a
settlement agreement that resolves West Bergen Mental Healthcare’s objection to the
Village’s housing element and fair share plan and after COAH’s approval of such
agreement.
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:414
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Any form of development other than
planned development.
COVERAGE BY ABOVE-GRADE STRUCTURES — The combined area of
all buildings and other above-grade structures on a lot, including but not
limited to porches, decks, balconies and cantilevered parts of the building
at any level, but excluding, however, cornices, eaves and other structures
which are specifically excluded by this chapter.[Added 6-7-1999 by Ord.
No. 2670]
COVERAGE BY IMPROVEMENTS or IMPROVEMENT COVERAGE — The
coverage by buildings and other above-grade structures on a lot as defined
by this chapter, plus the coverage of any other structures, including but
not limited to driveways, sidewalks, patios, decks, swimming pools, tennis
courts, parking areas and other paved areas, whether constructed of
asphalt, concrete, brick, stone, gravel or other paving materials, but
excluding structures, or portions of structures, that are located below the
surface of the ground and which are not visible from above the surface
of the ground. (Thus, subsurface structures such as drywells, underground
tanks, etc., are typically excluded from such coverage, whereas swimming
pools, which may be located below the surface of the ground, but which
are visible from above the surface of the ground, are not excluded). It
is intended to include within this definition all man-made features except
vegetation, organic mulch, soil (including soil retained by retaining walls)
and structures that may be specifically excluded by this chapter.[Added
6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 2670; amended 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2862]
"C" VARIANCE — Any variance which is not a "D" variance.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DECK — A structure consisting primarily of a man-made platform or
platforms which is/are elevated above the adjacent ground level by at least
one foot and which is/are typically used or designed for use for outdoor
dining, recreational, entertainment or similar purposes.[Added 4-12-2017
by Ord. No. 3591]
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land
to be developed.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or of any
mining excavation or landfill and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure or land or extension or use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DISPLAY — A three-dimensional item meant to attract patrons to a
business.[Added 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3667]
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:415
DISPLAY RACK — A framework (i.e., bar, rail, hooks) for holding multiple
items up for display.[Added 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3667]
DISTRICT — See "zoning district" below.
DRIVE-IN BANK — A facility either within the principal structure or in a
freestanding accessory structure which, by design, encourages or permits
customers to receive services while remaining in their motor vehicles.
"D" VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the
zoning regulations, Article X of this chapter, to permit:
DWELLING UNIT — A unit comprising living accommodations designed and
used for occupancy by only one family.
EASEMENT — An encumbrance or grant of an estate in lands distinct from
ownership to use in some way the land of another.
ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED SIGN/DISPLAY — Animated signs or
devices motivated by wind, thermal changes, or other natural
environmental input. Includes spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings, and/
or other devices or displays that respond to naturally occurring external
motions.[Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3667]
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall
include the painting of wall signs.70
FAMILY — Any reasonable number of persons (consistent with the
provisions of the building, fire and health codes and the residential
character of the neighborhood involved) living together as a single, not-forprofit
housekeeping unit, whose relationship is of a permanent, domestic
and private residential character and who utilize all rooms and cooking
A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use or
principal structure.
A.
B. An expansion of a nonconforming use;
Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a
conditional use;
C.
An increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in Section 3.1
of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4);
D.
An increase in the permitted density as defined Section 3.1 of P.L. 1975,
c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4), except as applied to the required lot area for
a lot or lots for detached one or two dwelling unit buildings which lot or
lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor
subdivision; or
E.
A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the
maximum height permitted in the district for a principal structure.
F.
70.Editor's Note: The definition of "erosion," added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2983, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-7-2007 by Ord. No. 3035. See now
§ 190-83.
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:416
facilities in common. Commercial and institutional uses, boarding- or
rooming houses, transient uses, societies, clubs, fraternities, sororities,
associations, lodges, shelters, halfway houses and similar organizations are
excluded from this definition, except as otherwise specifically provided by
the Municipal Land Use Law under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66c.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — The private residence of a family day-care
provider which is registered as a family day-care home pursuant to the
Family Day-Care Provider Registration Act, P.L. 1987, c. 27 (N.J.S.A.
30:5B-16 et seq.), and in which child care services are regularly provided
to no fewer than three and no more than five children for no less than 15
hours per week, not including children legally related to the provider or
being cared for as part of a cooperative agreement between parents for the
care of their children where no payment for the care is being provided.71
FENCE — An artificially constructed freestanding barrier, typically
constructed of wood, wire, metal, vinyl or other materials and typically
erected for the enclosure and/or screening of areas of land.[Added
3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2818]
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled
and the required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of
such guaranties.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is
presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance with this
chapter.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Flood Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has set forth flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOODPLAIN — The area of a special flood hazard subject to a one-percent
or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
of a foot.
FLOOR AREA — See "gross floor area and/or habitable floor area" below.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — In the case of residential uses in residential zones,
the habitable floor area of the building(s) divided by the total area of the
71.Editor’s Note: The definition of "fast-food restaurant," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3323.
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:417
site, expressed as a percentage. In the case of any use in the nonresidential
zones or nonresidential use in the residential zones, the gross floor area of
all buildings which are enclosed by an exterior wall, divided by the total
area of the site, expressed as a percentage.
FREESTANDING WALL — An artificially constructed freestanding barrier,
typically of heavier-duty construction than a fence, typically constructed of
wood, stone, brick, concrete or other masonry materials, often containing
a footing and/or foundation, and typically erected for the enclosure and/or
screening of areas of land.[Added 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2818]
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached accessory building or a portion of a
principal building used primarily for the storage of motor vehicles owned
or used by the occupant of the principal building to which the garage is
accessory.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any building, structure, lot or land in or upon which
a business, service or industry involving the fueling, storage, maintenance,
washing or servicing and storage in connection therewith of motor vehicles
is maintained, conducted, operated or rendered. Garages used exclusively
for the parking of motor vehicles for the general public are not included
within this definition.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A building situated on one lot which contains
separate dwelling units for more than two families, and which contains
no more than two stories, and in which individual dwelling units may be
located above one another. Garden apartments may also provide access to
dwelling units from a common entrance and utilize shared parking, utilities
and open space.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — See "garage, public."
GOVERNING BODY — The Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood.
GROSS BUILDING AREA — The sum of the horizontal area or areas of
each story or half story of all principal and accessory buildings on a site,
measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls of such buildings.
Gross building area shall not include basements, areas not enclosed by
walls, screening, windows, etc., and areas having a vertical dimension of
less than seven feet between the floor (or if there is no floor, then the joists)
and the bottom of the roof structure. Gross building area shall include but
not necessarily to be limited to the following:[Added 10-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 3083]
A. The horizontal area of habitable and nonhabitable floor area.
B. The horizontal area of interior and exterior walls.
The horizontal area of the portion of attics or other similar areas below
the roof having a vertical dimension of at least seven feet between the
floor (or if there is no floor, then the joists) and the bottom of the roof
structure.
C.
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:418
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The aggregate area of all floors in a building
enclosed by an exterior wall and measured from the exterior face of exterior
walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings, excluding
any space where the floor to ceiling height is less than six feet, and
excluding basements and cellars, attics, garages and other interior parking
and loading space used by motor vehicles. Notwithstanding the above, if
any part of the area of an attic, basement or cellar in a building or any part
of a garage shall be devoted to a principal use, including but not limited to a
dwelling unit, display space, sales space, work areas, food preparation and
service areas, offices, meeting rooms, drafting rooms or facilities, waiting
rooms, laboratories or patient treatment or therapy facilities, such part or
area shall be included in the computation of gross floor area. This shall
not be construed to include the use of such areas for storage and similar
support functions within the calculation of gross floor area.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — The area of that portion of a building or
structure designed, intended and furnished for year-round human
occupancy measured on each floor from the inside face of exterior walls or
from the center line of walls separating two buildings, and including but
not limited to interior walls and stairwells. Habitable floor area shall not
include attic spaces, basements or cellars, open porches, breezeways and
garages.72
HISTORIC PRESERVATION PERMIT — A document signed by the
Construction Official which is required for exterior work to any
improvement on property in an historic district or on an historic site.
A preservation permit pursuant to the historic preservation provisions of
the this chapter shall include, but is not limited to, a building permit, a
demolition permit or a permit to move, convert, relocate or remodel or
which involves exterior changes to the structure or the property on which
it is located, which changes are visible from a public street, also known as
"preservation permit."
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing of historical,
The horizontal area of all stairs and stairwells on each floor. The gross
building area shall be calculated as the area of stairs and stairwells
times the number of stories through which the stairs and stairwells
project.
D.
The horizontal area of spaces that project through two or more stories.
The gross building area shall be calculated as the area of the space
times the number of stories through which the space projects.
E.
The horizontal area of enclosed porches, decks and similar features
enclosed by screening, windows or similar enclosures.
F.
The horizontal area of attached garages, storage rooms and similar
areas.
G.
72.Editor's Note: The definition of "height of building," as amended, which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120.
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:419
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance and which has
been designated as such in the Village Master Plan or in this chapter.73
HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building or structure or group of buildings or
structures that is/are: 1) used primarily by groups of persons organized as a
nonprofit 501c(3) organization recognized by the Federal Internal Revenue
Service; and 2) used primarily for organized religious services and the
accessory uses associated therewith. This definition shall include, but not
be limited to, chapels, churches, congregations, temples, mosques, shrines
and similar designations.[Added 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3579]
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not
necessarily limited to new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential
structure to residential and the creation of new affordable units through
the reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.74[Added 5-12-2004 by
Ord. No. 2891; amended 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3493]
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A house of worship and/or a public or private
school-providing academic instruction for children between the grades
kindergarten through 12 and accredited by the State Department of
Education. Included in this definition are uses accessory to the foregoing
that are part of the same development. Specifically excluded from this
definition are child-care centers operating as a principal use and not
accessory to a house of worship or school.[Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 3579]
INSTRUCTIONAL SCHOOLS — An institution for providing nonaccredited
instruction to children or adults in the arts, dance, language, crafts, martial
arts and similar uses. Instructional schools shall not include post-secondary
education or trade schools.[Added 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 3686;
amended 12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3691]
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any
citizen of the State of New Jersey; and in the case of a civil proceeding in
any court or in an administrative proceeding before a municipal agency, any
person, whether residing within or without the Village, whose right to use,
acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken under
this chapter or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property under this
chapter or under any other law of this state or of the United States have
been denied, violated or infringed by an action or failure to act under this
chapter or the Municipal Land Use Law.75
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land, established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
73.Editor's Note: The definition of "impervious surface," added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2983,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-7-2007 by Ord. No. 3035. See
now § 190-83.
74.Editor's Note: The definition of "infiltration," added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2983, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-7-2007 by Ord. No. 3035. See now
§ 190-83.
75.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:420
LOT AREA — The total square unit content of any lot as measured within
the lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and having frontage on two or more
intersecting streets. A "corner lot" is also a lot bounded on two or more
sides by the same street.
LOT DEPTH — The distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line,
or extensions thereof, measured along the shortest such line that crosses
the building envelope.[Amended 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2731]
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of a lot which is contiguous with a street
right-of-way. In the case of a through lot, the lot frontage shall be considered
that frontage upon which the majority of the buildings in the same block
front; provided that in case there has been no clearly defined frontage
established, the owner may, when applying for a building permit, specify on
his permit application which lot line shall be considered the lot frontage. A
corner lot shall be deemed to have frontage on any abutting street.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line(s) separating a lot from a street rightof-
way. On corner lots and on through lots, all lot lines separating a lot
from a street right-of-way are front lot lines. See lot line illustration,
below.[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
LOT LINE, REAR — On interior lots, the lot line or lines opposite from the
front lot line and not intersecting the front lot line. In the case of interior
lots which have side lot lines meeting at a point in the rear of the lot, the
rear lot line shall be the point of intersection of the side lot lines and the
minimum rear yard shall be measured radially from said point.[Amended
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. On corner
lots, the side lot line shall be the lot line or lines which is/are opposite the
longest front lot line.[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
On corner lots, the rear lot line shall be that lot line or lines opposite
from the shortest front lot line, and which may intersect the longest
front lot line.
A.
On through lots, there may or may not be a rear lot line or lines,
depending upon the configuration of the lot.
B.
See lot line illustration, below, for examples using various lot
configurations. For uncommon lot configurations, the Zoning Officer
shall determine the side and rear lot lines, as set forth in § 190-119A(5).
C.
See lot line illustration, below, for examples using various lot
configurations. For uncommon lot configurations, the Zoning Officer
shall determine the side and rear lot lines, as set forth in § 190-119A(5).
A.
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:421
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect
at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The shortest straight line distance between the two side
lines of any lot, measured parallel to the front lot line and at a distance
from the front lot line equal to the minimum required front yard setback. On
corner lots, the lot width shall be as defined herein, but measured parallel
to the shortest front lot line. If the front lot line of any lot is not a straight
line, the lot width shall be measured parallel to the shortest imaginary line
which is entirely within the lot and tangent to the front lot line. The lot width
shall be measured parallel to said imaginary line at a distance equal to the
minimum front yard setback.[Amended 6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 2606]
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household having a gross household
income less than or equal to 50% of the median gross household income for
households of the same size within the housing region in which the housing
for said household is located, as approved by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing.[Added 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2891]
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to the Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or the standards included
in the Substantive Rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
(N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq.) for home ownership and rental costs, and
occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household
FRONT, REAR AND SIDE LOT LINES - EXAMPLES
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:422
income equal to 50% or less of the median gross household income for
households of the same size within the housing region in which the housing
is located, and which is subject to affordability controls promulgated by the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.[Added 5-12-2004 by Ord. No.
2891]
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by the
Village for the maintenance of any improvements required by this chapter,
including but not limited to cash, surety bonds and letters of credit under
the circumstances specified by this chapter.76
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MARKET-RATE DWELLING UNITS — Housing units not restricted to lowand
moderate-income households that may sell at any price determined by
a willing seller and a willing buyer.[Added 6-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3001]
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign located on a building or canopy of a building,
which sign is designed to be changed on a regular basis and which is
intended to advertise or announce performances or performers, attractions,
exhibits and similar events, as in the case of theaters, playhouses, halls,
etc.[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the municipality as set forth in and adopted pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which
requires site plan approval and which:[Amended 10-14-2009 by Ord. No.
3220; 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 3426]
Proposes new development which is limited to any or all of the
following, provided that for purposes of this definition multiple
development applications for the same property shall be construed as a
single development application if such application(s) is (are) filed within
190 days of the filing of any prior application:
Alterations to the facade, roof, entrance or exit doors, windows or
other exterior components of an existing building, provided that
such alterations do not involve alteration of the location or extent
of the exterior building walls or roof in a manner inconsistent with
Subsection A(2) and (3) in this definition.
(1)
The construction, demolition or other change in the gross building
area on the property, provided that the change involves no more
than 500 square feet. Said five-hundred-square-foot change shall
be calculated as the total amount of existing and proposed gross
building area affected by the change, not as the net change in
gross building area; thus, a demolition of 250 square feet and the
(2)
A.
76.Editor's Note: The definition of "major development," added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2983,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-7-2007 by Ord. No. 3035. See
now § 190-83.
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:423
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land for the creation of not more
than three lots fronting on an existing street, provided that such subdivision
will not adversely affect the development of the remainder of the parcel
or adjoining property and that such subdivision does not involve a planned
development, any new street or the extension of any off-tract improvement,
the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household having a gross
household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median gross
household income for households of the same size within the housing region
in which the housing for said household is located, as approved by the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.[Added 5-12-2004 by Ord. No.
2891]
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to the
Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development or the standards
included in the Substantive Rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing (N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq.) for home ownership and rental costs, and
occupied or reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household
income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median gross household
income for households of the same size within the housing region in which
the housing is located, and which is subject to affordability controls
promulgated by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.[Added
5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2891]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motorized means of conveyance of persons or
property, including but not limited to those vehicles covered by N.J.S.A.
39:1-1 et seq.[Added 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 3114]
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any structure containing three or more
dwelling units.
construction of 250 square feet of gross building area would be
calculated as a change of 500 square feet.
The construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration,
relocation, enlargement or demolition of any nonbuilding
structure(s), and any site grading, landscaping or other ground
disturbance, all of which have a combined ground surface area
of no greater than 2,000 square feet. Said two-thousand-squarefoot
limitation shall exclude any ground surface area affected by
changes in the gross building area included in the calculation in
Subsection A(2) of this definition.
(3)
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension
of off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42.
B.
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make an
informed determination as to whether the requirements established by
this chapter for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
C.
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:424
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Village Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
or Village Council when acting pursuant to this chapter, and any agency
created by or responsible to the Village of Ridgewood when such agency is
acting pursuant to this chapter.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning
regulations, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of
the zoning regulations, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning regulations, but which fails
to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES/DISTRICTS — Those zones set forth in the
zoning regulations of this chapter which are intended primarily for
nonresidential or mixed-use development. In addition, those lots in the HC
and T Zone Districts which are used primarily for nonresidential purposes
shall be considered to be in a nonresidential zone.77[Amended 6-13-2012
by Ord. No. 3343; 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3493]
OCCUPANCY or OCCUPIED — The residing of a person or persons in a
dwelling unit overnight or the installation, storage or use of equipment,
merchandise or machinery in any commercial, residential, public or
industrial building. Excluded from the definition is the use of any
construction equipment or machinery not considered part of the building
or the storage of product, merchandise, raw material or other personal
property or the use of a structure by those engaged in its construction.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32 et seq. Such map shall be deemed conclusive with respect to
the location and width of streets and public drainage ways and the location
and extent of flood control basins and public areas including public parks,
playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreation areas, public open spaces,
scenic and historic sites, sites for schools and other public buildings and
structures, whether or not such streets, ways, basins or areas are improved
or unimproved or are in actual physical existence.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the property of which the lot is a part which is the subject of a development
application or the closest half of the street or right-of-way abutting the
property of which the lot is a part.[Added 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2657]
77.Editor's Note: The definition of "normal grade," added 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2818, as
amended, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 5-14-2008 by Ord. No.
3120.
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:425
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on the closest half of the abutting street or
right-of-way.[Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2657]
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question and excluding any abutting street
or right-of-way.[Added 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2657]
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on the closest half of an abutting street or right-ofway.[
Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2657]
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served or consumed outside the interior of the eating
establishment on private property or upon the public right-of-way, namely,
the sidewalks immediately in front of any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria or place
of business where food and/or other refreshments are served or consumed
or where permitted on private property pursuant to this chapter.[Amended
7-18-2007 by Ord. No. 3071]
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, limited
liability corporation or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in
the land sought to be processed for development under this chapter.
PARKING AREA — An open area, other than a street or other public way,
used for the parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces and
adjacent service aisles, but not including access drives from a public
thoroughfare.
PARKING SPACE — A rectangular space designed to be used as an
accommodation for off-street motor vehicle parking, exclusive of access
drives or aisles.
PATIO — A structure consisting primarily of a man-made platform or
platforms which is/are located at the adjacent ground level, below the
adjacent ground level, or elevated above the adjacent ground level by less
than one foot and which is/are typically used or designed for use for outdoor
dining, recreational, entertainment or similar purposes.[Added 4-12-2017
by Ord. No. 3591]
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by the
Village, including but not limited to surety bonds, cash and letters of credit
under the circumstances specified in this chapter in lieu of a requirement
that certain improvements be made before the Planning Board or other
municipal agency approves a subdivision plat or site plan.
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:426
PERSON — Any person, individual, business entity, partnership, association,
corporation, limited liability corporation, company, organization or legal
entity of any kind or nature.
PLAT — The map or maps of a subdivision.
POOL, REGULATED — Any structure intended for swimming, recreational
bathing or wading that contains water over 24 inches deep, including inground,
aboveground and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas and fixed-in-place
wading pools.[Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
PORCH — An elevated structure attached to a building, consisting of a
platform or platforms and which may also include steps and/or a ramp,
and which typically provides ingress to and/or egress from the building,
and which may be used for outdoor relaxation and socializing.[Added
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46 et seq., prior to final approval after specific elements of
a development plan have been agreed upon by the Planning Board and the
applicant.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision and meeting the requirements of this chapter.
PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN — The preliminary development plan indicating
the proposed layout of the site and meeting the requirements of this
chapter.
PREMISES — A building or structure or a piece or tract of land or real
estate vacant or otherwise.
PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE — The primary or predominant use of any
lot. A principal structure is one devoted to the principal use.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — A place for the transaction of business where
reports are prepared, records are kept and services rendered, but where no
retail sales are offered and where no manufacturing, assembly, distribution
center or fabricating takes place. Office includes medical office.[Added
11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 3686; amended 12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3691]
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — Telephone and electric lines, poles,
equipment and structures, water or gas pipes, mains, valves or structures
or sewer pipes, valves or structures maintained, operated and conducted
for the service, convenience, necessity, health and welfare of the general
public, whether owned by any arm or creature of the local, state or federal
government or by any privately owned public utility corporation.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system comprising structures which,
operating alone or with other structures, results in the enclosure,
derivation, conveyance, transmission or distribution of water for potable or
domestic purposes to consumers in 20 or more dwellings or properties.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.78
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:427
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicular-type portable structure without
permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven and is primarily
designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreation and camping
purposes. Recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, travel
trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor
homes.[Added 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 3114]
REPORT OF THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION — A document
issued by the Historic Preservation Commission reporting to the
Construction Official on a preservation permit application for any alteration
or addition to a historic site or for a property within an historic district
based upon plans presented for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation
or alteration of property or the demolition, addition, removal, repair,
remodeling of any feature for any existing or new construction stating the
findings of fact and conclusions upon which the report is based.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — A contiguous or noncontiguous area to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan containing residential
housing units which have a common or public open space as an
appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL ZONES/DISTRICTS — Those zones set forth in the zoning
regulations of this chapter which are intended primarily for residential
development. In addition, those lots in the HC and T Zone Districts which
are vacant or used primarily for residential purposes, as well as those lots in
the nonresidential zones which are developed or proposed to be developed
entirely for residential uses permitted by ordinance or by variance shall be
considered to be in a residential zone.[Amended 6-13-2012 by Ord. No.
3343; 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3493]
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law or the alteration of any streets or the establishment of
any new streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or
recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to
combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
RETAIL SALES — An establishment engaged in the selling of goods or
merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption
and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. In no instance
shall bars selling alcohol or service stations be considered as retail
sales.[Added 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 3686; amended 12-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 3691]
RETAIL SERVICES — An establishment providing services, as opposed
to products, to the general public for personal or household use.[Added
11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 3686; amended 12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3691]
RETAINING WALL — A wall that is designed and constructed for the
purpose of supporting a change in elevation between one side of the wall
78.Editor's Note: The definition of "recharge," added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2983, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-7-2007 by Ord. No. 3035. See now
§ 190-83.
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:428
and the other side. Notwithstanding the foregoing, structures including but
not limited to curbs that support a change in elevation of eight inches
or less shall not be considered a retaining wall for the purposes of this
chapter.[Added 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2818]
ROAD STAND — A business engaged in the sale of food, soft drinks, ice
cream and other similar goods or confections which are so prepared and
served as to be intended for immediate consumption and in or from which
the customers are served while standing outside the confines of the
structure or building in which the business is conducted. The term "road
stand" includes the terms "snack bars," "dairy bars" and terms describing
similar establishments.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign extending above any part of the roof of any
structure.
SATELLITE DISH — A parabolic or dish-shaped antenna that is designed for
the purpose of receiving or transmitting radio waves.79[Added 10-13-1998
by Ord. No. 2643]
SIGN[Amended 12-11-2013 by Ord. No. 3400; 9-11-2019 by Ord. No.
3741] —
Any device, freestanding or attached to a building or structure or
erected, painted represented or reproduced upon any building or
structure, which displays, reproduces or includes any letter, logo, word,
name, number, model, insignia, design, device or representation used
for one or more of the following purposes:
(1) To identify the premises or occupant or owner of the premises;
To advertise any trade, business, profession, industry, service or
other activity;
(2)
To advertise any product or item to advertise the sale or rental or
use of all or any part of any premises, including that upon which it
is displayed;
(3)
To direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic other than state, county,
Village highway and roadway markers;
(4)
And shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration,
display, illustration, insignia or any representation used to
advertise or intended to advertise or promote the interests of any
person.
(5)
A.
The term "sign" shall not be construed to mean any sign in the interior
of any structure which is not visible from outside the structure. Official
flags of the United States, New Jersey or its political subdivisions, and
B.
79.Editor's Note: The definition of "sediment," added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2983, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-7-2007 by Ord. No. 3035. See now
§ 190-83.
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:429
SIGN MESSAGE — The letters, numbers, symbols or other graphic
representation of a sign used to identify or advertise a premises, occupant,
activity, product, service or to direct traffic, when such graphic
representation is distinguished from the sign structure.
SIGN, PRINCIPAL — A primary or predominant sign on the premises
displayed to identify the occupant thereof or the services rendered or a
product or item available therein or a trade, business or profession carried
on therein.
SIGN STRUCTURE — The physical structure of a sign, used for purposes
of support, ornamentation, background, illumination, ventilation or other
purposes, when such structure is distinguished from the sign message.
When not distinguished, the sign structure shall be deemed to include the
sign message.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling
unit in a structure containing at least three dwelling units in which each
separate dwelling unit is attached to other similar dwelling units by one or
more common walls, or portions thereof, extending from the foundation to
the roof and further provided each dwelling unit has a separate front and
rear or side entrance providing direct access for said unit to and from the
outdoors. Single-family attached residential dwelling units are also known
as "townhouse units."[Amended 8-9-2006 by Ord. No. 3015]
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown the
information required by this chapter, plus any other information reasonably
necessary and required in order to make an informed determination
pursuant to this chapter.
SITE PLAN COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three Planning Board
members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the purpose of
reviewing site plans for a report back to the entire Board and such other
duties relating to land development which may be conferred on this
Committee by the Board.80
STAIRS — A series of steps (a minimum two steps), including a landing
area.[Added 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3668]
STEP — Has a minimum tread depth of nine inches and a maximum depth
of 11 inches with a riser height of a minimum of four inches and a maximum
height of 8 1/4 inches.[Added 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3668]
STORAGE — The placement of any vehicle, boat, trailer, machine,
equipment or material upon the particular premises or property on a
regular or recurring basis.81
any poles upon which such flags are hung, shall not be construed a sign
for the purposes of this chapter.
80.Editor's Note: The definition of "soil," added 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2983, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-7-2007 by Ord. No. 3035. See now
§ 190-83.
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:430
STORY — That portion of a building between the surface of any one floor
and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there is no floor above it, then
that portion of the building included between the surface of any floor and
the ceiling or roof next above it. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a basement
shall be considered a story only if the finished surface of the floor above
the basement is:[Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 3083; 5-14-2008 by
Ord. No. 3120]
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the ceiling or roof next above it, and in which the ceiling area
at a height of seven feet above the floor is not more than one-third the area
of the next floor below.[Added 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120]
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, alley or
other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway; which is
shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; which is approved
by official action as provided by this chapter; or which is shown on a plat
duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer prior
to the appointment of the Planning Board and the grant to such Board of
the power to review plats; and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street
lines.
STREET SIDE LINE — The outermost line of the whole area devoted to
street purposes on either side thereof. "Street side line" is synonymous
with street right-of-way line, but generally throughout this chapter the
former is used in conjunction with existing streets and the latter is used in
conjunction with proposed streets.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision." The
following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this
chapter, if no new streets are created:
More than six feet above the average elevation of the finished ground
level at the foundation wall of the structure; or
A.
More than six feet above the average elevation of the finished ground
level for more than 50% of the total building perimeter; or
B.
C. More than 12 feet above the finished ground level at any point.
81.Editor's Note: The definitions of "stormwater" and "stormwater runoff," added 3-8-2006 by
Ord. No. 2983, which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 1-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 3035. See now § 190-83.
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:431
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A Committee of at least three Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the purpose
of reviewing subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and such other duties relating to land subdivision which may be conferred
on this Committee by the Board.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate permitting the
occupancy of any building or structure prior to the full completion, provided
that such portion or portions may be occupied safely prior to full completion
of the building or structure without endangering life or public welfare.
TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINER — A container designed for the
outdoor storage of personal property for temporary use and delivered and
removed by vehicle. Temporary storage containers shall include 1/2 cargo
containers with a maximum length of 26 feet. Temporary storage containers
shall not be utilized for operating a business. Temporary storage containers
shall hereinafter be referred to as "pods."[Added 1-16-2019 by Ord. No.
3695]
TRANSCRIPT — The typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
USABLE AREA — A rectangular area on a lot, located and having
dimensions as specified by the zone district regulations, encompassing the
buildable area and adjacent environs, and located as required by the zone
district regulations. In the case of a substandard lot having a rectangular
area with dimensions less than required, the usable area shall be construed
to be the largest rectangular area having dimensions less than or equal
to the required dimensions, encompassing the buildable area and adjacent
environs, and located as nearly as possible to that required by the zone
district regulations.[Added 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of the
zoning regulations, Article X of this chapter.
VILLAGE RESIDENT — A person who is domiciled in the Village of
Ridgewood.[Added 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2657]
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee
to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres
or larger in size.
A.
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Divisions of property by court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
C.
D. Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of
land owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found
and certified by the Zoning Officer to conform to the requirements of
this chapter and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or
parcels on the Tax Map or atlas of the Village.
E.
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:432
WATERCOURSE — Any natural swale, stream, brook or river which is
the natural course of storm- or running water through which water flows
ordinarily and frequently but not necessarily continuously. This definition
includes watercourses which have been artificially realigned or improved.
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as
"hydrophytic vegetation," as designated and approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection using a three-parameter approach
(i.e., hydrology, soils and vegetation).[Added 7-18-2001 by Ord. No.
2744]
WETLAND TRANSITION AREA — An area of land adjacent to a freshwater
wetland which minimizes adverse impacts on the wetland or serves as an
integral component of the wetlands ecosystem, as designated and approved
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.[Added
7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
WINDOW — Any opening in the exterior wall or roof of any structure for the
purpose of admitting air or light, whether or not covered with glass, plastic
or other coverings.
WINDOW AREA — The area of glass of the facade, including mullions
of a single window unit, located between structural elements of the
building.[Added 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3741]
WINDOW DISPLAY — A display of products, articles or merchandise
(including mannequins) in a retail window, designed to advertise or attract
consumers or customers. This can include photographs, artwork (with no
letters or numerals, unless on the product) and may not be any closer than
one foot from the glass.[Added 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3741]
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign as defined herein, that is located within four
feet of the window and is plainly visible from the exterior of the
building.[Added 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3741]
WINDOW SPACE — The aggregate square foot of all windows on any given
side and any given story of any structure, regardless of the angle or angles
at which they are set, and in computing window space, there shall be
included all portions of any door which, if part of any exterior wall, does
contain any window.
YARD, FRONT[Amended 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2862; 4-12-2017 by
Ord. No. 3591] —
On interior lots, that space extending across the full width of the lot and
located between the front lot line and the nearest principal building or
principal structure located on said lot.
A.
On corner lots, the two or more spaces extending across the full width
and/or depth of the lot, as applicable, and the nearest principal building
or principal structure located on said lot.
B.
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:433
YARD, REAR[Amended 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2862; 4-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 3591] —
YARD, SIDE[Amended 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2862; 4-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 3591] —
On through lots, the spaces defined as above for interior and corner
lots, and further defined as follows:
One front yard is a space extending across the full width of the lot
and located between the front lot line and the front of the principal
building, as determined by the Zoning Officer.
(1)
The other front yard(s) is/are a space or spaces extending across
the full width of the lot and located between the other front lot
line(s) and the minimum required front yard setback line from such
other front lot line(s).
(2)
C.
The depth of the front yard(s) shall be measured perpendicular to the
street right-of-way line.
D.
See yards illustration, below, for examples using various lot
configurations. For uncommon lot configurations, the Zoning Officer
shall determine the front, rear and side yards, as set forth in
§ 190-119A(5).
E.
On interior lots, the space extending across the full width of any lot and
lying between the rear lot line(s) and the nearest principal building or
principal structure located on said lot.
A.
On corner lots, a space extending between one front yard, the rear
lot line(s), the side lot line(s) located opposite the front yard, and the
nearest principal building or structure located on said lot.
B.
On through lots, the space located between the other front yard(s)
defined for through lots in "yard, front" above and the nearest principal
building or principal structure located on said lot.
C.
The depth of the rear yard shall be measured perpendicular to the rear
lot line.
D.
See yards illustration, below, for examples using various lot
configurations. For uncommon lot configurations, the Zoning Officer
shall determine the front, rear and side yards, as set forth in
§ 190-119A(5).
E.
On interior lots, the spaces located between the front yard, rear yard,
the side lot lines and the nearest principal building or principal
structure located on said lot.
A.
On corner lots, the space located between the front yard, rear yard, side
lot line and the nearest principal building or principal structure located
on said lot.
B.
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:434
ZONE — See "zoning district" below.
ZONING DISTRICT — An area delineated by this chapter within which
uniform regulations and requirements govern the use, placement, spacing
and size of land and buildings.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer which is
required by this chapter as a condition precedent to the commencement of
a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion
or installation of a structure or building and which acknowledges that
such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of the zoning
regulations or variance therefrom duly authorized by a Village agency
On through lots, the space(s) located between the first front yard
defined for through lots in "yard, front" above, the rear yard, the side lot
line(s) and the nearest principal building or principal structure located
on said lot.
C.
The depth of the side yard(s) shall be measured perpendicular to the
side lot line(s).
D.
See yards illustration, below, for examples using various lot
configurations. For uncommon lot configurations, the Zoning Officer
shall determine the front, rear and side yards, as set forth in
§ 190-119A(5).
FRONT, SIDE AND REAR YARDS-EXAMPLES
E.
§ 190-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-3
175:435
pursuant to the provisions of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.[Added 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 3109]
§ 190-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-3
175:436
ARTICLE III
Boards and Commissions
§ 190-4. Planning Board.
There is hereby established in the Village of Ridgewood a Planning Board
of nine members and up to two alternates, pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law.82
A. Membership; appointment. The Planning Board shall consist of four
classes of members, plus alternates, as follows:
(1) Class I: The Mayor of the Village, or the Mayor's designee in the
absence of the Mayor.
(2) Class II: One of the officials of the Village other than a member of
the Village Council, to be appointed by the Mayor.
(3) Class III: A member of the Village Council to be appointed by it.
(4) Class IV: Six Village residents to be appointed by the Village
Council. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal
office, position or employment, except that one such member may
be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic
Preservation Commission and one such member may be a member
of the Board of Education. For the purpose of this qualification,
membership on a municipal board or commission whose function is
advisory in nature, and the establishment of which is discretionary
and not required by statute, shall not be considered the holding of
municipal office. [Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2657]
(5) One member of the Environmental Commission, if one exists, shall
be a Class IV member, unless there is among the Class IV or
alternate members of the Planning Board both a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission
and a member of the Board of Education, in which case the member
common to the Planning Board and the Environmental Commission
shall be deemed a Class II member of the Planning Board.
(6) There shall be up to two alternate members of the Planning Board,
appointed by the Village Council. Alternate members shall meet the
qualifications of Class IV members of the Planning Board. If more
than one alternate member is appointed, they shall be designated
at the time of appointment by the Village Council as "Alternate No.
1" and "Alternate No. 2."
B. Terms of office. The terms of office for Planning Board members shall
be as follows:
82.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-4 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-4
175:437
(1) The term of the Class I member shall correspond to the Mayor's
official tenure, or if the member is Mayor's designee in the absence
of the Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor
during the Mayor's official tenure.
(2) The terms of the Class II and Class III members shall be for one
year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of
office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is
also a member of the Environmental Commission.
(3) The term of a Class II or Class IV member who is also a member of
the Environmental Commission shall be for three years or
terminate at the completion of his term of office as a member of the
Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first.
(4) The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or Board of Education shall terminate when he
is no longer a member of such other body or at the completion of
his Class IV term, whichever occurs first.
(5) The terms of all Class IV members shall be for four years, except as
provided otherwise herein.
(6) The terms of alternate members shall be for two years, except that
if more than one alternate member is appointed, the terms of the
alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one
alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided, however,
that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members first
appointed exceed two years.
(7) All terms shall run from the July 1 preceding the date on which the
appointment is made.
(8) Nothing contained herein shall affect the terms of any present
members of the Planning Board, all of whom shall continue as
members until the completion of the terms for which they were
appointed.
C. Planning Board committees. The Planning Board Chairman may appoint
from among the members of the Board a Subdivision and Site Plan
Committee to review, report and make recommendations to the full
Board regarding subdivision and site plan applications pending before
the Board. The Planning Board Chairman may also appoint from among
the members of the Board such other committees as the Chairman may
deem advisable in carrying out the functions of the Planning Board.
D. Powers and duties of the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall
follow the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law83 and this chapter,
and accordingly shall have authority to:
83.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-4
175:438
§ 190-5. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
There is hereby established in the Village of Ridgewood a Zoning Board of
Adjustment of seven members and up to two alternates, pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law.84
(1) Prepare, adopt and amend a Master Plan or component part
thereof.
(2) Exercise control over and review of subdivisions, site plans and
conditional uses, including certain variances and building permits.
Notwithstanding the above, the Planning Board shall not have the
power to review and approve site plans, subdivisions or conditional
uses when such applications involve a "D" variance.
(3) Perform informal review of concept plans for development as
provided by this chapter.
(4) Make recommendations to the Village Council concerning adoption
or amendment of development regulations and an Official Map.
(5) Direct the issuance of building permits for buildings or structures
in certain areas shown on an Official Map, when such building
permits also require subdivision, site plan or conditional use
approval.
(6) Direct the issuance of building permits for buildings or structures
on a lot not related to a street, when such building permits also
require subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval.
(7) Make recommendations to the Village Council and/or any housing,
parking, highway, special district or other authority, redevelopment
agency, school board or other similar public agency, state, county
or municipal, concerning the relationship of capital projects to the
Master Plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31.
(8) Prepare a capital improvements program, if authorized by the
Village Council.
(9) Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulation.
(10) Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
(11) Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the Village Council for the aid and
assistance of the Village Council or other agencies or officers.
A. Membership; appointment. Qualifications for and appointment as
members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be as follows:
84.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-4 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-5
175:439
(1) No member may hold any elective office or position under the
Village.
(2) All members shall be citizens of the Village of Ridgewood.
(3) All members shall be appointed by the Village Council.
(4) If more than one alternate member is appointed, they shall be
designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" by the Village
Council at the time of appointment.
B. Terms of office. The terms of office for Zoning Board of Adjustment
members shall be as follows:
(1) The terms of regular members shall be for four years.
(2) The terms of alternate members shall be for two years, except that
if more than one alternate member is appointed, the terms of the
alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one
alternate member shall expire in any one year; provided, however,
that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate members first
appointed exceed two years.
(3) All terms shall run from the July 1 preceding the date on which the
appointment is made.
(4) Nothing contained herein shall affect the terms of any present
members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, all of whom shall
continue as members until the completion of the terms for which
they were appointed.
C. Powers and duties of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall follow the provisions of the Municipal Land
Use Law85 and this chapter and accordingly shall have authority to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by the Zoning Officer based on or made in the enforcement of the
zoning regulations.
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
zoning regulations or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which the Board is authorized to pass by any zoning
regulation or Official Map regulation, in accordance with this
chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law.86
(3) Hear and decide requests for variances. Notwithstanding the
above, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not have the power to
hear and decide variances if the application also requires
85.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
86.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-5
175:440
§ 190-6. Historic Preservation Commission.
There is hereby reconstituted a Commission in the Village of Ridgewood to
be known as "The Ridgewood Historic Preservation Commission," pursuant
to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 et seq. The Commission shall consist
of seven regular members and one alternate member, all of whom shall
serve without compensation.
subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval, unless the
application involves a "D" variance.
(4) Exercise control over and review of subdivisions, site plans and
conditional uses, only when such applications involve a "D"
variance.
(5) Direct the issuance of building permits for buildings or structures
in certain areas shown on an Official Map, unless such building
permits also require subdivision, site plan or conditional use
approval.
(6) Direct the issuance of building permits for buildings or structures
on a lot not related to a street, unless such building permits also
require subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval.
(7) Prepare at least once a year a report for the Village Council and
Planning Board, based upon its review of its decisions on
applications and appeals for variances since any previous report.
The report shall be adopted by resolution of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and shall comment on the zoning regulations which
were the subject of variance requests and shall make
recommendations for any amendments to the zoning regulations
that the Board may deem appropriate based upon prior variance
applications.
A. Membership; appointment. The Mayor shall appoint all members of the
Commission and shall designate at the time of appointment the regular
members by class and the alternate member. At the time of
appointment, members shall be designated by the classes described
below. Of the seven regular members, at least three members shall be
of Classes A and B. At least one member shall be of Class A and at least
one member shall be of Class B.
(1) Class A: a person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside
the Village.
(2) Class B: a person who is knowledgeable or with a demonstrated
interest in local history and who may reside outside the Village.
(3) Class C: citizens of the Village who shall hold no other municipal
office, position or employment except for membership on the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
§ 190-5 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-6
175:441
(4) Alternate member. The alternate member shall meet the
qualifications of Class C members.
B. Terms of office. The terms of office for Historic Preservation
Commission members shall be as follows:
(1) The terms of the members first appointed to the reconstituted
Commission shall be so determined that to the greatest practical
extent the expiration of the terms shall be distributed, in the case of
regular members, evenly over the first four years after their
appointment, and in the case of alternate members, evenly over the
first two years after their appointment, provided that the initial
term of no regular member shall exceed four years and that the
initial term of no alternate member shall exceed two years.
Thereafter, the term of a regular member shall be four years; the
term of an alternate member shall be two years.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the term of any
member common to the Historic Preservation Commission and the
Planning Board shall be for the term of membership on the
Planning Board; and the term of any member common to the
Historic Preservation Commission and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be for the term of membership on the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
C. Responsibilities of Commission.
(1) The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the following
duties and responsibilities:
(a) To identify, record and maintain a system for survey and
inventory of all buildings, sites, places, landmarks and
structures of historical or architectural significance based on
the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for
Archaeology and Historic Preservation (Standards and
Guidelines for Identification); and to aid the public in
understanding their worth, methods of preservation,
techniques of gathering documentation and related matters.
(b) To advise the Planning Board on the relationship of the Historic
Preservation Plan Element of the Master Plan to other Master
Plan elements.
(c) To advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites
and landmarks in the recommended Capital Improvement
Program.
(d) To advise the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
on applications for development pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-110.
§ 190-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-6
175:442
§ 190-7. General provisions applicable to Planning Board, Zoning
Board of Adjustment and Historic Preservation Commission.
(e) To provide written reports pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111 on
the application of the zoning provisions concerning historic
preservation.
(f) To carry out such other advisory, educational and informational
functions as will promote historic preservation in the Village.
(2) The Commission shall have all of the responsibilities detailed in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-109 and as the same may hereafter be amended
and supplemented.
D. Member participation. The following provisions shall govern
participation of members of the Historic Preservation Commission, in
addition to any other provisions that may apply by law:
(1) Conflict of interest. No regular, alternate or temporary member
shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he has, either
directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Unless a
member resides or owns property within 200 feet of property which
is the subject of an application, mere residence in a designated
historic district and/or ownership of a designated historic site or a
nondesignated site within a district shall not be deemed a personal
or financial interest.
(2) Participation of alternate members. Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of regular members. A
vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote
instead of an alternate member.
A. Vacancies. A vacancy in any membership position, including alternate
members, occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only. Appointment of members to fill vacant
positions shall be as above provided.
B. Removal of members. Any member or alternate member, other than the
Class I member of the Planning Board, after a public hearing if
requested by the member, may be removed by the Village Council for
cause. Such hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the dictates of due
process. The accused member shall receive at least 30 days written
notice of the hearing, which notice shall include the specific charges
made. The accused member shall have the right to counsel. In the event
that any member(s) of the Council have brought the charges, said
Council member(s) shall not participate in the removal hearing or
action.
C. Officers. Each Board or Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson from their members, provided that in the case of the
Planning Board, only Class IV members may hold such positions, and
§ 190-6 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-7
175:443
§ 190-8. Additional provisions applicable to Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
provided further that in the case of the Planning Board and the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, no alternate members shall hold such positions.
Each Board and Commission shall select a Secretary, who may or
may not be a member or alternate member or municipal employee.
[Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2657]
D. Attorney, other experts and staff. There is hereby created the positions
of Attorney for the Planning Board and Attorney for the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. Each Board may employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel to fill such positions, who shall not be the
Village Attorney. The Historic Preservation Commission shall obtain its
legal counsel from the Village Attorney at the rate of compensation
determined by the Village Council, unless the Village Council by
appropriation provides for separate legal counsel for the Commission.
Each Board or Commission may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of a licensed professional planning consultant or such
other additional experts, staff and services as it may deem necessary,
not exceeding, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the Village Council for the Board's or Commission's use.
E. Funding of expenses. The Village Council shall make provision in its
budget and appropriate funds for the expenses of the Planning Board,
the Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Historic Preservation
Commission.
A. Rules and regulations. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall adopt and may amend reasonable rules and
regulations not inconsistent with this chapter, the Municipal Land Use
Law87 or with any applicable ordinance for the administration of their
functions, powers and duties. A copy of the rules shall be maintained in
the office of the Board Secretary and shall be furnished to any person
upon request. A reasonable fee may be charged for provision of a copy
of the rules.
B. Meetings. The following provisions shall apply to the meetings of the
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(1) Schedule of meetings; special meetings. Each Board shall by its
rules fix the time and place for holding its regular meetings.
Regular meetings of each Board shall be scheduled not less than
once a month and shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for
lack of applications for development to process. The schedule of
meetings shall be filed with the Village Clerk, posted upon the
Village bulletin board and sent to two newspapers with circulation
in the Village, one of which shall be the official newspaper of the
87.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-7 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-8
175:444
Village. Each Board may provide for special meetings at the call of
the Chairman or on the request of any two of its members.
(2) Meetings open to public; executive sessions. All regular meetings
and special meetings shall be open to the public except to the
extent that the public may be excluded from any such meeting or
portion thereof in accordance with requirements of the Open Public
Meetings Act (P.L. 1975, c. 231, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.). Meetings
shall be held on notice to the Board members and the public in
accordance with this chapter and the Open Public Meetings Act. An
executive session for the purpose of discussing and studying any
matters to come before the agency shall not be deemed a regular or
special meeting within the meaning of this chapter.
(3) Quorum; conflict of interest; appointment of additional members.
No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present. No regular, alternate or temporary member shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which he has, either directly or
indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
(a) If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular
or alternate members is prohibited from acting on a matter due
to a conflict of interest, regular members of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall be called upon to serve, for that matter
only, as temporary members of the Planning Board. Regular
members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be called in
order of seniority of continuous service to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. If a choice has to be made between regular
members of equal seniority, the Chairman of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall make the choice. There shall be called only
the minimum number of members of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment as are necessary to establish a quorum of the
Planning Board to act on the matter.
(b) If the Zoning Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any
of its regular or alternate members is prohibited from acting
on a matter due to a conflict of interest, Class IV members of
the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that
matter only, as temporary members of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be
called in order of seniority of continuous service to the
Planning Board. If a choice has to be made between Class IV
members of equal seniority, the Chairman of the Planning
Board shall make the choice. There shall be called only the
minimum number of Class IV members of the Planning Board
as are necessary to establish a quorum of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment to act on the matter.
(4) Majority vote required. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote
of the members of the Board present at the meeting, except as
§ 190-8 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-8
175:445
otherwise provided by this chapter and the Municipal Land Use
Law.88
(5) Participation of alternate members. Alternate members may
participate in all matters but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of regular members of any class. Participation of
alternate members shall not be deemed to increase the size of the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
[Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2657]
(6) Minutes. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept
and shall include the names of the persons appearing and
addressing the Board and of the persons appearing by attorney, the
action taken by the Board, the findings, if any, made by it and
reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be available for
public inspection during normal business hours at the office of the
Board Secretary after their approval by the Board. Any interested
party shall have the right to compel production of the minutes for
use as evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the subject
matter of such minutes. Such interested party may be charged a
reasonable fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use.
C. Exclusive authority of Boards. Any power expressly authorized by this
chapter or the Municipal Land Use Law89 to the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not be exercised by any other body,
except as otherwise provided by the Municipal Land Use Law.
88.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
89.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-8 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-8
175:446
ARTICLE IV
Hearings
§ 190-9. When required.
Public hearings shall be required for the following:
§ 190-10. Rules; hearing dates.
The agency holding the hearing shall make the rules governing such
hearings. Upon the filing of an appeal or complete application, the
appropriate agency shall schedule a hearing date in accordance with its
rules.
§ 190-11. Notice of hearing; when required.
Public notice as specified herein shall be given for all hearings involving the
following:
A. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable, shall
hold a hearing on each application for development.
B. The Planning Board shall hold a hearing on any adoption, revision or
amendment of the Master Plan.
C. The Planning Board or Village Council, as applicable, shall hold a
hearing on any adoption, revision or amendment of the Capital
Improvement Program.
D. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold a hearing on appeal from the
action of the Construction Official or Zoning Officer concerning the
zoning regulations, or other administrative appeal within its
jurisdiction.
E. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold a hearing on every request
for an interpretation of the zoning regulations or request pertaining to a
special question within the Board's jurisdiction.
F. The Village Council shall hold a hearing on any adoption, revision or
amendment of this chapter or any other development regulation.
G. The Village Council shall hold a hearing on appeal from the action of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment approving an application for development
involving a "D" variance.
A. Any application for development which involves a request for a variance
or any appeal specified in §§ 190-29, 190-30, 190-31 and 190-32.
B. An application for preliminary site plan approval, exclusive of a minor
site plan.
C. An application for preliminary major subdivision approval.
D. The adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan.
§ 190-9 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-11
175:447
§ 190-12. Notice of hearings for development applications.
The following provisions shall apply to public notice of hearings for
development applications:
E. The adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter or any other
development regulation.
F. The adoption, revision or amendment of the Capital Improvement
Program.
G. Any appeal to the Village Council from the action of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment approving an application for development involving a "D"
variance.
H. An extension of approvals for five or more years under §§ 190-46D and
190-47K. [Added 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2657]
I. Modification or elimination of a significant condition or conditions in a
memorializing resolution in any situation wherein the application for
development for which the memorializing resolution is proposed for
adoption required public notice. [Added 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2657]
A. Content. Public notice of hearings for development applications,
including variance applications, shall state the following:
(1) The date, time and place of the hearing and which board is to hear
the application;
(2) The nature of the matters to be considered; provided that when
conditional use approval, variance relief or the issuance of a permit
pursuant to this chapter is requested, the notice shall include
reference to the request for conditional use approval, variance or
direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be;
(3) An identification of the property proposed for development by
street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as
shown on the current tax duplicate in the Village Tax Assessor's
office; and
(4) The location and times at which any maps and documents for which
approval is sought are available for inspection in the office of the
Board Secretary.
B. Service of notice; parties entitled to notice. Public notice shall be given
by the applicant. Notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date
of the hearing. The date of the hearing shall not count as one of the 10
days. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the Village, if there is one, or in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village. Notice shall also be given to members of the
public as follows:
§ 190-11 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-12
175:448
(1) Notice of hearing shall be given to the owners, as shown on the
current tax duplicates, of all real property located within the state
and within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is the
subject of such hearing. This requirement shall be deemed satisfied
by notice to the condominium association, in the case of any unit
owner whose unit has a unit above or below it, or horizontal
property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has
an apartment above or below it. Notice shall be given as follows:
(a) Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property
owner as shown on said current tax duplicate, or his agent in
charge of the property; or mailing a copy thereof by certified
mail to the property owner at his address as shown on said
current tax duplicate.
(b) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner.
(c) Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its
President, a Vice President, Secretary or other person
authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on
behalf of the corporation.
(d) Notice to a condominium association, because of its ownership
of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of the
property which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in
the same manner as to a corporation without further notice to
unit owners, co-owners or homeowners on account of such
common elements or areas.
(2) Notice of hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality.
(3) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of hearings on applications for development
involving property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed
road shown on the Official County Map or on the County Master
Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within 200 feet of a
municipal boundary.
(4) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development involving property adjacent to a state highway.
(5) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
State Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. The notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Board Secretary pursuant to the
checklists contained in Article VIII of this chapter.
§ 190-12 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-12
175:449
§ 190-13. Notice of hearings for the Master Plan.
The following provisions shall apply to public notice of hearings for
adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan:
(6) Notice of hearings on an application for development involving a
major subdivision or preliminary site plan, excluding minor site
plans, shall be given to a public utility, cable television company or
local utility which possesses a right-of-way or easement within the
Village and which has registered with the Village, in accordance
with the Municipal Land Use Law,90 by serving a copy of the notice
on the person whose name appears on the registration form on
behalf of the public utility, cable television company or local utility
or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the person whose
name appears on the registration form at the address shown on
that form.
C. Request for certified list of property owners within 200 feet. Upon
written request of an applicant, the Board Secretary shall request the
Tax Assessor to make and certify, within seven days, a list from the
current tax duplicates of the names and addresses of owners to whom
the applicant is required to give notice. In addition, the Tax Assessor
shall include on the list the names, addresses and positions of those
persons who, not less than seven days prior to the date on which the
applicant requested the list, have registered to receive notice as a
public utility, cable television company or local utility. The applicant
shall be entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list, and
failure to give notice to any owner or to any public utility, cable
television company or local utility not on the list shall not invalidate any
hearing or proceeding.
D. Effect of mailing notice. Any notice made by certified mail as stipulated
above shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
E. Proof of service of notice. The applicant for development shall file an
affidavit of proof of service with the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as appropriate, at least two days prior to the date
of the hearing for which notice is required.
A. Content. Public notice of hearings for adoption, revision or amendment
of the Master Plan shall state the following:
(1) The date, time and place of the hearing;
(2) The nature of the matters to be considered; and
(3) The location and times at which any maps and documents which
are the subject of said adoption, revision or amendment are
available for inspection in the office of the Board Secretary.
90.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-12 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-13
175:450
§ 190-14. Notice of hearings for development regulations or Capital
Improvement Program.
The following provisions shall apply to public notice of hearings for
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, other development
regulations or the Capital Improvement Program:
B. Service of notice; parties entitled to notice. Notice shall be given by the
Planning Board at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. The
date of the hearing shall not count as one of the 10 days. Public notice
shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the Village, if
there is one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the Village.
Notice shall also be given to the following parties as specified below:
(1) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Clerk of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoption,
revision or amendment of a Master Plan involving property situated
within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality.
(2) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of the Village Master Plan. Such notice shall include a
copy of any such proposed Master Plan or any revision or
amendment thereto.
(3) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of the adoption, revision or amendment of
the Village Master Plan. Such notice shall be given not more than
30 days after the date of such adoption, revision or amendment and
shall include a copy of the Master Plan or revision or amendment
thereto.
C. Effect of mailing notice. Any notice made by certified mail as stipulated
above shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
A. Content.
(1) Public notice of hearings for adoption, revision or amendment of
this chapter, other development regulation or the Capital
Improvement Program shall provide the following:
(a) A statement of the date, time and place of the hearing;
(b) A statement of the nature of the matters to be considered; and
(c) The location and times at which any maps and documents
which are the subject of said adoption, revision or amendment
are available for inspection in the office of the Village Clerk.
(2) In the case of zone district classification or boundary changes
requiring notice, the notice shall also provide an identification of
the affected zoning districts and proposed boundary changes, if
any, by street names, common names or other identifiable
§ 190-13 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-14
175:451
landmarks and by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on
the current tax duplicate in the Village Tax Assessor's office.
(3) In the case of notice to the County Planning Board, a copy of the
proposed or adopted development regulation, Official Map, Capital
Improvement Program or any proposed or adopted revision or
amendment thereto, as the case may be, shall be included with the
notice.
B. Service of notice; parties entitled to notice. Notice shall be given by the
Village Council at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. The
date of the hearing shall not count as one of the 10 days. Notice shall be
given to the following parties as specified below:
(1) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Clerk of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoption,
revision or amendment of any development regulation involving
property situated within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality.
(2) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of any development regulation.
(3) Notice of a hearing on an amendment to the zoning regulations,
Article X of this chapter, which amendment proposes a change to
the classification or boundaries of a zoning district, exclusive of
classification or boundary changes recommended in a periodic
general reexamination of the Master Plan by the Planning Board
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-89, shall be given in the following
manner:
(a) Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property
owner as shown on said current tax duplicate, or his agent in
charge of the property, or mailing a copy thereof by certified
mail and regular mail to the property owner at his address as
shown on said current tax duplicate.
(b) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner.
(c) Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its
President, a Vice President, Secretary or other person
authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on
behalf of the corporation.
(d) Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property
regime, community trust or homeowners' association, because
of its ownership of common elements or areas located within
200 feet of the boundaries of the district which is the subject of
the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a
corporation in addition to notice to unit owners, co-owners or
homeowners on account of such common elements or areas.
§ 190-14 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-14
175:452
§ 190-15. Filing deadline for maps and documents.
Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall
be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days before the
date of the hearing, during normal business hours in the office of the
Board Secretary. The applicant may produce other documents, records
or testimony at the hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement the
previously filed maps and documents.
§ 190-16. Witnesses; evidence.
The following provisions shall govern the testimony of witnesses and
production of evidence at hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter:
(e) The Village Clerk shall execute affidavits of proof of service of
the notices required herein for the hearings on zoning district
classification or boundary changes and shall keep the affidavits
on file along with the proof of publication of the notice of the
required public hearing on the proposed zoning ordinance
change. Costs of the notice provision shall be the responsibility
of the proponent of the amendment.
(4) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of the adoption, revision or amendment of
the Village Capital Improvement Program or Official Map. Such
notice shall be given not more than 30 days after the date of such
adoption, revision or amendment.
C. Effect of mailing notice. Any notice made by certified mail as stipulated
above shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
A. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may designate
shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence,
including witnesses and documents presented by the parties. The
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L. 1953, c.
38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
B. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer. The right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
C. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the agency may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence.
§ 190-14 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-17
175:453
§ 190-17. Voting procedures.
The following voting procedures shall apply for public hearings held
pursuant to this chapter. Nothing herein shall be construed to contravene
any act providing for procedures for governing bodies.
§ 190-18. Record of proceedings. [Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord. No.
2657]
The Village agency conducting the hearing shall provide for the verbatim
recording of the proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or
electronic means. The agency shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate
recording in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at his expense,
pursuant to the fees established by this chapter. Transcripts shall be
certified, in writing, by the transcriber to be accurate.
§ 190-19. Record of decision.
The Village agency shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon in each decision on any application for development and shall
reduce the decision to writing. The Village agency shall provide the findings
and conclusions through either a resolution adopted at a meeting held
within the time period provided in this chapter for action by the Village
agency on the application for development or a memorializing resolution
adopted at a meeting held not later than 45 days after the date of the
meeting at which the Village agency voted to grant or deny approval. The
following provisions shall apply to memorializing resolutions:
A. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members present at
the hearing, except as otherwise provided by this chapter and the
Municipal Land Use Law.91
B. A member of the Village agency who was absent for one or more of the
meetings at which a hearing was held or was not a member of the
Village agency at that time shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon
which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from
one or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such member has
available to him the transcript or recording of all of the hearings from
which he was absent or was not a member, and certifies, in writing, to
the agency that he has read such transcript or listened to such
recording. [Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord. No. 2657]
C. Failure of a motion to receive the number of votes required to approve
an application for development shall be deemed an action denying the
application.
A. Only the members of the Village agency who voted for the action taken
may vote on the memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of
such members present at the meeting at which the resolution is
91.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-17 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-19
175:454
§ 190-20. Mailing, filing and publication of decision.
Following adoption of the resolution of the Village agency, the resolution
shall be mailed, filed and published as follows:
presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution. If
only one member who voted for the action attends the meeting at
which the resolution is presented for adoption, the resolution may be
adopted upon the vote of that member. [Amended 3-9-1999 by Ord.
No. 2657]
B. An action to deny resulting from the failure of a motion to approve an
application shall be memorialized by resolution as provided above, with
those members voting against the motion for approval being the
members eligible to vote on the memorializing resolution.
C. The vote on any memorializing resolution shall be deemed to be a
memorialization of the action of the Village agency and not to be an
action of the municipal agency; however, the date of the adoption of the
resolution shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes of the
mailings, filings and publications required in § 190-20.
D. If the Village agency fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing
resolution as hereinabove specified, any interested party may apply to
the Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling the
municipal agency to reduce its findings and conclusions to writing
within a stated time, and the cost of the application to Superior Court,
including attorney's fees, shall be assessed against the Village.
A. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Village agency within 10
days of the date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to
his attorney, without separate charge, and to all who request a copy of
the decision, for a fee as specified in Article V of this chapter.
B. A copy of the decision shall also be filed by the Village agency in the
office of the Board Secretary. The Board Secretary shall make a copy of
such filed decision available to any interested party for a fee as
specified in Article V of this chapter, and available for public inspection
at his office during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
C. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Village, if there is one, or in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Board Secretary, provided that nothing contained in this chapter shall
be construed as preventing the applicant from arranging such
publication if he so desires. The Village shall instruct the newspaper to
charge the applicant the cost of said publication. The published notice
shall include a statement advising that copies of the resolution of the
Board have been filed in the office of the Board and in the office of the
Village Clerk and that such copies are available for inspection at said
offices.
§ 190-19 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-20
175:455

ARTICLE V
Fees, Deposits, Guaranties and Other Payments
§ 190-21. Filing fees for development applications or appeals.
The following fees shall be required to be filed with any application, appeal
or other matter pursuant to this chapter. Fees shall be nonrefundable and
shall be paid by cashier's check, certified check, bank money order or
cash to the Board Secretary. The filing fee shall be used to defray the
administrative costs of processing the application or appeal. In the case of
proposals requiring a combination of approvals, such as subdivision, site
plan and/or variance(s), the applicant shall pay a fee equal to the sum of the
fees for each required approval.
§ 190-22. Schedule of fees. [Amended 10-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2802]
In addition to those established elsewhere in this chapter, all applicants
or appellants to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, Building
Inspector or Village Council shall pay the applicable fees as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees. The filing fee for a concept plan for development shall
be credited against the filing fee otherwise required for subdivision or site
plan approval after review by the Planning Board of the concept plan. In
addition, a special fee to fund affordable housing activities in the Village
shall be required of certain development applications as set forth in § 145-8.
§ 190-23. Payment for professional services. [Amended 5-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 3059]
The Chief Financial Officer of the Village shall pay professionals for all
services rendered to the Village or approving authority for review of
applications for development, review and preparation of documents,
inspection of improvements or other purposes under the provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law and this chapter. At the time of filing of an
application for development, appeal or other matter pursuant to this
chapter, the applicant shall pay to the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment
or the Planning Board, as applicable, a deposit, in accordance with the
schedule in Subsection A below, to be used to reimburse the Village for said
professional services. Deposits shall be paid by cashier’s check, certified
check, bank money order or cash and shall be placed by the Village in an
escrow account if required pursuant to § 190-26. In the case of proposals
requiring a combination of approvals, such as subdivision, site plan and/
or variance(s), the applicant shall deposit an amount equal to the sum
of the deposits required for each application. Notwithstanding the above,
if the Board determines that professional services are not required in
order to process and review the application, no deposit shall be required.
Professionals whose services may be subject to reimbursement from escrow
accounts established pursuant to this chapter may include, but are not
necessarily limited to, legal counsel for the Board of Adjustment, Planning
Board or Village, as applicable, professional engineers and inspectors,
professional planners, architects, landscape architects, traffic consultants,
§ 190-21 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-23
175:457
environmental consultants, surveyors, real estate appraisers and financial
analysts, but shall not include the administrative or clerical staff of such
professionals.
A. Schedule of deposits. The initial deposit for payment of professional
services shall be as set forth on the schedule set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees, provided that if the Board Secretary determines that a greater
initial deposit than indicated on the schedule is necessary to reimburse
the anticipated cost of professional services on a particular application,
such as circulation-intensive sites requiring the services of a traffic
engineering consultant, the applicant shall be required to deposit said
greater amount.
B. Depletion of deposits. If an escrow account or deposit contains
insufficient funds to enable the Village or approving authority to
perform required application reviews or improvement inspections, the
Chief Financial Officer of the Village shall provide the applicant with a
notice of the insufficient escrow or deposit balance. In order for work to
continue on the development or the application, the applicant shall
within a reasonable time period post a deposit to the account in an
amount to be agreed upon by the Village or approving authority and the
applicant. In the interim, any required health and safety inspections
shall be made and charged back against the replenishment of funds.
C. Failure to maintain adequate deposit. No application shall be deemed
complete and no formal action shall be taken by the Board until the
initial deposit required by Subsection A above has been submitted. If
the funds required by Subsection B above for professional services are
not deposited in a timely manner, the Board Secretary shall notify the
board having jurisdiction over the application. No further action shall
be taken on the application unless the deposits have been made by the
applicant as required above. In the event that the time for action by the
Board or any extension thereof as required by this chapter shall expire
prior to the payment of the required deposits, the Board may, at its
discretion, dismiss the application.
D. Eligible charges against deposit. All professional charges for review of
an application for development review and preparation of documents or
inspection of improvements shall be reasonable and necessary, given
the status and progress of the application or construction. The
following provisions shall apply:
(1) Application review and inspection charges shall be limited only to
professional charges for review of applications, review and
preparation of documents and inspections of developments under
construction and review by outside consultants when an
application is of a nature beyond the scope of the expertise of the
professionals normally utilized by the Village.
(2) Review fees shall be charged only in connection with an application
for development presently pending before the approving authority
§ 190-23 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-23
175:458
or upon review of compliance with conditions of approval or review
of requests for modification or amendment made by the applicant.
A professional shall not review items which are subject to approval
by any state governmental agency and not under Village
jurisdiction except to the extent consultation with a state agency is
necessary due to the effect of state approvals in the subdivision or
site plan.
(3) Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on a
subdivision or site plan or required by an approving resolution.
Professionals inspecting improvements under construction shall
charge only for inspections that are reasonably necessary to check
the progress and quality of the work and such inspections shall be
reasonably based on the approved development plans and
documents.
(4) The only costs that shall be added to any such charges in
Subsection D(1) through (3) above shall be actual out-of-pocket
expenses of any such professionals or consultants including normal
and typical expenses incurred in processing applications and
inspecting improvements.
(5) The Village or approving authority shall not bill the applicant or
charge any escrow account or deposit authorized herein for any
Village clerical or administrative functions, overhead expenses,
meeting room charges or any other Village costs and expenses
except as provided for in this section, nor shall a Village
professional add any such charges to his bill.
(6) If the Village retains a different professional or consultant in the
place of the professional originally responsible for development
application review or inspection of improvements, the Village or
approving authority shall be responsible for all time and expenses
of the new professional to become familiar with the application or
the project, and the Village or approving authority shall not bill the
applicant or charge the deposit or the escrow account for any such
services.
E. Rates of payment for professional services. If the salary, staff support
and overhead for a professional are provided by the Village, the hourly
rate charged to the deposit from said professional shall be at 200% of
the sum of the products resulting from multiplying the hourly base
salary, which shall be established annually by ordinance, of each of the
professionals by the number of hours spent by the respective
professional upon review of the application for development or
inspection of the developer’s improvements, as the case may be. For
other professionals, the charge shall be at the same rate as all other
work of the same nature by the professional for the Village when fees
are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants or developers.
Rates for professional services shall be in accordance with a schedule
of professional fees filed annually with the Secretary of the Board of
§ 190-23 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-23
175:459
Adjustment or Planning Board, as applicable, and maintained in the
office of the Village Clerk for public inspection. [Amended 6-9-2010
by Ord. No. 3251]
F. Vouchers for payment of professional services. Each payment charged
to a deposit for the review of applications, review and preparation of
documents and inspection of improvements shall be pursuant to a
voucher from the professional. The processing of vouchers shall be in
accordance with the following:
(1) The voucher shall identify the personnel performing the service
and, for each date the services are performed, the hours spent to
one-fourth-hour increments, the hourly rate and the expenses
incurred.
(2) All professionals shall submit vouchers to the chief financial officer
of the Village on a monthly basis in accordance with the schedules
and procedures established by the Chief Financial Officer of the
Village.
(3) If the services are provided by a Village employee, the Village
employee shall prepare and submit to the Chief Financial Officer of
the Village a statement containing the same information as
required on a voucher, on a monthly basis.
(4) The professional shall send an informational copy of all vouchers or
statements submitted to the Chief Financial Officer of the Village
simultaneously to the applicant.
(5) The Chief Financial Officer of the Village shall prepare and send to
the applicant a statement which shall include an accounting of
funds listing all deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the
cumulative balance of the escrow account. This information shall
be provided on a quarterly basis, if monthly charges are $1,000 or
less, or on a monthly basis if monthly charges exceed $1,000.
G. Appeals of charges. An applicant shall notify in writing the Village
council, with copies to the Chief Financial Officer of the Village, the
approving authority and the professional, whenever the applicant
disputes the charges made by a professional for service rendered to the
Village in reviewing applications for development, review and
preparation of documents, inspection of improvements or other charges
made pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.92 The following shall
apply:
(1) An applicant shall file an appeal within 45 days from receipt of the
informational copy of the professionals voucher required by
§ 102-23F(4), except that if the professional has not supplied the
applicant with an informational copy of the voucher, then the
applicant shall file his appeal within 60 days from receipt of the
92.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-23 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-23
175:460
§ 190-24. Inspection fees.
The developer shall reimburse the Village for all reasonable inspection fees
paid to the Director of Public Works for the inspection of improvements
required pursuant to this chapter. Prior to the initiation of any construction
approved pursuant to this chapter, the developer shall deposit with the
Village statement of activity against the deposit or escrow account
required by § 102-23F(5).
(2) The Village Council or its designee shall within a reasonable time
period attempt to remediate any disputed charges.
(3) If the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, the
applicant may appeal to the county Construction Board of Appeals
established under Section 9 of P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-127) any charge to an escrow account or a deposit by any
Village professional or consultant. An applicant or his authorized
agent shall submit the appeal, in writing, to the County
Construction Board of Appeals. The applicant or his authorized
agent shall simultaneously send a copy of the appeal to the Village,
approving authority and any professional whose charge is the
subject of the appeal. The procedures followed by the County
Construction Board of Appeals shall be as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2b and c.
(4) An applicant may file an appeal for an ongoing series of charges by
a professional during a period not exceeding six months to
demonstrate that they represent a pattern of excessive or
inaccurate charges. An applicant making use of this provision need
not appeal each charge individually.
(5) During the pendence of any appeal, the Village or approving
authority shall continue to process, hear and decide the application
for development and to inspect the development in the normal
course and shall not withhold, delay or deny reviews, inspections,
signing of subdivision plats or site plans, the reduction or the
release of performance and maintenance guaranties, the issuance
of construction permits or certificates of occupancy or any other
approval or permit because an appeal has been filed or is pending
under this subsection. The Chief Financial Officer of the Village
may pay charges out of the appropriate escrow account or deposit
for which an appeal has been filed.
(6) If a charge is disallowed after payment, the Chief Financial Officer
of the Village shall reimburse the deposit or escrow account in the
amount of any such disallowed charge or refund the amount to the
applicant. If a charge is disallowed after payment to a professional
or consultant who is not an employee of the Village, the
professional or consultant shall reimburse the Village in the
amount of any such disallowed charge.
§ 190-23 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-24
175:461
Board Secretary sufficient funds to reimburse the Village for inspection fees
paid to the Director of Public Works. Deposits shall be paid by cashier's
check, certified check, bank money order or cash. The Director of Public
Works shall not perform any inspection if sufficient funds to pay for those
inspections are not on deposit. Deposits shall be as set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees. The following additional provisions shall apply to inspection fees:
§ 190-25. Performance and maintenance guaranties.
Before recording of final subdivision plats or as a condition of final site
plan approval or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit, the
Village agency may require and shall accept performance and maintenance
guaranties for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance
of on-tract improvements. Such performance and maintenance guaranties
shall be in accordance with the following provisions:
A. Payment of inspection fee deposits by installment.
(1) For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated
inspection fees are less than $10,000, inspection fee deposits may,
at the option of the developer, be paid in two installments. The
initial amount deposited by a developer shall be 50% of the
reasonably anticipated inspection fees. When the balance on
deposit drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated inspection fees
because the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced
by the amount paid to the Director of Public works for inspection,
the developer shall deposit the remaining 50% of the anticipated
inspection fees.
(2) For those developments for which the reasonably anticipated
inspection fees are $10,000 or greater, inspection fee deposits may,
at the option of the developer, be paid in four installments. The
initial amount deposited by a developer shall be 25% of the
reasonably anticipated fees. When the balance on deposit drops to
10% of the reasonably anticipated fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to
the Director of Public works for inspection, the developer shall
make additional deposits of 25% of the reasonably anticipated fees.
B. Appeals of amount of deposit or amount of fee. Appeals of the amount
required to be deposited for the payment of inspection fees or the
amount charged for the inspection of improvements shall follow the
procedures in § 190-23G.
A. Performance guaranties. The following provisions shall apply to the
administration of performance guaranties:
(1) Amount of performance guaranty. The performance guaranty for
the installation of those improvements required shall be in favor of
the Village of Ridgewood in an amount equal to 120% of the cost of
such improvements. The cost of said improvements shall be
§ 190-24 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-25
175:462
determined by the Village Engineer based on documented
construction costs for public improvements prevailing in the
general area of the Village. The Village Engineer shall prepare
an itemized cost estimate of the improvements covered by the
performance guaranty, which estimate shall be appended to each
performance guaranty posted by the obligor.
(2) Appeal of disputed performance guaranty amounts. The developer
may appeal the Village Engineer's estimate of the cost of
improvements for purposes of furnishing a performance guaranty.
Such appeal shall be made in accordance with the procedures set
forth in § 190-23G.
(3) Form of guaranty. At least 10% of the performance guaranty shall
be in the form of cash or a certified check made payable to the
Village of Ridgewood. The balance of the performance guaranty
shall be in the form of any security issued by an institution
authorized to issue such securities in the State of New Jersey and
which may be accepted by the Village and approved by the Village
Attorney, including but not limited to surety bonds, cash and letters
of credit, provided that the Village shall only accept an irrevocable
letter of credit if it:
(a) Constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer
running solely to the Village for an express initial period of
time in the amount determined pursuant to this chapter;
(b) Is issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to do
and doing business in the State of New Jersey;
(c) Is for a period of at least one year; and
(d) Permits the Village to draw upon the letter of credit if the
obligor fails to furnish another letter of credit which complies
with the provisions of this section 30 days or more in advance
of the expiration date of the letter of credit or such longer
period in advance thereof as is stated in the letter of credit.
(4) Time allowed for completion of improvements. The performance
guaranty shall state the time period within which all improvements
are to be installed by the developer. No performance guaranty shall
run for a term longer than 18 months, except as provided otherwise
by this chapter.
(5) Extension of time allowed for completion of improvements. The
time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
Village Council by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guaranty shall be
increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to
exceed 120% of the cost of the installation at the time of the
resolution. The cost of installation shall be determined by the
§ 190-25 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-25
175:463
Village Engineer as provided herein for the initial cost
determination.
(6) Failure to complete improvements within time specified. If the
required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety,
if any, shall be liable thereon to the Village for the reasonable cost
of the improvements not completed or corrected. The Village may,
either prior to or after receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete
such improvements or use said funds to restore the property to a
safe condition so that the subject property in its unfinished
development state does not adversely affect the public safety or
adversely impact the environment. Such completion or correction
of improvements shall be subject to the public bidding
requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law.93
(7) Release of performance guaranty. Release of performance
guaranties shall be in accordance with the following procedure:
(a) Upon substantial completion of all required street
improvements (except for the top course) and appurtenant
utility improvements and the connection of the same to the
public system, the obligor may request of the Village Council
that the Village Engineer prepare a list of all uncompleted or
unsatisfactory completed improvements. The request to the
Village Council shall be made in writing by certified mail
addressed to the Village Clerk, with a copy of the request to be
sent to the Village Engineer. The request shall indicate which
improvements have been completed and which improvements
remain uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor.
(b) Upon receiving the obligor's request, the Village Engineer
shall inspect all improvements covered by the obligor's request
and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with the
Village Council and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to
the obligor not later than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's
request.
(c) The detailed list prepared by the Village Engineer shall be in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
Village Engineer, which estimate shall have been appended to
the performance guaranty as required herein. The list
prepared by the Village Engineer shall state, in detail, with
respect to each improvement deter mined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of
each incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of and
remedy for the unsatisfactory state of each completed
improvement determined to be unsatisfactory.
93.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 190-25 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-25
175:464
(d) The report prepared by the Village Engineer shall identify each
improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction
to be made in the performance guaranty relating to the
completed and satisfactory improvement. The recommended
reduction shall be in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the Village Engineer, which cost estimate
shall have been appended to the performance guaranty as
required herein.
(e) The Village Council, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by
the Village Engineer or reject any or all of these improvements.
The cause for any rejection shall be stated in the Council's
resolution. If any portion of the required improvements is
rejected, the approving authority may require the obligor to
complete or correct such improvements and, upon completion
or correction, the same procedure of notification as required
herein shall be followed.
(f) For accepted improvements, the Village Council' shall approve
and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the
performance guaranty relating to the improvements accepted.
Any authorized reduction shall be in accordance with itemized
cost estimate prepared by the Village Engineer, which cost
estimate shall have been appended to the performance
guaranty as required herein. The resolution shall be adopted
not later than 45 days after receipt of the list and report
prepared by the Village Engineer.
(g) Any partial reduction granted in the performance guaranty as
provided herein shall be applied to the cash deposit in the
same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full
amount of the performance guaranty.
(h) Upon adoption of the resolution by the Village Council, the
obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guaranty, with respect to those approved
improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet
approved, provided that 30% of the amount of the performance
guaranty posted may be retained to ensure completion and
acceptability of all improvements.
(8) Failure of Village Engineer or Council to act. If the Village Engineer
or Village Council fails to act on the request for release of a
performance guaranty within the time required herein, the obligor
may apply to the court in the manner provided below; provided that
nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of the obligor to
contest by legal proceedings any determination of the Village
Council or the Village Engineer.
§ 190-25 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-25
175:465
(a) If the Village Engineer fails to send or provide the list and
report as requested by the obligor as required herein within 45
days from receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to the
court in a summary manner for an order compelling the Village
Engineer to provide the list and report within a stated time.
The cost of applying to the court, including reasonable
attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
(b) If the Village Council fails to approve or reject the
improvements determined by the Village Engineer to be
complete and satisfactory or reduce the performance guaranty
for the complete and satisfactory improvements within 45 days
from the receipt of the Village Engineer's report, the obligor
may apply to the court in a summary manner for an order
compelling, within a stated time, approval of the complete and
satisfactory improvements and approval of a reduction in the
performance guaranty for the approvable complete and
satisfactory improvements in accordance with the itemized
cost estimate prepared by the Village Engineer, which cost
estimate shall have been appended to the performance
guaranty as required herein. The cost of applying to the court,
including reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the
prevailing party.
B. Maintenance guaranties. After final acceptance of required
improvements, a maintenance guaranty shall be required to be posted
with the Village. Except as specifically provided otherwise below,
maintenance guaranties shall be administered in the same manner as
performance guaranties as provided by this chapter.
(1) Amount of maintenance guaranty. The maintenance guaranty shall
be in favor of the Village of Ridgewood in an amount equal to 15%
of the cost of such improvements. The cost of said improvements
shall be determined by the Village Engineer in the same manner as
provided herein for performance guaranties.
(2) Appeal of disputed maintenance guaranty amounts. The developer
may appeal the Village Engineer's estimate of the cost of
improvements for purposes of furnishing a maintenance guaranty.
Such appeal shall be made in accordance with the procedures set
forth in § 190-23G.
(3) Form of guaranty. The maintenance guarantee shall be in the form
of any security issued by an institution authorized to issue such
securities in the State of New Jersey and which may be accepted by
the Village and approved by the Village Attorney, including but not
limited to surety bonds, cash and letters of credit, provided that
acceptance of irrevocable letters of credit shall be subject to the
same conditions as provided herein for performance guaranties.
§ 190-25 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-25
175:466
§ 190-26. Administration of deposits.
Deposits received for professional services employed by the Village to
review applications for development, for Village inspection fees in
accordance with this chapter or to satisfy the guaranty requirements of this
chapter shall be administered in accordance with the following provisions:
(4) Time required for maintenance guaranty. The maintenance
guaranty shall be required to run for a period of two years, which
shall be stated in the guaranty.
C. Exception for improvements related to other jurisdictions. In the event
that other governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will
own the utilities to be installed or the improvements are covered by a
performance or maintenance guaranty to another governmental
agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty, as the case may be,
shall be required by the Village for such utilities or improvements.
D. Final approval by stages or sections of development. In the event that
final approval is by stages or sections of development as provided by
this chapter, the provisions Of this section shall by applied by stage or
section of development.
A. Deposits to be held in escrow. Whenever an amount of money in excess
of $5,000 shall be deposited by an applicant with the Village, the money,
until repaid or applied to the purposes for which it is deposited,
including the applicant's portion of the interest earned thereon, except
as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall continue to be the property
of the applicant and shall be held in trust by the Village. Deposits
received pursuant to this article shall be held in escrow and deposited
in a banking institution or savings and loan association in New Jersey
insured by an agency of the federal government, or any other fund or
depository approved for such deposits by the State of New Jersey. Such
deposits shall be placed in an account bearing interest at the minimum
rate currently paid by the institution or depository on time or savings
deposits. The Village shall notify the applicant in writing of the name
and address of the institution or depository in which the deposit is made
and the amount of the deposit.
B. Refund of deposits; interest. Any of the funds remaining in the deposit
upon completion of the purpose for which the deposit was made shall be
returned to the applicant and the account shall be terminated. For
deposits over $5,000 placed in an interest bearing account pursuant to
this chapter, refunds of interest shall be made as follows:
(1) The Village shall not be required to refund an amount of interest
paid on a deposit which does not exceed $100 for the year.
(2) If the amount of interest exceeds $100 for the year, that entire
amount shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him
by the Village annually or at the time the deposit is repaid or
§ 190-25 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-26
175:467
§ 190-27. Approvals contingent upon payment; exemptions.
applied to the purposes for which it was deposited, as the case may
be; except that the Village may retain for administrative expenses
a sum equivalent to no more than 1/3 of that entire amount, which
shall be in lieu of all other administrative and custodial expenses.
C. Procedure for closing of deposits and escrow accounts. The following
close-out procedure shall apply to all deposits and escrow accounts
established under the Municipal Land Use Law94 and this chapter:
(1) In the case of application review escrows and deposits, the closeout
of deposits and escrow accounts shall commence after the
approving authority has granted final approval and signed the
subdivision plat or site plan, or after the authority has denied the
application or after the applicant has formally withdrawn the
application.
(2) In the case of improvement inspection escrows and deposits, the
close-out of deposits and escrow accounts shall commence after the
improvements have been approved as provided in § 190-25.
(3) The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Village and the approving authority
and to the relevant Village professional that the application is
completed, denied or withdrawn or the improvements are
completed, as the case may be.
(4) After receipt of such notice, the professional shall render a final bill
to the Chief Financial Officer of the Village within 30 days and shall
send a copy simultaneously to the applicant.
(5) The Chief Financial Officer of the Village shall render a written
final accounting to the applicant on the uses to which the deposit
was put within 45 days of receipt of the final bill. Any balances
remaining in the deposit or escrow account, including interest in
accordance with Subsection B above, shall be refunded to the
developer along with the final accounting.
A. Approvals contingent upon payment of fees. All approvals granted by
the Village pursuant to this chapter shall be conditional upon the
payment of the fees and other payments required herein. If, after the
date of an approval, the applicant shall fail to pay any and all
outstanding fees and other payments, the Village may, at its discretion,
void any approval which may have been granted.
B. Projects of the Village of Ridgewood and the Village of Ridgewood
Board of Education shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.
94.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-26 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-27
175:468
ARTICLE VI
Appeals
§ 190-28. General appeals procedure.
It is the intent of this article to set forth the procedures for the various
appeals to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Village
Council as permitted by this chapter. In addition to the procedures set forth
in the following sections for each type of appeal, the procedures set forth for
review of site plan and subdivision applications in Article VII of this chapter
shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise or unless contrary
to law, including but not necessarily limited to the following:
§ 190-29. Appeal alleging erroneous administrative officer decision.
Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party when it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order,
requirement, decision or refusal made by the Zoning Officer or Construction
Official of the Village based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning
regulations, Article X of this chapter. The following provisions shall apply to
such appeals:
A. The filing procedures in § 190-39.
B. The procedures for filing simultaneous applications in § 190-40.
C. The completeness review procedures in §§ 190-41 and 190-66.
D. The general review procedures in § 190-42.
E. The conditional approval provisions in § 190-49.
F. The default approval provisions in § 190-50.
G. The provisions for extensions and tolling of approvals in §§ 190-51 and
190-52, respectively.
H. The provisions for reservation of public areas, payment of taxes and
assessments, disclosure of ownership and binding nature of approvals
in §§ 190-61, 190-63, 190-64 and 190-65, respectively.
A. Appeals must be taken within 20 days of the decision of the Zoning
Officer or Construction Official.
B. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Officer or Construction
Official, specifying the grounds of the appeal. The officer from whom
the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
C. Fees required by this chapter shall be submitted with the notice of
appeal, as well as proof of payment of taxes and assessments.
§ 190-28 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-29
175:469
§ 190-30. Request for interpretation or other special questions.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for
interpretation of the Zoning Map or zoning regulations, Article X of this
chapter, or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the Board
is specifically authorized to pass by this chapter. The following provisions
shall apply to such requests:
D. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings
in furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed
from was made unless the officer from whose action the appeal is taken
certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal
shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an
order of the Superior Court upon notice to the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
E. A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions for
hearings in this chapter.
F. The appellant shall give public notice of the hearing in the manner
specified for development applications in this chapter, provided that the
parties entitled to notice shall be as specified in § 190-12B(1) of this
chapter. If the appeal is made by an interested party other than the
owner of the property which was the subject of the decision by the
Zoning Officer or Construction Official, notice shall also be sent to said
property owner. Affidavits of proof of service of notice shall be
submitted at least two business days prior to the hearing.
G. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify the action, order, requirement, decision,
interpretation or determination appealed from and to that end shall
have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
H. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than
120 days after the date the appeal is taken from the Zoning Officer or
Construction Official, or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant.
I. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may refer an application pursuant to
this section to any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning
Board, for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend the
period of time within which the Board shall act.
A. An application form shall be completed and shall be accompanied by a
specific written request which outlines that part of the Zoning Map,
zoning regulations or Official Map for which an interpretation is sought
or outlines the special question that the Board is asked to consider.
B. Twelve copies of the application form and all accompanying
documentation shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Board.
§ 190-29 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-30
175:470
§ 190-31. Appeal for issuance of permits for areas on Official Map.
Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken from a refusal
by the Construction Official to issue a permit for any building or structure
in the bed of any street or public drainage way, flood control basin or
public area reserved on the Official Map; provided that if the proposed
development requires approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site
plan or conditional use, the Planning Board shall also hear any appeal
pursuant to this section. The following provisions shall apply to such
appeals or applications:
C. Fees required by this chapter shall be submitted with the request, as
well as proof of payment of taxes and assessments.
D. A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions for
hearings in this chapter.
E. The appellant shall publish notice of the hearing on the request in the
official newspaper of the Village, if there is one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village. If the request for interpretation or
special question concerns a specific property, the appellant shall also
give public notice of the hearing in the manner specified for
development applications in this chapter, provided that the parties
entitled to notice shall be as specified in § 190-12B(1) of this chapter. If
the request is made by a person other than the owner of the specific
property which is the concern of the interpretation or special question,
notice shall also be sent to said property owner. Affidavits of proof of
service of notice shall be submitted at least two business days prior to
the hearing.
F. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may refer an application pursuant to
this section to any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning
Board, for its report.
A. A developer may file an application for development with the
appropriate board under this section without prior application to the
Construction Official. In addition, the developer may elect to submit a
separate application requesting direction for the issuance of a permit
and a subsequent application for any required approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate direction for the
issuance of a permit shall be conditioned upon grant of all required
subsequent approvals by the same Board that directed the issuance of a
permit.
B. Any appeal or application pursuant to this section shall be required to
submit 12 copies, if the Zoning Board of Adjustment has jurisdiction, or
20 copies, if the Planning Board has jurisdiction, of a map showing the
property in question and the location of the proposed building and/or
structure in relation to the bed of the mapped street or public drainage
way, flood control basin or public area reserved on the Official Map. In
§ 190-30 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-31
175:471
§ 190-32. Appeal for permits for lot not abutting a street.
Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken from a refusal
by the Construction Official to issue a permit for any building or structure
on a lot which does not abut a street giving access to such building or
structure, provided that if the proposed development requires approval
addition, fees required by this chapter shall be submitted with the
notice of appeal, as well as proof of payment of taxes and assessments.
C. An appeal pursuant to this section shall stay all proceedings in the same
manner as specified in § 190-29D.
D. A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions for
hearings in this chapter.
E. The appellant shall give public notice of the hearing in the manner
specified for development applications in this chapter; provided that
the parties entitled to notice shall be as specified in § 190-12B(1) of this
chapter. Affidavits of proof of service of notice shall be submitted at
least two business days prior to the hearing.
F. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify the refusal of the Construction Official and direct
the issuance of a permit subject to the following provisions:
(1) There must be a showing by the appellant, and the Board must find,
that the subject property cannot yield a reasonable return to the
owner unless a building permit is granted.
(2) Any decision of the Board to direct the issuance of a permit
pursuant to this section shall only be by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the full authorized membership of the Board.
(3) Any decision of the Board to direct the issuance of a permit
pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with terms and
conditions which will as little as practicable increase the cost of
opening such street, or tend to cause a minimum change of the
Official Map, and the Board shall impose reasonable requirements
as a condition of granting the permit so as to promote the health,
morals, safety and general welfare of the public.
G. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than
120 days after the date an appeal is taken from the Construction Official
or a development application is certified to be complete pursuant to this
chapter, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
H. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may refer an application pursuant to
this section to any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning
Board, for its report; provided that such reference shall not extend the
period of time within which the Board shall act.
§ 190-31 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-32
175:472
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, the
Planning Board shall also hear any appeal pursuant to this section. The
following provisions shall apply to such appeals or applications:
A. A developer may file an application for development with the
appropriate board under this section without prior application to the
Construction Official. In addition, the developer may elect to submit a
separate application requesting direction for the issuance of a permit
and a subsequent application for any required approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate direction for the
issuance of a permit shall be conditioned upon grant of all required
subsequent approvals by the same Board that directed the issuance of a
permit.
B. Any appeal or application pursuant to this section shall be required to
submit 12 copies, if the Zoning Board of Adjustment has jurisdiction, or
20 copies, if the Planning Board has jurisdiction, of a map showing the
property in question and the manner by which access will be provided
to the building and/or structure, including the location of the nearest
street from which access may be obtained. In addition, fees required by
this chapter shall be submitted with the notice of appeal, as well as
proof of payment of taxes and assessments.
C. An appeal pursuant to this section shall stay all proceedings in the same
manner as specified in § 190-29D.
D. A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions for
hearings in this chapter.
E. The appellant shall give public notice of the hearing in the manner
specified for development applications in this chapter, provided that the
parties entitled to notice shall be as specified in § 190-12B(1) of this
chapter. Affidavits of proof of service of notice shall be submitted at
least two business days prior to the hearing.
F. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify the refusal of the Construction Official and direct
the issuance of a permit subject to the following provisions:
(1) There must be a showing by the appellant, and the Board must find,
that the refusal to issue a permit would entail practical difficulty or
hardship, or that the circumstances of the case do not require the
building or structure to be related to a street.
(2) Any decision of the Board to direct the issuance of a permit
pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with terms and
conditions which will provide adequate access for fire fighting
equipment, ambulances and other emergency vehicles necessary
for the protection of health and safety and that will protect any
future street layout shown on the Official Map or on the circulation
plan element of the Village Master Plan.
§ 190-32 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-32
175:473
§ 190-33. "C" variance appeals.
Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken for relief from
the zoning regulations, Article X of this chapter. Notwithstanding the above,
if the proposed development requires approval by the Planning Board of
a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, the Planning Board shall also
hear any such variance appeals, except for "D" variances. The following
provisions shall apply to "C" variance appeals or applications:
G. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than
120 days after the date an appeal is taken from the Construction Official
or a development application is certified to be complete pursuant to this
chapter, or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
H. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may refer an application pursuant to
this section to any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning
Board, for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend the
period of time within which the Board shall act.
A. A developer may file an application for development with the
appropriate board under this section without prior application to the
Zoning Officer or Construction Official.
B. The developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
approval of the variance and a subsequent application for any required
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate
approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon grant of all required
subsequent approvals by the same Board that approved the variance.
C. Any appeal or application pursuant to this section shall be required to
submit the information required by the § 190-75.
D. An appeal pursuant to this section shall stay all proceedings in the same
manner as specified in § 190-29D.
E. A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions for
hearings in this chapter.
F. The appellant shall give public notice of the hearing in the manner
specified for development applications in this chapter, provided that the
parties entitled to notice shall be as specified in § 190-12B(1) of this
chapter. Affidavits of proof of service of notice shall be submitted at
least two business days prior to the hearing.
G. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a "C" variance to allow
departure from the zoning regulations if there is a showing by the
appellant, and the Board finds that:
(1) The strict application of the specific zoning regulation would result
in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional
and undue hardship upon the developer of the subject property due
§ 190-32 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-33
175:474
§ 190-34. "D" variance appeals.
In particular cases, appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken
for "D" variance requests. Whenever the proposed development involves
a "D" variance, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall also hear any
subdivision, site plan, conditional use application and any other variance
applications required for the development. The following provisions shall
apply to "D" variance appeals or applications:
to exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of the subject
property, exceptional topographic conditions or physical features
uniquely affecting the subject property or an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting the subject property or the
structures lawfully existing thereon; or that the purposes of the
Municipal Land Use Law95 would be advanced by the requested
variance, and the benefits of the variance would substantially
outweigh any detriment;
(2) The variance can be granted without substantial detriment to the
public good; and
(3) The grant of the variance will not substantially impair the intent of
the zone plan and zoning regulations.
H. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than
120 days after the date an appeal is taken from the Zoning Officer or
Construction Official or a development application is certified to be
complete pursuant to this chapter, or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant.
I. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may refer an application pursuant to
this section to any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning
Board, for its report; provided that such reference shall not extend the
period of time within which the Board shall act.
A. A developer may file an application for a "D" variance with the Zoning
Board of Adjustment without prior application to the Zoning Officer or
Construction Official.
B. The developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
approval of the variance and a subsequent application for any required
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate
approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon grant of all required
subsequent approvals by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. Any appeal or application pursuant to this section shall be required to
submit the information required by § 190-75.
D. An appeal pursuant to this section shall stay all proceedings in the same
manner as specified in § 190-29D.
95.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-33 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-34
175:475
§ 190-35. Appeal of "D" variance approval to the Village Council.
Any interested party may appeal to the Village Council any final decision of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment approving an application for development
involving a "D" variance. The following provisions shall apply to such
appeals:
E. A public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions for
hearings in this chapter.
F. The appellant shall give public notice of the hearing in the manner
specified for development applications in this chapter; provided that
the parties entitled to notice shall be as specified in § 190-12B(1) of this
chapter. Affidavits of proof of service of notice shall be submitted at
least two business days prior to the hearing.
G. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a "D" variance to allow
departure from the zoning regulations subject to the following
provisions:
(1) There must be a showing by the appellant, and the Board must find,
the following:
(a) Special reasons exist justifying the grant of the variance;
(b) The variance can be granted without substantial detriment to
the public good; and
(c) The grant of the variance will not substantially impair the
intent of the zone plan and zoning regulations.
(2) Any decision of the Board to grant a "D" variance pursuant this
section shall only be by an affirmative vote of at least five members
of the Board.
H. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than
120 days after the date an appeal is taken from the Zoning Officer or
Construction Official or a development application is certified to be
complete pursuant to this chapter, or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant.
I. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may refer an application pursuant to
this section to any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning
Board, for its report; provided that such reference shall not extend the
period of time within which the Board shall act.
A. Appeals to the Village Council shall be made within 10 days of the date
of publication of the final decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. The appeal to the Village Council shall be made by serving the Village
Clerk in person or by certified mail with a notice of appeal specifying
the grounds thereof, the name and address of the appellant and the
name and address of his attorney, if represented.
§ 190-34 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-35
175:476
C. An appeal pursuant to this section shall stay all proceedings in the same
manner as specified in § 190-29D.
D. The appellant shall, within five days of service of the notice of the
appeal, arrange for a transcript pursuant to § 190-18 for use by the
Village Council and pay a deposit as specified in Article V of this chapter
or within 35 days of service of the notice of appeal submit a transcript
as otherwise arranged to the Village Clerk; otherwise, the appeal may
be dismissed for failure to prosecute.
E. Notice of the meeting to review the record below shall be given by the
Village Council by personal service or certified mail to the appellant, or
to his attorney if represented, to those entitled to notice of a decision
pursuant to § 190-20A and to the Zoning Board of Adjustment at least
10 days prior to the date of the meeting.
F. The appeal shall be decided by the Village Council only upon the record
established before the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The parties may
submit oral and written argument on the record at such meeting, and
the Village Council shall provide for verbatim recording and transcripts
of such meeting pursuant to § 190-18.
G. The Village Council may reverse, remand or affirm with or without the
imposition of conditions the final decision of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment granting a "D" variance.
H. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized membership of
the Village Council shall be necessary to reverse or remand to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or to impose conditions on or alter
conditions to any final action of the Zoning Board of Adjustment;
otherwise the final action of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
deemed to be affirmed. A tie vote of the Village Council shall constitute
affirmance of the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
I. The Village Council shall conclude a review of the record below not
later than 95 days from the date of publication of notice of the decision
below pursuant to § 190-20C, unless the applicant consents in writing
to an extension of such period.
J. Failure of the Village Council to hold a hearing and conclude a review of
the record below and to render a decision within the period specified in
Subsection I above shall constitute a decision affirming the action of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
K. The Village Council shall mail a copy of the decision to the appellant, or
if represented then to his attorney, without separate charge, and for a
fee as provided by Article V of this chapter to any interested party who
has requested it, not later than 10 days after the date of the decision.
L. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Village, if there is one, or in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Village. Such publication shall be arranged by the
§ 190-35 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-35
175:477
§ 190-36. Expiration of variances. [Amended 4-9-2008 by Ord. No.
3109]
Variances granted by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall expire unless the development associated with the variance is
promptly completed; provided, however, that no variance which was a
prerequisite for subdivision approval shall expire if the plat or deed for the
subdivision has been filed with the County Recording Officer as required by
law. In addition, the tolling provisions of § 190-52 shall apply to variances.
All other variances shall expire in accordance with the following provisions:
Village Clerk, provided that nothing herein shall be construed as
preventing the applicant from arranging such publication if he so
desires. The Village Council shall require a fee for the publication as
specified in Article V of this chapter.
M. Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the right of any
party to obtain a review by any court of competent jurisdiction
according to law. The period of time in which an appeal to a court of
competent jurisdiction may be made shall run from the first publication
of the decision of the Village Council, whether arranged by the Council
or the applicant.
A. Variance approvals not subject to site plan, subdivision or conditional
use approval. In the case of a variance approval from the Zoning Board
of Adjustment which does not also require subdivision, site plan or
conditional use approvals from the Board, the following shall apply:
(1) The required building permits, or zoning and other permits, when
no building permits are required, must be obtained within one year
of the date of the adoption of a resolution or memorializing
resolution of approval or within six months of the date that all
conditions precedent of approval, if any, have been satisfied,
whichever occurs later, or the variance will expire. Conditions
precedent to approval shall be complied with within the time
periods specified in § 190-49.
(2) The construction of the improvements that were the subject of the
variance(s) must be initiated prior to expiration of the building and/
or zoning permit or the variance will expire.
(3) The construction of the improvements that were the subject of the
variance(s) must be completed within the time frames specified in
§ 190-97E, or the violator will be subject to § 190-97E(5) and (6).
B. Variance approvals subject to or part of site plan or conditional use
approval. In the case of a variance approval from the Planning Board or
the Zoning Board of Adjustment which also requires site plan or
conditional use approvals from the Board, the following shall apply:
(1) The required building permits, or zoning and other permits, when
no building permits are required, must be obtained prior to the
§ 190-35 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-36
175:478
date of expiration of the period of statutory protection against
changes in the zoning regulations, including any extensions
thereof, which periods are provided in Article VII of this chapter, or
the variance will expire.
(2) The construction of the improvements that were the subject of the
variance(s) must be initiated prior to expiration of the building
permit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq. or, if no building permit is
required, prior to the expiration of the zoning permit pursuant to
§ 190-97B, or the variance will expire.
(3) The construction of the improvements that were the subject of the
variance(s) must be completed within the time frames specified in
§ 190-97E, or the violator will be subject to the provisions of
§ 190-97E(5) and (6).
C. Bifurcated variance applications. In the case of a bifurcated variance
approval from the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment
which requires subsequent subdivision, site plan or conditional use
approvals from the Board, the following shall apply:
(1) Such subsequent applications shall be filed within six months of the
date of adoption of the resolution or memorializing resolution
approving the original variance or within six months of the date
that all conditions precedent of the approval for the original
variance, if any, have been satisfied, whichever occurs later, or the
variance will expire. Conditions precedent to approval shall be
complied with within the time periods specified in § 190-49.
(2) The developer shall obtain all required site plan and/or subdivision
approvals, as applicable, within one year of the original filing of the
application therefor, or the variance will expire. For purposes of
administering this provision, "approvals" shall be construed to
mean the vote by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as
applicable, in favor of the application.
D. Extensions. The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
applicable, may, upon good cause shown in writing, extend the
expiration dates for variances specified in Subsections A, B and C
above. The following procedures shall apply:
(1) Variances granted with site plan or subdivision. In considering
requests for extensions of variances that were granted as part of an
application for site plan or subdivision approval, the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment, as applicable, shall follow the
applicable procedures and requirements for extensions of the
period of approval and/or period of protection from changes in
zoning regulations set forth in Article VII of this chapter.
(2) Variances granted without site plan or subdivision. In considering
requests for extensions of bifurcated variances or variances that
§ 190-36 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-36
175:479
were not granted as part of an application for site plan or
subdivision approval, the following shall apply:
(a) The developer may apply for an extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date. Whenever the
Board grants a variance extension pursuant to this subsection
and the variance has expired before the date on which the
extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would
otherwise be the expiration date.
(b) The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as applicable,
shall hold a public hearing on the extension request, with
public notice to be served the same as in the original variance
application.
(c) The developer may apply for and the Board may grant
extensions of variances for a time period not to exceed one
year for each extension. A new application and hearing shall be
required for each subsequent request for a variance extension.
(d) If the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of
delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly
for and diligently pursued the approvals, the reviewing board
shall grant the requested extension.
(e) If the circumstances in Subsection D(2)(d) above do not apply,
the reviewing board shall have the discretion to grant or deny
variance extensions. In considering extension requests under
these circumstances, the reviewing board shall balance the
public interest at stake against the private interest in
requesting the extension.
§ 190-36 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-36
175:480
ARTICLE VII
Site Plan and Subdivision Review Procedures
§ 190-37. Site plan approval; when required. [Amended 6-10-1997
by Ord. No. 2606; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 1-15-2003 by Ord.
No. 2814; 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2818; 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933;
7-18-2007 by Ord. No. 3071; 10-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3220]
A. Developments that require site plan approval. Prior to the issuance of a
building permit, zoning permit or certificate of occupancy for any
development, a final site plan application shall be submitted to and
approved by resolution of the Planning Board in accordance with the
requirements of this article, unless such development is determined to
be exempt by this section from the requirement to obtain site plan
approval. The resolution of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
substitute for that of the Planning Board whenever the Zoning Board of
Adjustment has jurisdiction over a site plan pursuant to this chapter.
B. Developments which are exempt from site plan approval requirements.
The following developments shall be exempt from the requirement to
obtain site plan review and approval, provided that if such
developments are proposed in connection with an application that
otherwise requires site plan approval, they shall require approval as
part of the overall site plan application: [Amended 4-7-2010 by Ord.
No. 3242; 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 3426]
(1) Developments which are automatically exempt from site plan
approval.
(a) Subdivision or individual lot applications for detached one- or
two-dwelling-unit buildings and permitted accessory uses and
structures thereto.
(b) A proposed interior alteration, change in occupancy or change
of use involving no exterior site improvements other than those
improvements exempted from site plan review and approval by
this section.
(c) Maintenance and repair of existing improvements; provided,
however, that replacement of existing improvements shall be
subject to the provisions of Subsection B(1)(g) below.
(d) Improvements or activities within the right-of-way of a public
street which have been authorized by the state, county and/or
Village, as applicable, and/or which have received a street
opening permit by the entity having jurisdiction.
(e) Development undertaken by the Village of Ridgewood.
(f) Development otherwise exempt from the requirement of site
plan approval by law.
§ 190-37 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-37
175:481
(g) Improvements that are an identical replacement for
improvements that previously received site plan approval and
for which there is no legal prohibition against such
replacement. The foregoing shall not be construed to be
exempt improvements:
[1] For which no valid approval exists;
[2] Which would violate any applicable condition of a prior
development application approval;
[3] Which would violate any of the provisions related to
nonconforming uses or structures in § 190-126; or
[4] Which would violate any provision of this chapter or other
chapters of the Village Code.
(h) The following improvements or activities, provided that the
automatic site plan exemption shall only apply if such
improvements or activities: a) fully comply with the
requirements of this chapter, b) comply with the conditions of
any and all development application approvals currently in
effect, and c) obtain all other required permits and approvals:
[1] Drainage structures which receive a permit or are exempt
from the requirement to obtain a permit pursuant to
§ 190-120A.
[2] Utility service connections including but not limited to
water, sanitary sewer, natural gas, electric, telephone and
cable television connections.
[3] Light fixtures designed and used primarily to illuminate
building entries and exits, to illuminate signs or to provide
decorative effects to building facades and which have
received all required building and zoning permits. The
foregoing shall not be construed to automatically exempt
light fixtures designed and used primarily to illuminate
parking and loading areas and driveways from site plan
approval requirements.
[4] Exterior heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, backup
power generators and similar mechanical equipment.
[5] Antennas, except for cellular telecommunications
antennas and equipment accessory to cellular
telecommunications antennas.
[6] Signs accessory to a permitted principal use located on the
same property and which are completely conforming to all
applicable zoning regulations.
§ 190-37 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-37
175:482
[7] Soil movement which has received a ministerial permit,
minor permit, or is exempt from the requirement to obtain
a soil movement permit pursuant to Chapter 246 of the
Village Code.
[8] Landscaping that disturbs an area of not more than 500
square feet and has received any required soil movement
permit or other permits or is exempt from the requirement
to obtain a permit.
[9] Exterior storage areas for refuse and recyclable materials
that have received a zoning permit and any required
building permit.
[10] Fuel storage tanks up to 1,500 gallons capacity.
[11] Flag poles.
[12] Fences.
[13] The placement of temporary and movable tables, chairs,
umbrellas and/or other such furnishings or fixtures
approved in connection with a licensed outdoor cafe,
provided that the foregoing shall not be construed to
exempt the construction, reconstruction or demolition of
permanent structures or any structures requiring a
permit.
(2) Improvements which are not automatically exempt, but which are
determined exempt at the discretion of the Site Plan Exemption
Committee. The Site Plan Exemption Committee may determine
certain improvements not specified in § 190-37B(1) to be exempt
from the requirement to obtain site plan approval in accordance
with the procedures in Subsection C below. No site plan exemption
shall be granted by the Committee for any of the improvements set
forth in § 190-37C(1)(a) below, and no site plan exemption shall be
granted by the Committee unless the improvements: a) are
included in the definition of "minor site plan" in § 190-3, as further
limited below, b) fully comply with the requirements of this chapter,
c) comply with the conditions of any and all development
application approvals currently in effect, and d) obtain all other
required permits and approvals. The improvements that may be
determined exempt by the Committee are limited to the following:
(a) The construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration,
relocation, enlargement or demolition of any nonbuilding
structure(s), and any landscaping, all of which do not increase
the improvement coverage on the property by more than 500
square feet, and all of which have a combined ground surface
area of no greater than 2,000 square feet.
§ 190-37 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-37
175:483
(b) Alterations to the facade, roof, entrance or exit doors, windows
or other exterior components of an existing building, which
alterations do not change the location or extent of the walls of
the building.
(c) Porches, decks, accessible ramps, lifts, fire escapes and other
above-grade entry/egress structures having an area up to 100
square feet.
(d) Outdoor enclosures for existing restaurants, provided that:
[Added 1-8-2020 by Ord. No. 3762]
[1] Timeframe limited to: From December 10 through
February 28/29. [Amended 3-11-2020 by Ord. No.
3783]
[2] Contains no signage.
[3] Extends no greater distance than the minimum required to
meet ADA requirements.
[4] Doors open to the side so as to minimize pedestrian
conflicts.
[5] The area is under 32 square feet.
[6] A minimum of 52 inches of unobstructed sidewalk shall be
maintained in front of the enclosure.
[7] Anchoring methods as approved by the Village Engineer.
[8] Indemnification as per § 156-75 of the Village Code.
[9] Liability insurance as per § 156-76 of the Village Code.
[10] Obtains all required approvals including Uniform
Construction Code permits.
[11] The restaurant use is preexisting at the time of adoption of
this subsection.
[12] The design shall comply with all applicable United States
Access Board, Accessibility Guidelines for Pedestrian
Facilities within a Right-of-Way.
C. Site plan exemption criteria and procedures. The determination as to
whether or not an improvement is exempt from the requirement to
obtain site plan approval shall be made by the permitting official,
except for improvements referenced in § 190-37B(4). In the case of the
improvements referenced in § 190-37B(4), the following exemption
criteria and procedure shall apply:
(1) Exemption criteria. Only improvements that meet the following
criteria may be determined exempt:
§ 190-37 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-37
175:484
(a) The improvements shall not include any of the following; such
improvements shall be required to obtain site plan approval:
[Amended 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 3426]
[1] Principal or accessory buildings.
[2] Building additions.
[3] Porches, decks, accessible ramps, lifts, fire escapes and
other above-grade entry/egress structures having an area
greater than 100 square feet.
[4] Any use or improvement regulated by the standards for
conditional uses in § 190-123.
[5] Any improvement which requires a variance, exception
from the design standards or modification of the
conditions of all current development approvals.
[6] Improvements that result in an increase of more than 500
square feet of improvement coverage.
(b) The proposed improvements, taken in the aggregate, shall be
consistent with the improvements in the definition of "minor
site plan" in § 190-3, in both nature and extent.
(c) The proposed improvements must comply with all applicable
provisions of Chapter 190, Land Use and Development,
including but not limited to the specific and general design
guidelines, standards and construction specifications in Article
IX, the zoning regulations in Article X and all other applicable
laws, rules and regulations of the Village Code.
(2) Application for exemption. The applicant for site plan exemption
shall file with the Planning Board Secretary an application form, an
application fee as set forth in § 145-6, a plan depicting the
proposed development and any supplemental documentation, all of
which shall be sufficient to determine that the improvements
comply with the exemption criteria in Subsection C(1) above. The
application form and completeness checklist shall be available in
the office of the Planning Board and shall be posted on the Village's
website. The documentation to be submitted shall contain the
information required in the completeness checklist for minor site
plans in § 190-72 unless waived by the Site Plan Exemption
Committee, provided that the Committee may request additional
information not on the checklist if such information is needed to
determine compliance with the exemption criteria in Subsection
C(1) above.
(3) Review of applications for site plan exemption. Applications for site
plan exemption shall be reviewed and decided by a committee
consisting of the Village Engineer or his designee, the Construction
§ 190-37 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-37
175:485
Official or his designee, the Village Planner and a member of the
Planning Board to be appointed by the Planning Board Chairman;
provided, however, that such committee may authorize one of its
members to review and act on behalf of the entire committee
in order to expedite very simple applications. In performing this
review and in making the decision regarding site plan exemption,
the following shall apply: [Amended 8-13-2014 by Ord. No.
3426]
(a) The applicant shall have the burden of proof that the proposed
development meets the criteria for site plan exemption. Failure
to meet this burden to the satisfaction of the Committee shall
result in a determination that the improvement(s) is (are) not
exempt from the requirement to obtain site plan approval.
(b) If the applicant has not provided sufficient information or has
provided information that is unclear, contradictory or
confusing, the Committee shall notify the applicant in writing
of such deficiencies within 15 business days of the date the
application is filed. In the event that the Committee does not
determine the application to be complete or incomplete within
said period, the application shall be determined complete upon
the expiration of said fifteen-day period.
(c) If the application is determined incomplete, the applicant shall
be required to address the completeness deficiencies.
Subsequent submission by the applicant, if made within 190
days of being notified of the completeness deficiencies, shall
not require the payment of an additional application fee or the
filing of a new application, and such submission shall be
reviewed following the same procedures as the original
application. Failure to resubmit the required information
within said one-hundred-ninety-day period shall result in the
dismissal of the application without prejudice.
(d) The Committee shall review and decide applications for site
plan exemption within 15 business days of the date the
application is determined to be complete, unless such deadline
is extended by consent of the applicant. Such extension may be
granted before or after said fifteen-day period. The failure of
the Committee to act within said time period shall be deemed a
dismissal of the application without prejudice.
(e) All decisions to grant or deny applications for site plan
exemption shall be made by a majority of the full Site Plan
Exemption Committee, except for simple applications when the
Committee has authorized a single member to act on its behalf.
(f) The Committee shall approve or deny applications for site plan
exemption based upon the exemption criteria in Subsection
C(1) above. Approvals may be granted with the imposition of
§ 190-37 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-37
175:486
§ 190-37.1. Subdivision approval; when required. [Added
10-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3220]
Prior to the filing of any plat, deed or other recorded instrument with
the County Recording Officer for the subdivision of land, as defined by
§ 190-3, a final subdivision application shall be submitted to and approved
by resolution of the Planning Board in accordance with the requirements
of this article. The resolution of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
substitute for that of the Planning Board whenever the Zoning Board of
Adjustment has jurisdiction over a subdivision pursuant to this chapter.
§ 190-38. Classification of site plans and subdivisions.
Applications for site plan and/or subdivision approval shall be classified as
one or more of the following, as defined by this chapter:
reasonable conditions designed to ensure compliance with
such exemption criteria, as may be required by law or deemed
appropriate by the Committee.
(g) If there is any reasonable doubt concerning whether or not the
proposed development meets the exemption criteria in
Subsection C(1) above, the Committee shall deny the
application for site plan exemption.
(h) All decisions of the Committee shall be in writing and shall
include a reference to the documents that served as a basis for
the decision, the reason(s) for the decision and, in the case of
exemption approval, any conditions of approval. A copy of the
decision shall be sent to the applicant without charge.
(i) The application materials and a copy of the Committee's
decision shall be maintained in the records of the Planning
Board.
(4) Any exemption that may be granted from site plan approval
requirements shall not be construed to exempt the applicant from
the requirement, as applicable, to obtain all required building
permits, zoning permits, sign permits, historic preservation
permits and all other required approvals.
A. Conceptual site plan.
B. Conceptual subdivision.
C. Minor site plan.
D. Minor subdivision.
E. Preliminary major site plan.
F. Preliminary major subdivision.
§ 190-37 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-38
175:487
§ 190-39. Filing of applications.
Applications for site plan and/or subdivision approval shall be filed in
accordance with the following procedures:
G. Final site plan.
H. Final subdivision.
A. An application for site plan or subdivision approval shall be filed with
the Secretary of the board having jurisdiction over the application.
Required forms and checklists for the application shall be available in
the office of the Secretary for the respective board and shall be
provided to the applicant prior to formal submission of an application.
B. Applications must be accompanied by the required drawings,
documents, fees and other data as required by the completeness
checklists in this chapter. The applicant may produce other documents,
records, or testimony at the hearing to substantiate, clarify or
supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
C. Maps and documents. [Amended 4-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2776]
(1) Any maps and documents for which approval is sought shall be
submitted and determined complete within the following deadlines
before the date of the public hearing at which the application will
be heard in order to give the Board, its advisors and Village
agencies sufficient time to review the application and report to the
Board:
Type of Application Days Before Public Hearing
"C" variance applications, appeals
other than variances, minor site
plans, minor subdivisions, final
major site plans and final major
subdivisions
21
"D" variances, preliminary major
site plans and preliminary major
subdivisions
28
Combination of application types The longest time period
applicable to any of the
application types
(2) The hearing date for any application will be deferred for any
application failing to meet this deadline; however, the Board may
vary from this procedure when necessary to act on the application
within the time periods set forth in § 190-42C or in exceptional
circumstances and for due cause shown upon written request from
the applicant. Under no circumstances, however, shall the ten-day
deadline in § 190-15 be waived. The foregoing provisions shall not
be construed as a requirement that an application determined
§ 190-38 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-39
175:488
§ 190-40. Simultaneous application.
The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable,
shall have the power to review and approve or deny conditional uses,
site plans and subdivisions simultaneously and shall have the power to
review and approve or deny variance requests simultaneously with any
of the above applications, without the developer being required to make
further application to the Board or the Board being required to hold further
hearings.
§ 190-41. Completeness determination.
Upon the filing of an application, it shall be reviewed to determine
compliance with the submission requirements of this chapter. The following
procedure shall apply:
complete within the required deadline be heard at the next
meeting; the Board shall set its own agenda in accordance with
its rules and in accordance with the time periods within which the
Board is required to act.
A. An application for development shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by the Board when so
certified by the Board or its authorized committee or designee.
B. The applicant shall be notified in writing whether the application has
been determined complete or incomplete by the Board or its authorized
committee or designee within 45 days of the date of submission of an
application. An application shall be determined complete if all of the
items required by the appropriate completeness checklists have been
submitted.
C. In the event that the agency, committee or designee does not certify the
application to be complete or incomplete within 45 days of the date of
its submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon the
expiration of said forty-five-day period.
D. The applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived. A written request explaining the basis for such
request(s) must be submitted for such waiver requests in order to be
considered. The Board or its authorized committee shall grant or deny
the waiver request within 45 days of receipt of the written request.
E. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's
obligation to prove in the application process that he is entitled to
approval of the application. The Board may subsequently require
correction of any information found to be in error and submission of
additional information not specified in this chapter or any revisions in
the accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application have been met. The application shall not be
§ 190-39 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-41
175:489
§ 190-42. General review procedures.
The following general review procedures shall apply, unless the provisions
for specific types of applications indicate a contrary procedure.
deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any
revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the Board.
A. After an application has been determined to be complete, the Secretary
shall forward the application to the Planning Board or the Zoning Board
of Adjustment for public hearing, depending on which Board has
jurisdiction. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the
procedures outlined in this chapter.
B. After an application has been determined to be complete or when the
application has been scheduled for public hearing, whichever occurs
sooner, the Secretary shall refer the application to the following
persons or agencies for report and recommendation to the Board:
(1) Village Engineer;
(2) Planning consultant for the Board;
(3) Ridgewood Historic Preservation Commission, if the property for
the application is located in an historic district designated by the
zoning regulations, Article X of this chapter, or is designated as an
historic site on the Zoning Map, Official Map or by any component
element of the Master Plan. Failure to refer the application to the
Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding. The
Commission may provide its advice, which shall be conveyed
through its delegation of one of its members or staff to testify orally
at the hearing on the application and to explain any written report
which may have been submitted;
(4) Village Environmental Commission, if one exists; and
(5) Such other consultants which have been directed by the Board to
review and comment on the application, as well as other Village,
county, state and federal officials and agencies having appropriate
jurisdiction and as directed by the Board. Such referral to other
governmental officials or agencies shall not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility of applying independently to and receiving
approval from such agencies as required by law.
C. The Board shall grant or deny an application within the following time
periods or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. The time period required below for action shall begin on the
date that an application is determined to be complete.
(1) Conceptual site plan and conceptual subdivision: no time limit.
(2) Minor site plan: 45 days.
§ 190-41 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-42
175:490
§ 190-43. Conceptual site plans and subdivisions.
At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an informal
review of a concept plan for a development for which the developer intends
to prepare and submit an application for development. Submission of a
concept plan is optional with the developer. Informal review of a concept
plan is intended to enable the Board and the developer to discuss and
evaluate principles and potential problems involved before the applicant
has gone to the expense of completing detailed engineering drawings as
required for formal plan review and approval. The procedures for filing,
determination of completeness and review shall be as provided by this
(3) Preliminary major site plan, 10 acres of land or less and 10 or fewer
dwelling units: 45 days.
(4) Preliminary major site plan, more than 10 acres of land or more
than 10 dwelling units: 95 days.
(5) Final site plan: 45 days.
(6) Minor subdivision: 45 days.
(7) Preliminary major subdivision, 10 or fewer lots: 45 days.
(8) Preliminary major subdivision, more than 10 lots: 95 days.
(9) Final major subdivision: 45 days.
(10) Conditional use site plan: 95 days.
(11) Any application involving a variance: 120 days.
(12) Simultaneous or consecutive applications. Whenever an applicant
seeks simultaneous approval of a subdivision, site plan, conditional
use, variance request and/or direction for issuance of a permit, the
longest time period for action by the Board, whether it is for
subdivision, site plan, conditional use, variance or direction for
issuance of a permit, shall apply to the simultaneous application. In
the event that the applicant elects to submit separate consecutive
applications, the time period for action provided by this chapter
shall apply to each individual application.
D. If the Board requires any substantial amendments in the layout of
improvements proposed by the developer that have been the subject of
a hearing, an amended application for development shall be submitted
and proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application for
development.
E. If the proposed development complies with this chapter and the
Municipal Land Use Law,96 the Board shall grant site plan and/or
subdivision approval.
96.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-42 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-43
175:491
article. The developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for which
review is requested, and the Planning Board shall not be bound by any such
review.
§ 190-44. Minor site plans.
In addition to the procedures for filing, completeness determination and
review provided by this article, the following provisions shall apply to minor
site plans.
A. If an application for minor site plan approval is classified as other than a
minor site plan, the applicant will be so notified. No further action by
the Board will be required, and the applicant will be required to follow
the procedures for filing an application for preliminary and final major
site plan approval.
B. A minor site plan may, at the discretion of the Board, be reviewed by the
full Board, referred to the Site Plan Committee for review and
recommendations or be approved subject to administrative review by
the Village Engineer, provided that any minor site plan which requires
any variances shall be reviewed by the full Board, and a public hearing
shall be held in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
chapter.
C. Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the
plan by the Board, provided that the Board or, in the case of
administrative review, the Village Engineer may condition such
approval on terms ensuring the provision of improvements pursuant to
§§ 190-25, 190-54 and 190-55.
D. If the application is approved, the approved plan shall be signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the Board; provided that the signatures of
the Chairman and Secretary shall not be affixed until the developer has
posted any guaranties that may be required pursuant to §§ 190-25 and
190-57.
E. Prior to the Board returning the signed minor site plan to the applicant,
the applicant shall submit six copies of the approved plan to the
Secretary. If the approved plan is larger than 11 inches by 17 inches,
the applicant shall also submit a translucent copy of the drawing
suitable for making prints.
F. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
minor site plan approval. The Planning Board shall grant an extension
of this period for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding
one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally
§ 190-43 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-44
175:492
§ 190-45. Minor subdivisions.
In addition to the procedures for filing, completeness determination and
review provided by this article, the following provisions shall apply to minor
subdivisions.
required approvals from other governmental entities and that the
developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the approvals.
The developer shall apply for this extension before what would
otherwise be the expiration date or the 91st day after the date on which
the developer receives the last of the legally required approvals from
the other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
G. If the required building and/or zoning permits for an approved minor
site plan have not been issued within the period of protection set forth
in Subsection F above, the approval of said minor site plan shall become
null and void.
A. If an application for minor subdivision approval is classified as other
than a minor subdivision, the applicant will be so notified. No further
action by the Board will be required, and the applicant will be required
to follow the procedures contained herein for filing an application for
preliminary and final major subdivision approval.
B. In reviewing a minor subdivision application, the Board may accept a
plat not in conformity with the Map Filing Law,97 provided that if the
developer chooses to file the minor subdivision as provided herein by
plat rather than deed, such plat shall conform with the Map Filing Law.
C. A minor subdivision may, at the discretion of the Board, be reviewed by
the full Board or referred to the Subdivision Committee for review and
recommendations, provided that any minor subdivision which requires
any variances shall be reviewed by the full Board, and a public hearing
shall be held in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
chapter.
D. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the
subdivision by the Board, provided that the Board may condition any
such approval on terms ensuring the provision of improvements
pursuant to §§ 190-25, 190-54 and 190-55.
E. If the application is approved, the deed or plat, as applicable, shall be
signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Board, provided that the
signatures of the Chairman and Secretary shall not be affixed until the
developer has posted any guaranties that may be required pursuant to
§§ 190-25 and 190-57.
F. Prior to the Board returning the signed minor subdivision plat or deed
to the applicant, the applicant shall submit six copies of the approved
plat or deed to the Secretary. If the approved plat is a drawing larger
97.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 190-44 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-45
175:493
§ 190-46. Preliminary major site plans and preliminary major
subdivisions. [Amended 10-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3220; 4-7-2010 by
Ord. No. 3242]
In addition to the procedures for filing, completeness determination and
review provided by this article, the following provisions shall apply to
preliminary major site plans and preliminary major subdivisions.
than 11 inches by 17 inches, the applicant shall also submit a
translucent copy of the drawing suitable for making prints.
G. Except as provided otherwise below, approval of a minor subdivision
shall expire 190 days from the date on which the resolution of Village
approval is adopted unless within such period a plat in conformity with
such approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law, or a deed
clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is filed by the
developer with the county recording officer, the Village Engineer and
the Village Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed accepted for such filing
shall have been signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Board. No
subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording
officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board as indicated on
the instrument by the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board or a certificate has been issued pursuant to §§ 190-50 or
190-59.
H. The Board may extend the one-hundred-ninety-day period for filing a
minor subdivision plat or deed if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or prevented,
directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining legally
required approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental
entities and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently
pursued the required approvals. The length of the extension shall be
equal to the period of delay caused by the wait for the required
approvals, as determined by the Board. The developer may apply for the
extension either before or after what would otherwise by the expiration
date.
I. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date on
which the resolution of minor subdivision approval is adopted, provided
that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as
provided in this section.
A. If the application is approved, the site plan or plat, as applicable, shall
be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Board.
B. Prior to the Board returning the approved preliminary subdivision plat
or site plan drawings to the applicant, the applicant shall submit six
copies of the approved site plan or plat to the Secretary. If the approved
§ 190-45 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-46
175:494
plan is larger than 11 inches by 17 inches, the applicant shall also
submit a translucent copy of the drawing suitable for making prints.
C. Preliminary approval of a major site plan or preliminary major
subdivision shall, except as provided otherwise below, confer upon the
applicant the following right for a three-year period from the date on
which the resolution of preliminary approval is adopted:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; and, in the case of a site plan, any on-tract
improvements required to be installed, except that nothing herein
shall be construed to prevent the Village from modifying by
ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary
approval as relate to public health and safety;
(2) That the applicant may construct only those infrastructure
improvements set forth in § 190-54B, provided that the same rights
shall be conferred in the case of a site plan involving the
infrastructure improvements set forth in § 190-54B. No other
improvements may be constructed and no other permits may be
issued until final approval has been granted and all conditions
precedent to approval have been satisfied;
(3) That the applicant may submit for final apps oval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary major site plan or preliminary major
subdivision, as the case may be;
(4) That the applicant may apply for and the Board may grant
extensions of such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
D. In the case of a preliminary major site plan or preliminary major
subdivision for an area of 50 acres or more, the Board may grant the
rights referred to above for such period of time, longer than three
years, as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval, economic conditions and
the comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply
for thereafter and the Board may thereafter grant an extension to
preliminary approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the Board to be reasonable taking into consideration the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under preliminary approval, and the potential number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
§ 190-46 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-46
175:495
§ 190-47. Final major site plans and final major subdivisions.
In addition to the procedures for filing, completeness determination and
review provided by this article, the following provisions shall apply to final
major site plans and final major subdivisions.
development, provided that, if the design standards have been revised,
such revised standards may govern.
E. Whenever the Board grants an extension of preliminary major site plan
or preliminary major subdivision approval as indicated above and the
preliminary approval has expired before the date on which the
extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise
be the expiration date. The developer may apply for the extension either
before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
A. The Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established by ordinance for final approval,
the conditions of preliminary approval and, in the case of a major
subdivision, the standards prescribed by the Map Filing Law.98
B. In the case of a residential cluster, the Board may permit minimal
deviations from the conditions of preliminary approval necessitated by
a change of conditions beyond the control of the developer since the
date of preliminary approval without the developer being required to
submit another application for development for preliminary approval.
C. If the application is approved, the site plan or plat, as applicable, shall
be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Board, provided that
the signatures of the Chairman and Secretary shall not be affixed until
the developer has posted any guaranties that may be required pursuant
to §§ 190-25 and 190-57. Prior to the signing and return of a final major
subdivision plat or final major site plan, the applicant shall submit six
copies of the approved plat to the Secretary. If the approved plat is a
drawing larger than 11 inches by 17 inches, the applicant shall also
submit a translucent copy of the drawing suitable for making prints.
D. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the county recording officer. The Board
may for good cause shown extend the period of recording for an
additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the
plat.
E. The Board may extend the ninety-five-day or one-hundred-ninety-day
filing period if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required
98.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 190-46 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-47
175:496
approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to the
period of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as
determined by the Board.
F. The developer may apply for a filing extension either before or after the
original expiration date.
G. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording
officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board as indicated on
the instrument by the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board or a certificate has been issued pursuant to §§ 190-50
and 190-59. The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board shall not be affixed until the developer has posted the
guaranties required pursuant to §§ 190-25 and 190-57.
H. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other right conferred upon the developer by preliminary
approval, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date on which the resolution of final
approval is adopted, provided that in the case of a major subdivision the
rights conferred herein shall expire if the plat has not been duly
recorded within the time period provided above.
I. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the granting of
final approval to the development or section of the development
terminates the time period of protection for the preliminary approval
granted to the same development or section of the development.
J. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, and, in the case of a subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as
required above, the Board may extend such period of protection for
extensions of one year, but not to exceed three extensions.
K. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development of 50
acres or more, conventional subdivision or site plan for 150 acres or
more, or site plan for development of a nonresidential floor area of
200,000 square feet or more, the Board may grant the rights referred to
in Subsection H above for such period of time, longer than two years, as
shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The developer may apply for
thereafter, and the Board may thereafter grant, an extension of final
approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined by
the Board to be reasonable taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final
approval, the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
remaining to be developed, economic conditions and
comprehensiveness of the development.
§ 190-47 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-47
175:497
§ 190-48. Residential cluster.
In addition to the procedures for filing, completeness determination and
review provided by this article, the following provisions shall apply to
applications which involve residential cluster.
L. The developer may apply for an extension either before or after what
would otherwise be the expiration date. Whenever the Board grants an
extension of final approval pursuant to Subsection J or K above and the
final approval has expired before the date on which the extension is
granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the
expiration date.
A. Variation in density or intensity. The standards for permitting variation
in intensity in a residential cluster shall be as set forth in the specific
district regulations in Article X of this chapter. In the case of cluster
development, the maximum number of lots which may be permitted
shall be computed by providing the Board with a plan which shows a
subdivision concept layout of the property as it could be developed as a
conventional subdivision in conformance with all the regulations of the
Land Use Ordinance. This subdivision concept plan shall provide all the
information required pursuant to § 190-67 and also include road
profiles, a wetlands delineation pursuant to the Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act and a floodplain delineation pursuant to the most recent
Federal Flood Insurance Rate Map. The cluster development shall be
entitled to the same number of lots that said conforming conceptual
subdivision would be entitled to, taking into account good planning,
zoning and engineering principles as determined by the Board.
B. Open space ownership and maintenance. Any subdivision which
involves residential cluster shall either dedicate any resulting open
space land to the Village or shall make provision for the establishment
of an open space organization which shall own and maintain said open
space for the benefit of owners or residents of the development. Any
area to be dedicated to the Village for open space purposes under the
terms of this section shall be at a location and shape as approved by the
Planning Board. If any open space areas are to be owned and
maintained by an organization for the benefit of owners and residents of
the development, then the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Such organization shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of
any open space, by sale or otherwise, except to an organization
conceived and established to own and maintain the open space for
the benefit of such development. Thereafter, such organization
shall not be dissolved or dispose of any of its open space without
first offering to dedicate the same to the Village of Ridgewood.
(2) In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the open
space in reasonable order and condition, the Planning Board may
serve written notice upon such organization or upon the owners of
the development setting forth the manner in which the
§ 190-47 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-48
175:498
organization has failed to maintain the open space in reasonable
condition. Said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies
of maintenance be cured within 35 days thereof and shall state
the date and place of a hearing thereon. The hearing shall be held
within 15 days of the notice.
(3) At the hearing on deficiencies in maintenance, the Planning Board
may modify the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and
may give a reasonable extension of time not to exceed 65 days
within which they shall be cured.
(4) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modification thereof shall not be cured within 35 days or any
permitted extension thereof, the Village, in order to preserve the
open space and maintain the same for a period of one year, may
enter upon and maintain such land. Said entry and maintenance
shall not vest in the public any rights to use the open space except
when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners.
(5) Before the expiration of the year in Subsection B(4) above, the
Planning Board shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the
organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the
open space, call a public hearing upon 15 days' written notice to
such organization and to the owners of the development shall show
cause why such maintenance by the Village shall not, at the
election of the Village, continue for a succeeding year.
(6) If at the hearing the Planning Board shall determine that such
organization is ready and able to maintain said open space in a
responsible condition, the Village shall cease to maintain said open
space at the end of said year.
(7) If at the hearing the Planning Board shall determine such
organization is not ready and able to maintain said open space in a
reasonable condition, the Village may, at its discretion, continue to
maintain said open space during the next succeeding year, subject
to a similar hearing and determination, in each year thereafter. The
decision of the Planning Board in any such case shall constitute a
final administrative decision subject to judicial review.
(8) The cost of such maintenance by the Village shall be assessed pro
rata against the properties within the development that have a
right of enjoyment of the open space in accordance with assessed
value at the time of imposition of the lien and shall become a lien
and tax on said properties and be added to and be a part of the
taxes to be levied and assessed thereon and enforced and collected
with interest by the same officers and in the same manner as other
taxes.
C. Findings for residential cluster. Prior to the approval of any residential
cluster, the Board must find the following facts and conclusions:
§ 190-48 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-48
175:499
§ 190-49. Conditional approvals.
The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, in granting any
approval, may require reasonable conditions designed to further the intent
and purpose of this chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.). The following provisions shall apply to conditional
approvals:
(1) That departures by the proposed development from the zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
the zoning regulations authorizing such departures by residential
clusters in Article X;
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate;
(3) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate;
(4) That the proposed residential cluster will not have an reasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be
established; and
(5) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
A. Time for compliance with conditions. Whenever any application for
development is approved subject to specified conditions, said
conditions shall be fulfilled within 190 days of the date on which the
resolution of approval was adopted, subject, however, to the following:
(1) Exempt from this requirement are those conditions pertaining to
other governmental approvals as indicated in Subsections D and E
below.
(2) Notwithstanding the above one-hundred-ninety-day limitation, the
Board may, in appropriate circumstances, specify a longer period of
time within which any specific condition must be fulfilled.
(3) The applicant may, for good cause shown, apply for and the Board
may grant extensions of time within which such conditions must be
fulfilled as the Board may deem appropriate under the
circumstances. Applications for such extension must be made prior
to the expiration of the period within which conditions were
previously required to be fulfilled.
§ 190-48 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-49
175:500
B. Procedure for demonstrating compliance. All conditions of approval
shall be complied with in the following manner:
(1) Proof that applications have been filed with all other agencies
having jurisdiction over any aspect of the application for
development shall forthwith be filed with the Board.
(2) The fulfillment of all other conditions shall forthwith be reported in
writing to the Board, which may cause such reports to be verified in
an appropriate manner.
C. Effect of failure to comply. Only upon fulfillment of all conditions
precedent of preliminary approval shall any site clearing, grading,
construction of required on-tract or off-tract improvements or other
development be permitted only upon fulfillment of all conditions
precedent of final approval shall any subdivision map or site plan be
signed or any required building permit, occupancy permit, zoning
approval or other required approval be issued. Failure to comply with
any and all specified conditions of approval shall have the following
effects:
(1) Conditions precedent. In the case of specified conditions intended
to be fulfilled before the approval becomes effective, failure to
fulfill any such condition within the required time period shall
cause said conditional approval to lapse and become null and void.
(2) Conditions subsequent. In the case of specified conditions which by
their terms are incapable of being fulfilled or are not required to be
fulfilled prior to the final approval of the application, the
performance of which are not guaranteed by bonds or securities of
any type, failure to fulfill any such condition within the required
time period shall be grounds for the issuance of a stop-work order
by the enforcing official and the withholding of any certificate of
occupancy or any other approval until such conditions are fulfilled.
D. County Planning Board approval. Whenever review or approval of an
application by the County Planning Board is required by Section 5 of
P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), in the case of a subdivision, or
Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6), in the case of a site
plan, the Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely
receipt of a favorable report on the application by the County Planning
Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report
thereon within the required time period.
E. Other governmental approvals. In the event that development proposed
by an application requires an approval by a governmental agency other
than the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the County
Planning Board, the Board shall, in appropriate instances, condition its
approval upon the subsequent approval of such governmental agency,
provided that the Board shall make a decision on any application within
the time periods provided in this chapter or within an extension of such
§ 190-49 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-49
175:501
§ 190-50. Default approvals.
Failure of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment to act
within the periods prescribed herein shall constitute an approval of the
application, and a certificate of the Board Secretary as to the failure of
the Board to act shall be issued on the request of the applicant, and it
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval, as required by the Municipal Land Use Law,100 and shall be so
accepted by the county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision
plats. The following provisions shall apply whenever an applicant wishes to
claim approval of his application for development by reason of the failure of
the Board to grant or deny approval within the time period provided herein.
period as has been agreed to by the applicant unless the Board is
prevented or relieved from so acting by the operation of law.
F. In the event that a developer submits an application for development
that is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, by a legal action
instituted by any state agency, political subdivision or other party to
protect the public health and welfare or by a directive or order issued
by any state agency, political subdivision or court of competent
jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare, the Village agency
shall process such application for development in accordance with the
Municipal Land Use Law99 and this chapter, and, if such application for
development complies with this chapter, the Village agency shall
approve such application conditioned on removal of such legal barrier
to development.
A. The applicant shall provide notice of the default approval to the
municipal agency and to all those entitled to notice by personal service
or certified mail of the hearing on the application for development; but
for purposes of determining who is entitled to notice, the hearing on the
application for development shall be deemed to have required public
notice pursuant to § 190-11.
B. The applicant shall arrange publication of a notice of the default
approval in the official newspaper of the Village, if there is one, or in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Village.
C. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service and publication
with the Board Secretary, who, in the case of a minor subdivision or
final approval of a major subdivision, shall be the officer who issues
certificates pursuant to § 190-59.
99.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
100. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-49 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-51
175:502
§ 190-51. Extensions of approvals due to delay in obtaining other
governmental approvals.
The following shall apply to requests for extension of any approval from the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment due to delays in obtaining
approvals from other government agencies.
§ 190-52. Tolling of running of period of approval due to legal
action.
In the event that, during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development, the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by any
state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public health
and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health
and welfare and the developer is ready, willing and able to proceed with
said development, the running of the period of approval under this chapter
shall be suspended for the period of time said legal action is pending or such
directive order is in effect.
§ 190-53. Developer's agreements; restoration guaranties.
Prior to any construction and coincident with the furnishing of the
performance guarantee by the developer, the developer shall enter into
a developer's agreement with the Village Council incorporating all of the
terms and conditions of approval as required by the Planning Board. At the
discretion of the Village Council, the developer may be required to provide
a restoration guarantee as part of the agreement that can be used by the
Village to restore the property to a safe condition in the event that the
developer abandons the development project. The intent of such guarantee
is to ensure that the property in its unfinished development state does
A. The Planning Board shall grant an extension of any site plan or
subdivision approval for a period determined by the Board, but not
exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date,
if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that
the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining legally
required approvals from other governmental entities and that the
developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the approvals.
B. A developer shall apply for this extension before what would otherwise
be the expiration or the 91st day after the date on which the developer
receives the last of the legally required approvals from the other
governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
C. An extension granted pursuant to this section shall not preclude the
Board from granting any other extensions permitted herein or by any
other law.
§ 190-51 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-53
175:503
not adversely affect the public safety or adversely impact the environment.
No cutting of trees or vegetation and no excavation, earth moving or
installation of infrastructure shall be permitted until said developer's
agreement is executed between the Village Council and the developer. No
Village official shall sign an approved preliminary subdivision or site plan
until the required developer's agreement has been executed.
§ 190-54. Required improvements. [Amended 10-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 3220; 4-7-2010 by Ord. No. 3242]
A. All required improvements for subdivisions set forth in § 190-54B and
any of the improvements in § 190-54B that may be required for a site
plan shall be installed and any required off-tract improvements shall be
installed or a pro rata share of such off-tract improvements paid prior to
final approval, provided that the Village may accept a performance
guarantee for all or some of the required improvements in lieu of
installation of said improvements prior to final approval. If a developer
posts a performance guarantee as provided by this chapter, the Board
shall condition the issuance of building permits, demolition permits or
certificates of occupancy, as the Board deems appropriate, upon the
timely installation of improvements. No building permit for the
construction of any structure other than public improvements as
required pursuant to Subsection B below shall be issued for any portion
of a property that has been granted preliminary approval by the
Planning Board until such time as final approvals have been granted by
the Board.
B. The following improvements shall be required for all major
subdivisions, designed in accordance with the provisions in Article IX of
this chapter:
(1) Street pavement and curbs;
(2) Sidewalks on both sides of new streets and along any side of
existing streets upon which the subject property has frontage;
(3) Driveway aprons;
(4) Streetlighting;
(5) Street signs, traffic signs and striping;
(6) Street trees;
(7) Monuments;
(8) Potable water facilities;
(9) Water facilities for fire-fighting purposes;
(10) Sanitary sewer facilities;
(11) Storm drainage facilities;
§ 190-53 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-54
175:504
§ 190-55. Off-tract improvements.
As a condition of preliminary approval and prior to any construction or
the filing of an application for final approval of a subdivision or site plan,
the applicant shall have made cash payments or other forms of payment
acceptable to the Village and/or installed with the consent of the Village for
any required off-tract improvements. The following provisions shall apply:
(12) Electric, telephone, gas and cable television service, as applicable;
(13) Any related improvements that may be necessary to provide any of
the improvements required above; and
(14) Any off-tract improvements required pursuant to the provisions in
§ 190-55.
C. All improvements as shown on an approved site plan, plus any off-tract
improvements required by § 190-55, shall be required to be installed so
as to comply with the provisions in Articles IX and X of this chapter.
A. Determination of required improvements. The Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable, shall determine the nature
of off-tract improvements to be required. Such determinations shall not
be inconsistent with the Village Master Plan circulation and utility
elements and may include street and related improvements, water,
sewer and drainage facilities and easements therefor.
B. Determination of total cost of improvements. The cost of installation of
the required off-tract improvements shall be determined by the
Planning Board with advice of the Director of Public Works and
appropriate Village agencies.
C. General criteria in determining proportion of costs to be paid by
applicant. The proportion of the total cost to be paid by the applicant for
off-tract improvements shall be determined by the Board, with the
assistance of the appropriate Village agencies, based on the following
criteria:
(1) The total cost of the off-tract improvements;
(2) The increase in market values of the property affected and any
other benefits conferred;
(3) The needs created by the application;
(4) Population and land use projections for the general area of the
applicant's property and other areas to be served by the off-tract
improvements;
(5) The estimated time of construction of the off-tract improvements;
§ 190-54 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-55
175:505
(6) The condition and periods of usefulness of the off-tract
improvements, which periods may be based upon the criteria of
N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22; and
(7) Any other reasonable criteria the Board feels is necessary to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
D. Criteria in determining proportion of costs to be paid by applicant for
specific improvements. In addition to and notwithstanding the
provisions of Subsection C above, the following criteria may be
considered in determining the proportion of the total cost to be paid by
the applicant for the following specific off-tract improvements:
(1) Proportion of costs for street pavement, curbs, sidewalks, shade
trees, streetlights, street signs, traffic lights and related
improvements and easements therefor may also be based upon the
anticipated increase of traffic generated by the development. In
determining such traffic increase, the Board may consider traffic
counts, existing and projected traffic patterns, quality of roads and
sidewalks in the area and other factors related to the need created
by the development and the anticipated benefit thereto.
(2) Proportion of costs for drainage facilities may also be based upon
the drainage conditions created by or affected by a particular
development, considering:
(a) The percentage relationship between the acreage of the
development and the acreage of the total drainage basin.
(b) The use of the site and the amount of area to be covered by
impervious surfaces on the site.
(c) The use, condition or status of the remaining area of the
drainage basin.
(3) Proportion of costs for water supply and distribution facilities may
also be based upon the additional facilities necessitated by the total
anticipated water use requirements of the development and other
properties in the general area benefiting therefrom.
(4) Proportion of costs for sanitary sewer facilities may also be based
upon the proportion that the total anticipated volume of sewage
effluent of the development and other properties connected to the
new facility bears to the existing capacity of existing sewerage
facilities. The calculation shall include the lines and other
appurtenances leading to and servicing the development property.
Consideration may also be given to the types of effluent and
particular problems requiring special equipment or added costs for
treatment. In the event that the applicant's property shall be
permitted to be connected to existing sewer facilities, the applicant
shall pay a charge or be assessed in accordance with law.
§ 190-55 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-55
175:506
E. Manner of implementation. After the estimated total cost of
construction and the application's proportion of the total cost has been
determined, the Village Council shall determine whether the off-tract
improvement is to be implemented by the Village as a general or local
improvement or by the applicant under a formula providing for partial
reimbursement by the Village for benefits to properties other than the
subdivision or site plan.
F. Deposit for improvements. When the manner of implementation has
been determined by the Village Council, the applicant may be required
to provide a cash deposit or other deposit acceptable to the Village, in
accordance with the following:
(1) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Village as a general
improvement, the applicant shall be required to deposit an amount
equal to the difference between the total cost of the improvement
and the estimated amount, if less than the total cost, that all
properties which are to be serviced by the improvement, including
the subject property, will be specifically benefited by the
improvement.
(2) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Village as a local
improvement, the applicant shall be required to deposit an amount
equal to the amount specified in Subsection F above, plus the
estimated amount that the subject property will be specifically
benefited by the improvement.
(3) If the improvement is to be constructed by the applicant, the
applicant shall be required to deposit an amount equal to the
estimated cost of the improvement, less an offset for benefits to
properties other than the subject property.
G. Payment for applicant's share of the cost of improvement. The
applicant's proportion of the total cost of off-tract improvements shall
be paid by the applicant to the Village Treasurer, who shall provide a
suitable depository therefor, and such funds shall be used only for the
off-tract improvements for which they are deposited, or for other
improvements serving the same purpose. In the event that the amount
of the deposit pursuant to Subsection F above is less than the
applicant's proportion of the total cost determined pursuant to
Subsections C and D above, then the applicant shall be required to pay
said proportion. In the event that the amount of the deposit pursuant to
Subsection F above is more than the applicant's proportion of the total
cost determined pursuant to Subsections C and D above, then the
Village shall reimburse the applicant or his successors or assigns for
the difference between the deposit and the applicant's proportion.
H. Refund of payments for failure of Village to make improvements. If after
a period of 10 years from the date of payment by an applicant for offtract
improvements to be constructed by the Village, construction of
such off-tract improvements has not been initiated, the Village shall
§ 190-55 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-55
175:507
refund any and all deposits made by the applicant for such
improvements, together with the accumulated interest or other income
earned on the deposit, if any.
I. Dispute of amount of applicant's contribution. If the applicant and the
Board cannot agree on the total cost or the applicant's proportion of the
total cost of the off-tract improvement, or on the determination made by
the officer or Board charged with the duty of making assessments as to
special benefits, and if the off-tract improvement is to be constructed as
a local improvement, no approval shall be granted for the application.
Where a developer pays the amount determined as his proportion of the
total cost of the improvement under protest, he shall institute legal
action within one year of such payment in order to preserve the right to
a judicial determination as to the fairness and reasonableness of such
amount.
J. Assessments of properties. Upon receipt from the applicant of his
proportion of the total cost of the off-tract improvement, the Village
may adopt a local improvement assessment ordinance for the purpose
of construction of the off-tract improvements based upon the actual cost
thereof. Any portion of the cost of the improvements not defrayed by a
deposit by the applicant may be assessed by the Village against any
property owners who benefit from the improvement. Any assessments
made against the applicant or his successors or assigns for benefits
conferred shall be first offset by a credit for the payment made by the
applicant pursuant to Subsection G above. The applicant or his
successors or assigns shall not be liable for any part of any assessment
for such improvements unless the assessment exceeds the credit for
payment previously made, and then only to the extent of the deficiency.
K. Credit for work performed. In the event that the applicant, with the
Village's consent, decides to install and construct the off-tract
improvement or any portion thereof, the certified cost shall be treated
as a credit against any future assessment for that particular off-tract
improvement or portion thereof constructed by the Village in the same
manner as if the applicant had made a payment pursuant to Subsection
G above.
L. Installation of improvements by applicant. At the option of the Village,
and with the consent of the applicant, the Village may enter into a
contract with the applicant providing for the construction of off-tract
improvements by the applicant upon contribution by the Village of the
remaining unallocated portion of the cost of the off-tract improvement.
In the event that the Village so elects to contribute to the cost and
expense of installation of the off-site improvements by the applicant, the
portion contributed by the Village shall be subject to possible
certification and assessment as a local improvement against benefiting
property owners in the manner provided by law, if applicable.
M. Compliance with design criteria. Should the applicant and the Village
enter into a contract for the construction and erection of the off-tract
§ 190-55 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-55
175:508
§ 190-56. Inspection of improvements and construction.
All improvements required by the Board except electric, telephone, cable
television, streetlighting, gas, water and streets not under the jurisdiction
of the Village of Ridgewood shall be installed under the supervision and
inspection of the director of the Department of Public Works. Other
improvements shall be installed under the supervision and inspection of
the authority having jurisdiction over such improvements. No construction
work covering the required improvements shall be commenced without the
developer first notifying the Director that said construction work is about
to take place. Such notice shall be given, in writing, to the Director at his
office in the Village Hall at least one week before the commencement of
such work. No required improvements shall be covered until inspected and
approved by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
§ 190-57. Maintenance of improvements prior to acceptance.
Until final acceptance of all public improvements by the Village Council,
the developer shall be responsible for the maintenance of all such
improvements, whether such improvements are completed or are under
construction, and shall be responsible for providing all municipal services
regarding such improvements other than solid waste collection. The
following provisions shall apply:
§ 190-58. Selling before final subdivision approval; violations and
penalties.
improvement to be done by the applicant, he shall observe all
requirements and principles of this chapter in the design of such
improvements.
A. If the developer fails to maintain such improvements, including but not
limited to a failure to sweep streets, remove leaves or remove ice or
snow, the Village may, after 24 hours' notice to the developer, proceed
to perform such maintenance at the expense of the developer.
B. The cost charged by the Village for such services shall include direct
labor, overhead, materials and equipment as computed by the Director
of the Department of Public Works.
C. In order to ensure payment of such charges, the Village shall require
the applicant, at the time of and as a condition of preliminary approval,
to deposit in an escrow account an amount equal to that necessary to
provide all necessary maintenance services for a time period equal to
that established for the required performance guarantee, and any
extension thereof. Such escrow deposit shall be administered in
accordance with § 190-26, with the amount of any additional deposits to
be computed by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
A. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
§ 190-55 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-58
175:509
§ 190-59. Certification of subdivision approval.
The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision or which formed
part of such a subdivision subsequent to August 1, 1973, may apply in
writing to the Board Secretary for the issuance of a certificate certifying
whether or not such subdivision has been approved by the Board. The
following provisions shall apply to the issuance of said certificates:
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
Village approval is required by this chapter or any other ordinance
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,101 such person shall be
subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so
made may be deemed a separate violation.
B. In addition to the foregoing, the Village may institute and maintain a
civil action for injunctive relief and to set aside and invalidate any
conveyance made to such a contract of sale if a certificate of
compliance has not been issued in accordance with § 190-59. In any
such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a
lien upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was made
that remains in the possession of the developer or his assigns or
successors, to secure the return of any deposits made or purchase price
paid and also, a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing
expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within two years of the
date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance
of said land or within six years, if unrecorded.
A. Such application shall contain a diagram showing the location and
dimension of the land to be covered by the certificate and the name of
the owner thereof.
B. The Board Secretary shall make and issue such certificate within 15
days after the receipt of such written application and the fees therefor.
C. Each such certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land" and shall certify:
(1) Whether there exists in the Village a duly established planning
board and whether there is an ordinance controlling subdivision of
land adopted under the authority of the Municipal Land Use Law.102
(2) Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Planning Board and, if so,
the date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof,
showing that subdivision of which the lands are a part is a validly
existing subdivision.
101. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
102. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-58 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-59
175:510
§ 190-60. Exception in application of subdivision or site plan
regulation.
The Board, when acting upon applications for minor site plan, minor
subdivision, preliminary major site plan or preliminary major site plan
approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
requirements in this chapter for site plan or subdivision approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent for the provisions for
site plan and subdivision review and approval, if the literal enforcement of
one or more provisions of this chapter regulating site plan and subdivision
applications is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question. Notwithstanding the
above, there shall be no deviation from the zoning regulations, Article X of
this chapter, authorized by this section.
§ 190-61. Reservation of public areas.
If the Village Master Plan or Official Map provides for the reservation
of designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or public
areas within the proposed development, the Board may require that such
streets, ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in locations and sizes
suitable to their intended uses before approving the subdivision or site plan.
(3) Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided in
the Municipal Land Use Law.
D. The Board Secretary shall charge a fee for such certificate as provided
in Article V of this chapter, which fee shall be paid by the Board
Secretary to the Village of Ridgewood.
E. The Board Secretary shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate,
consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee charged, in a
binder as a permanent record of his office.
F. Any person who shall acquire for a valuable consideration an interest in
the lands covered by any such certificate of approval of a subdivision in
reliance upon the information contained therein shall hold such interest
free of any right, remedy or action which could be prosecuted or
maintained by the Village pursuant to the provisions of § 190-58.
G. If the Board Secretary fails to issue the same within 15 days after
receipt of an application and fees therefor, any person acquiring an
interest in the lands described in such application shall hold such
interest free of any right, remedy or action which could be prosecuted
or maintained by the Village pursuant to § 190-58.
H. Any such application addressed to the Village Clerk shall be deemed to
be addressed to the proper designated officer, and the Village shall be
bound thereby to the same extent as though the same was addressed to
the designated official.
§ 190-59 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-61
175:511
The Board may also reserve such areas in accordance with the provisions of
§ 190-130.
§ 190-62. Soil removal.
Notwithstanding any other provision of Chapter 246, Soil Removal, in any
instance where an application for development proposes the moving of any
soil, the applicant may pay a soil permit fee as required in said Chapter 246,
and the Board may process the soil permit as an integral part of the site plan
or subdivision application. In processing such applications, the applicant
will be required to meet all provisions of said Chapter 246, except that a
separate public hearing pertaining to the moving of soil will not be required.
§ 190-63. Payment of taxes and assessments prior to approval.
It shall be a condition of any approval by a Village agency pursuant to
this chapter that proof be submitted that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which any approval
is sought.
§ 190-64. Disclosure of ownership required; violations and
penalties.
A corporation or partnership applying to the Planning Board, Zoning Board
of Adjustment or to the Village Council, as provided herein, for permission
to subdivide a parcel of land into six or more lots or applying for a variance
to construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or more family units or for approval
of a site to be used for commercial purposes shall disclose the ownership of
the corporation or partnership as follows:
A. The corporation shall list the names and addresses of all stockholders
or individual partners owning at least 10% of its stock of any class or at
least 10% of the interest in the partnership, as the case may be.
B. If a corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of a
corporation, or 10% or greater interest in a partnership, subject to
disclosure pursuant to this section, that corporation or partnership
shall list the names and addresses of its stockholders holding 10% or
more of its stock or of 10% or greater interest in the partnership, as the
case may be, and this requirement shall be followed by every corporate
stockholder or partner in a partnership, until the names and addresses
of the noncorporate stockholders and individual partners exceeding the
10% ownership criterion established in this section have been listed.
C. The Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or Village Council
shall not approve any application of any corporation or partnership that
does not comply with the provisions of this section.
D. Any corporation which conceals the names of the stockholders owning
10% or more of its stock or of the individual partners owning a tenpercent
or greater interest in the partnership, as the case may be, shall
§ 190-61 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-64
175:512
§ 190-65. Approvals binding.
Any site plan or subdivision approved by the Board pursuant to this article
shall be binding upon the applicant and his heirs, executors, successors
or assigns. Any deviation from an approved site plan or subdivision or any
failure to adhere to the conditions of approval shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement and penalties
prescribed by this chapter.
be subject to a fine of $1,000 to $10,000, which shall be recovered in
the name of the Village of Ridgewood in any court of record in the state
in a summary manner pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law.103
103. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 190-64 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-65
175:513

ARTICLE VIII
Submission Requirements for Development Applications
§ 190-66. General procedure for completeness review.
This article sets forth the submission requirements for the various
categories of subdivision, site plan and variance applications to the
Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The following general
procedures shall apply to the completeness review of applications:
§ 190-67. General requirements. [Amended 7-16-2003 by Ord. No.
2833]
In addition to the submission requirements for the individual categories of
applications in the following sections, all categories of applications, except
for conceptual site plans, conceptual subdivisions and minor site plans for
which a waiver of public hearing is granted, shall be required to submit the
following:
A. In order to be determined complete for review by the Board, all of the
required information must be submitted, provided that the applicant
may request that one or more of the submission requirements be
waived. A written request, explaining the basis for such request(s) must
be submitted for such waiver requests in order to be considered. The
Board or its authorized committee shall grant or deny the waiver
request within 45 days of receipt of the written request.
B. If more than one development application category is to be considered
by the Board, the applicant shall be required to submit the information
required for all of the individual applications.
C. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's
obligation to prove in the application process that he is entitled to
approval of the application.
D. The Board may subsequently require correction of any information
found to be in error and submission of additional information not
specified in this chapter or any revisions in the accompanying
documents, as are reasonably necessary to make an informed decision
as to whether the requirements necessary for approval of the
application have been met. The application shall not be deemed
incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any revisions
in the accompanying documents so required by the Board.
A. For purposes of completeness review only, three copies of the
appropriate application form(s). Thereafter, if the application is
determined to be complete, the applicant shall submit 20 copies (if
submitting to the Planning Board) or 12 copies (if submitting to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment) of the appropriate application form(s),
completed and signed. If any item is not applicable to the applicant, it
§ 190-66 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-67
175:515
shall be indicated on the application form(s) by the words "not
applicable" or "none."
B. Written description of the application, including a description of the
proposed use and improvements.
C. Statements as to any requirements from which a waiver or variance is
sought, together with a statement of reasons why same should be
granted.
D. Receipt indicating that applicable fees and initial escrow deposits are
paid.
E. Certificate from the Tax Collector indicating that all taxes and
assessments for the subject property are paid up to and including the
most recent collection period.
F. Certificate from both the Board of Adjustment and the Planning Board
indicating the nature and date of prior actions, if any, by the respective
Boards affecting the subject property.
G. Affidavit of ownership. If applicant is not the owner, applicant's interest
in land must be indicated; e.g., tenant, contract/purchaser, lien holder,
etc., and permission of property owner to file the application must be
submitted.
H. If the applicant is a corporation or partnership applying to the Board or
the Council for permission to subdivide a parcel of land into six or more
lots or applying for a variance to construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or
more family units or for approval of a site to be used for commercial
purposes, list the names and addresses of all stockholders or individual
partners owning at least 10% of its stock of any class as required by
§ 190-64.
I. For purposes of completeness review only, three copies of the required
plot plan, site plan or subdivision plan. Thereafter, if the application is
determined to be complete, the applicant shall submit 20 copies (if
submitting to the Planning Board) or 12 copies (if submitting to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment) of any required plot plan, site plan or
subdivision plan, signed and sealed by the professional who prepared
the plot plan, site plan or subdivision plan. Any plan submitted as part
of an application to a Village agency shall be prepared by an individual
pursuant to the regulations in N.J.A.C. 13:27, 13:40 and 13:41, as
amended, provided that the owner of a single-family detached or twofamily
dwelling may sign the plans for an application if he has prepared
them. All such plans shall contain the following information:
(1) Title block containing the type of application; name and address of
applicant and owner; name, address, signature, license number
and seal of plan preparer; existing lot and block numbers;
municipality and county, date prepared and date(s) of all plan
amendments.
§ 190-67 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-67
175:516
(2) Signature block for signatures of Chairman and Secretary of the
Board.
(3) The name of all adjoining property owners as disclosed by current
Village tax records.
(4) A key map showing the location of the tract to be considered in
relation to the surrounding area within at least 500 feet of the
subject property.
(5) Scale of map, both written and graphic. The scale shall consist of
no more than 50 feet to the inch.
(6) North arrow.
(7) Zoning district in which parcel is located, and the zone district of
adjacent property, with a table indicating tract area, lot area(s), lot
width(s), all yard setbacks, coverage by above-grade structures and
coverage by improvements, building height, floor area ratio,
density and number of parking spaces, both as to required, existing
and proposed, for the subject property. If the application involves a
conditional use, compliance with the applicable conditional use
standards shall be indicated on the plan.
(8) Existing and proposed boundaries of the site(s) in question, with
bearings and dimensions of the same. The number of each existing
tax lot in accordance with the Tax Map shall be shown.
(9) Municipal boundary line(s), if any, crossing or adjacent to the
subject property.
(10) Location and width of existing easements or rights-of-way on or
abutting the subject property, including but not limited to streets,
utility and drainage easements, sight easements and access
easements.
(11) Location of existing and proposed buildings, with setbacks from
property lines dimensioned on the plan.
(12) Location of existing and proposed paved areas, including parking
and loading areas, driveways, sidewalks, etc., showing the design
of such areas.
(13) Location of natural features, including woodlands, streams and
other water bodies, wetlands, flood hazard areas and rock outcrops
on the property, and also on adjacent properties if the same affect
the proposed development.
(14) Location of any required dedication or reservation for streets or
any area shown on the Official Map or Master Plan.
(15) Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, if required pursuant to
P.L. 1975, c. 251.104
§ 190-67 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-67
175:517
(16) Construction details and specifications sufficient to illustrate the
nature of site improvements, including but not limited to the
following, when appropriate: paving, curbing, walls, fences, utility
and storm drainage structures, soil erosion control structures, tree
protection devices, light fixtures and standards, signs, planting and
staking details and barrier-free access design.
J. A statement of any and all approvals which are required from other
governmental entities.
K. For minor subdivisions, preliminary major site plans and preliminary
major subdivisions, one of the following:
(1) A letter of interpretation from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE) indicating the
absence of freshwater wetlands, or indicating the presence and
verifying the boundaries of freshwater wetlands, and classifying
the same by resource value;
(2) A letter of exemption from the NJDEPE certifying that the proposed
activity is exempt from the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act,
and regulations promulgated thereunder;
(3) A copy of any application made to the NJDEPE for any permit
concerning a proposed regulated activity in or around freshwater
wetlands; or
(4) Documentation demonstrating that no wetlands exist on the subject
property and demonstrating that no wetlands exist on adjacent
property that would affect or limit development on the property
which is the subject of the development application.
L. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions, if any, affecting
the property in question; provided that if none exist, an affidavit from
the owner certifying that no such covenants or restrictions exist shall
be submitted.
M. If the development is classified as a major development as defined by
§ 190-83C, three copies of a stormwater management plan including
the following and sufficient to demonstrate that the project meets the
standards for major development in § 190-83D: [Added 1-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 3035]
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. The
topographic base map should extend a minimum of 200 feet beyond
the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The
map shall indicate, as appropriate, the following: existing surface
water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils,
104. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 190-67 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-67
175:518
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of
Category One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their
appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious
or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads,
bearing and distances of property lines, and significant natural and
man-made features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of § 190-83D(1)
through (7) are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations. Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and postdevelopment
§ 190-67 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-67
175:519
conditions for the design storms specified in § 190-83D(4), (5) and
(6).
(7) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties of
soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall
be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and
location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined
based on what is needed to determine the suitability and
distribution of soils present at the location of the control measure,
or no less than one soil boring per 500 square feet of infiltration
basin area to a depth 10 feet below the ambient groundwater
elevation or 50 feet below surface elevation, whichever is less.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village Engineer may waive the
requirement for borings if in his/her opinion the same are
unnecessary to determine the hydrologic properties of the soil(s).
(8) Maintenance and repair plan. The plan shall be sufficient to
demonstrate that the design and planning of the stormwater
management facility shall meet the maintenance requirements of
§ 190-83D(8).
N. If the development is classified as a minor development as defined by
§ 190-83C and involves a new building, an addition to an existing
building, pool or any site improvement resulting in an increase of at
least 200 square feet of impervious surface, three copies of a
stormwater management application and plan including the following
and sufficient to demonstrate that the project meets the standards for
minor development in § 190-83E: [Added 1-17-2007 by Ord. No.
3035]
(1) A current survey of the site indicating existing conditions.
(2) All existing and proposed impervious cover areas.
(3) All methods of capturing and directing stormwater runoff into
seepage tanks.
(4) All inlet and pipe sizes.
(5) Manufacturer's drawings and installation details of all proposed
products.
(6) Existing and proposed contours and/or spot elevations sufficient to
allow calculation of soil movement and accurately depict drainage
patterns.
(7) Limits of disturbance for all proposed work.
(8) All trees with a trunk diameter of at least six inches at breast height
to be removed and to remain.
§ 190-67 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-67
175:520
§ 190-68. Conceptual site plans and subdivisions.
Applications for informal review of conceptual site plans and/or subdivisions
shall be required to submit a plan of the proposed development. The
procedures for completeness review of formal applications shall not apply
to such plan, except as provided below; however, the Board Secretary shall
refer the plan to the appropriate persons and agencies, who shall provide
suggestions as to any additional information that may be helpful to the
Board in reviewing the plan. The applicant may choose to proceed without
providing such additional information or may provide some or all of the
suggested information. Once the applicant has finalized his plan submittal,
the application shall be scheduled for the Board's agenda; provided that any
application for informal review shall provide the following prior to referral
or review by the Board:
(9) Elevations at property corners and key points of proposed
buildings, additions, paved areas, property corners, gutters,
swales, top and bottom of walls and curbs, and at all significant
grade changes.
(10) Existing and proposed basement, first floor and garage slab
elevations, where applicable. All elevations shall be in the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. Benchmarks are available at the
Village of Ridgewood, Engineering Division.
(11) All existing streams, brooks, or other natural or man-made
drainage facilities, and including utilities when pertinent to any
proposed use or construction.
(12) Proposed landscaping, showing the treatment of nonimpervious
areas.
(13) A soil erosion/sediment control plan, including but not limited to
silt fence and/or salt hay barrier(s). A fifty-foot long by ten-foot
wide clean crushed stone access drive is required for all sites also
obtaining a soil moving permit. Bergen County Soil Conservation
District certification shall be required for any project that will
disturb an area greater than 5,000 square feet.
(14) Information sufficient to demonstrate compliance with the
requirements for seepage tank/retention system design in
§ 190-83E(2).
(15) Where applicable, the boundary of the one-hundred-year floodplain
and flood hazard area and the base flood elevation, as determined
by the latest accepted Federal Emergency Management Agency's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (information available from the
Engineering Division).
(16) Limits of wetlands and associated transition areas.
§ 190-67 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-68
175:521
§ 190-69. Minor subdivisions.
In addition to the requirements indicated in § 190-67, the information below
shall be shown on the plans for all minor subdivision applications. Minor
subdivision plans to be filed with the County Recording Officer shall use
a sheet size of either 8.5 inches by 13 inches, 15 inches by 21 inches, 24
inches by 36 inches or 30 inches by 42 inches.
A. Twenty copies of the appropriate application form(s), completed and
signed. If any item on the form is not applicable to the applicant, it shall
be indicated on the application form(s) by the words "not applicable" or
"none."
B. Twenty copies of the concept plan.
C. Written description of the application, including a description of the
proposed use and improvements.
D. Receipt indicating that applicable fees and initial escrow deposits are
paid.
E. Certificate from the Tax Collector indicating that all taxes and
assessments for the subject property are paid up to and including the
most recent collection period.
A. Name of the map.
B. Dimensions, bearings and curve data for all property lines and
easements.
C. Location and description of existing and proposed monuments,
including monuments where found, monuments set or reset, and
monuments to be set or reset.
D. Proposed lot and block numbers for each proposed lot.
E. Reference meridian for North arrow shown graphically.
F. Date of the survey.
G. Required building envelopes drawn for each lot, showing graphically
and by dimension the minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks, as
well as any easements within which the construction of buildings is
prohibited.
H. Location, dimensions and nature of existing and proposed
improvements in any streets, within or abutting the tract.
I. Existing and proposed topographic contours, both for the tract and for
adjacent areas affecting and affected by the development. Contour
intervals shall not exceed the following: up to 10% grade: two feet; over
10% grade: five feet. Contour elevations shall be referenced to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. [Amended 1-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 3035]
§ 190-68 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-69
175:522
§ 190-70. Preliminary major subdivisions.
In addition to the requirements indicated in § 190-67, the information below
shall be shown on the plans for all preliminary major subdivision
applications:
J. Location of existing and proposed wells and septic systems and location
of existing and proposed connections to public water and sanitary
sewer systems, as well as connections to other utilities.
K. Certification from a licensed surveyor as to the accuracy of the details
on the plat and as to compliance with provisions of the Map Filing
Law.105
L. Certification from a licensed surveyor as to the setting of monuments or
from the Village Clerk as to the posting of a bond for the future setting
of monuments.
M. Certification from the Village Engineer as to the plat's compliance with
the provisions of the Map Filing Law and all applicable Village
ordinances and requirements.
N. A statement from the Village Engineer that he has received a map
showing all utilities in exact location and elevation identifying those
portions already installed and those to be installed, and that the
developer has installed all improvements in accordance with all Village
regulations and/or a statement by the Village Clerk that proper
performance guaranties have been posted with the Village Council for
the installation of required improvements.
O. When approval of a plat is required by an officer or agency of the
Village, county or state, such approval shall be referenced and certified
on the plat.
A. The proposed name of the subdivision.
B. Curve data for all property lines.
C. Proposed lot and block numbers for each proposed lot.
D. Required building envelopes drawn for each lot, showing graphically
and by dimension the minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks, as
well as any easements within which the construction of buildings is
prohibited.
E. Location and use of open space, if any, to be deeded to the Village or
controlled by an open space organization, as well as the use and nature
of any other common areas.
F. Location, dimensions and nature of existing and proposed
improvements in any streets, within or abutting the tract for a minimum
105. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 190-69 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-70
175:523
distance of 200 feet beyond the tract boundaries, including profiles and
cross-sections for all proposed streets, sidewalks, alleys, and planting
strips; radii, points of curvature and tangency and central angles of all
curves, both center-line and curb.
G. Existing and proposed water supply, including plans and profiles of
proposed water mains, pipe material and sizes, valves, joints, hydrants
and location of private wells.
H. Existing and proposed sanitary sewer service. If septic disposal systems
are proposed, test hole locations and soil log information shall be
submitted, along with the location of existing septic tanks and fields. If
connection to public sanitary sewers is contemplated, the applicant
shall submit plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewer lines; pipe
length, material and sizes; location of pumping stations, manholes and
other structures; and appropriate elevations.
I. Plans and profiles of existing and proposed storm drainage design and
improvements, including a map showing the entire drainage area; the
drainage area contributing to each pertinent drainage structure;
drainage tabulation sheets showing calculations for each drainage
area; length, size and material of drain pipes; direction of flow; location
of inverts, manholes, dry wells, groundwater recharge basins, swales,
drainage basins and other structures; and elevations of grates, inverts,
etc.
J. Proposed location of easements for gas, electric, telephone and cable
television service.
K. Existing and proposed topographic contours, both for the tract and for
adjacent areas affecting and affected by the development. Contour
intervals shall not exceed the following: up to 10% grade: two feet; over
10% grade: five feet. Contour elevations shall be referenced to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929. [Amended 1-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 3035]
L. If regrading near existing buildings is proposed, proposed spot grades
at the corners of all buildings, and finished floor elevations of buildings.
M. Location and description of existing and proposed street trees,
landscaping and natural vegetation to remain. Information for proposed
plantings shall include common and scientific names, number of plants,
planted size and root specification.
N. The location and design of fences, walls, sidewalks and similar
improvements to be proposed.
O. If development is proposed in phases or stages, a phasing plan.
§ 190-70 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-71
175:524
§ 190-71. Final major subdivisions.
In addition to the requirements indicated in § 190-67, the information below
shall be shown on the plans for all minor subdivision applications. Minor
subdivision plans shall use a sheet size of either 8.5 inches by 13 inches, 15
inches by 21 inches, 24 inches by 36 inches or 30 inches by 42 inches.
§ 190-72. Minor site plans. [Amended 7-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2833]
A. Those items required for preliminary major subdivisions pursuant to
§ 190-70, shown in final form.
B. Information sufficient to demonstrate that all of the conditions of
preliminary approval have been satisfied.
C. Name of the map.
D. Location and description of existing and proposed monuments,
including monuments where found, monuments set or reset, and
monuments to be set or reset.
E. Reference meridian for North arrow shown graphically.
F. Date of the survey.
G. Certification from a licensed surveyor as to the accuracy of the details
on the plat and as to compliance with provisions of the Map Filing
Law.106
H. Certification from a licensed surveyor as to the setting of monuments or
from the Village Clerk as to the posting of a bond for the future setting
of monuments.
I. Certification from the Village Engineer as to the plat's compliance with
the provisions of the Map Filing Law and all applicable Village
ordinances and requirements.
J. A statement from the Village Engineer that he has received a map
showing all utilities in exact location and elevation identifying those
portions already installed and those to be installed and that the
developer has installed all improvements in accordance with all Village
regulations and/or a statement by the Village Clerk that proper
performance guaranties have been posted with the Village Council for
the installation of required improvements.
A. In addition to the requirements indicated in § 190-67, the following
information shall be submitted for all minor site plans for which the
public hearing is not waived:
(1) A site plan showing the location and design of existing and
proposed improvements, including but not limited to parking,
106. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 190-71 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-72
175:525
loading, access and circulation improvements, signs, exterior
lighting, fences and walls, pavement and landscaping.
Improvements need be shown only to the extent that such
improvements affect or are affected by the proposed development
and/or are necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.
(2) If interior renovations or alterations are proposed, floor plans for
existing and proposed buildings, showing the use and layout of
internal space, at a minimum scale of one inch per eight feet.
(3) If alterations to the existing building facade are proposed,
elevations showing the extent and nature of the construction,
including the location and dimensions of walls, doors, windows and
signs, and the proposed materials and colors.
(4) If revisions to existing topographic contours or spot elevations are
proposed, or if the building entrance or finished floor elevation is
proposed to be revised, existing and proposed contours and/or spot
elevations portraying the change.
(5) The nature, location and design of any proposed exterior heating,
ventilating, exhaust, air conditioning or other equipment serving
similar functions, including any exterior ductwork.
(6) If any subsurface stormwater storage/discharge systems are
proposed, or other improvements that require discharge of water in
the ground, the results of percolation tests shall be submitted with
the application, along with test hole locations and soil log
information, if determined necessary by the Village Engineer.
(7) A statement from the Village Engineer indicating whether or not
the existing sanitary sewer service capacity is adequate for the
proposed development and stating whether or not any
modifications to the sanitary sewer design for the development are
necessary.
B. For minor site plans for which the public hearing is waived pursuant to
§ 190-44B, the information required by § 190-67 shall not be required,
but the information required by Subsection A(1) through (7) above, plus
all of the following information, shall be required:
(1) Six copies of the appropriate application form(s), completed and
signed. If any item on the form is not applicable to the applicant, it
shall be indicated on the application form(s) by the words "not
applicable," "none" or other appropriate language.
(2) Written description of the application, including a description of
the proposed use, hours of operation, number or nature of
employees and improvements, both interior and exterior.
(3) Receipt indicating that applicable fees and initial escrow deposits
are paid.
§ 190-72 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-72
175:526
§ 190-73. Preliminary major site plans.
In addition to the requirements indicated in § 190-67, the following
information shall be submitted for all preliminary major site plans:
(4) Certificate from the Tax Collector indicating that all taxes and
assessments for the subject property are paid up to and including
the most recent collection period.
(5) Six copies of the site plan, drawn at an appropriate scale but having
no more than 30 feet per inch.
(6) Six copies of a photograph or photographs showing the existing
conditions in the area of the proposed development (e.g., photo of
storefront, location of addition, dumpster, fence, etc.).
(7) Certification from the Zoning Officer that the proposed
development complies with all applicable development regulations.
If any relief from such regulations is found to be necessary, a public
hearing shall be required, and the submission requirements in
§§ 190-67 and 190-72A shall apply.
(8) Certificate from both the Board of Adjustment and the Planning
Board indicating the nature and date of prior actions, if any, by the
respective Boards affecting the subject property.
(9) Affidavit of ownership. If applicant is not the owner, applicant's
interest in land must be indicated; e.g., tenant, contract/purchaser,
lienholder, etc., and permission of property owner to file the
application must be submitted.
A. Location of existing and proposed buildings and their setbacks from
property lines, plus the location of existing buildings and paved areas
on adjacent properties.
B. Floor plans for existing and proposed buildings, showing the use and
layout of internal space, and front, rear and side building facade
elevations, both at a scale not exceeding eight feet per inch.
C. Location and design of existing and proposed parking, loading, access
and circulation improvements, showing dimensions of the same.
D. Existing and proposed topographic contours of the site and areas
affecting and affected by the site. Contour intervals shall not exceed the
following: up to 10% grade: two feet; over 10% grade: five feet. Contour
elevations shall be referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
of 1929. [Amended 1-17-2007 by Ord. No. 3035]
E. If new buildings or paved areas are proposed or if regrading near
existing buildings is proposed, proposed spot grades at the corners of
all buildings and in appropriate pavement locations, and finished floor
elevations.
§ 190-72 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-73
175:527
§ 190-74. Final major site plans.
In addition to the requirements indicated in § 190-67, the following
information shall be submitted for all final major site plans:
§ 190-75. Variance applications or appeals.
All applications or appeals for a "C" variance or "D" variance, when site plan
or subdivision approval is not required, or when the variance application
has been bifurcated from subsequent site plan or subdivision applications
which may be required by this chapter, shall submit the information
required by § 190-67. The Board reviewing the application shall have the
authority to request additional information not required by § 190-67 if, in
its opinion, such additional information is necessary to make an informed
decision on the application or appeal.
F. Existing and proposed utility service, including septic systems with test
hole locations and soil log information, connections to sanitary sewers,
wells, connections to water mains, fire hydrants, etc.
G. Existing and proposed storm drainage design and improvements,
including a map showing the entire drainage area, the drainage area
contributing to each pertinent drainage structure and drainage
tabulation sheets showing calculations for each drainage area.
Provisions for rooftop drainage shall also be shown.
H. Existing and proposed site illumination, including height and location of
fixture, type of fixture and bulb, pole material and manufacturer's
isocandela diagram superimposed upon the site plan.
I. Location and description of existing and proposed landscaping.
Information for proposed landscaping shall be include common and
scientific names, number of plants, planted size and root specification.
J. Existing and proposed signs, including the size, materials, nature of
construction, location and any illumination of same.
K. The location and design of fences, walls, sidewalks and similar
improvements to be proposed.
L. The location and design of solid waste disposal containers and recycling
containers.
M. If development is proposed in phases or stages, a phasing plan.
A. Those items required for preliminary major site plans pursuant to
§ 190-73, shown in final form.
B. Information sufficient to demonstrate that all of the conditions of
preliminary approval have been satisfied.
§ 190-73 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-76
175:528
§ 190-76. Other applications or appeals.
Applications or appeals for other than variance relief shall be required to
submit the information specified in the procedural sections for said appeals,
§ 190-29, 190-30, 190-31 or 190-32, as appropriate.
§ 190-76 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-76
175:529

ARTICLE IX
Design Guidelines, Standards and Construction Specifications
§ 190-77. Applicability; general design guidelines. [Amended
8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 3426]
This article provides design guidelines, design standards and construction
specifications which shall apply to applications for site plan or subdivision
approval and to improvements and activities which are exempted from the
requirement to obtain formal site plan approval. Site plans and subdivisions,
and improvements and activities which are exempt from formal site plan
approval requirements, except for individual lot applications for detached
one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings and permitted accessory uses and
structures thereto, shall be designed to:
§ 190-78. Blocks and lots.
A. Be consistent with the Village Master Plan, Official Map and with the
zoning regulations, Article X of this chapter;
B. Consider county, regional and state plans for the Village, and to
conform to all applicable regulations of the county, state or federal
governments, as well as any regional entities having jurisdiction;
C. Minimize negative impacts to the natural and man-made environment,
including wetlands, areas prone to flooding, stream corridors, steep
slopes, surface and ground water systems, significant stands of
vegetation, wildlife, historical structures and sites, existing structures,
neighborhood character and the fiscal stability of the community; and
D. Advance the purposes of this chapter and the Municipal Land Use
Law,107 as applicable.
A. General. The layout of blocks and lots shall be designed to:
(1) Be compatible with the lot and block patterns established in the
neighborhood, as appropriate;
(2) Minimize negative impacts to the natural and man-made
environments;
(3) Provide for a well-designed system for circulation and access; and
(4) Provide a suitable amount of land on each lot that will enable
appropriate development according to this chapter without undue
environmental impact.
B. Block length. No block shall exceed 1,000 feet in length, except when a
greater length is necessary to implement a conforming dead end street
layout as permitted by this chapter.
107. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-77 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-78
175:531
§ 190-79. Streets.
The following standards shall apply for all streets which are within the
jurisdiction of the Village of Ridgewood.
C. Block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the property line with
a minimum radius of 25 feet.
D. Conformance with zoning. Whenever a new lot is formed from a part of
any other lot or lots, the assembly or separation shall be effected in
such a manner as not to impair any of the requirements of this chapter.
No subdivision shall be permitted which results in a change in area,
width or front, side or rear yard that fails to comply in every respect
with the required provisions of the district in which it is located.
E. Lot shape. Lots shall be shaped to enable proper use, maintenance of
and access to the lot, and in keeping with the planned future
development of the area, as indicated in the Master Plan and zoning
regulations. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles
to straight streets and radial to curved streets.
F. Each lot must front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in width, or
such greater width that may be required by the Village Master Plan,
Official Map or by any other law.
G. Reserve access strips. No subdivision showing reserve strips
controlling access to streets shall be approved unless the control and
disposal of land comprising such strips has been placed in the Village
Council under conditions approved by the Board and the Council.
H. Suitability of lots for development. The Board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of any lot which, in its opinion, is not
suitable for its intended use due to factors such as, but not limited to,
rock formations, surface or underground mines, flooding, wetlands, soil
conditions, presence of hazardous materials, excessive slopes, etc.
A. General. Streets, driveways, aisles and sidewalks shall be designed to:
(1) Comply with the proposals in the Village Master Plan and Official
Map;
(2) Permit the safe, efficient, and orderly movement of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic;
(3) Discourage heavy volumes of through traffic on minor streets and
in residential areas;
(4) Provide for anticipated future volumes and speeds of traffic;
(5) Provide for adequate access and movement of emergency and
service vehicles, including police and fire-fighting equipment,
school buses, street maintenance vehicles, garbage trucks, delivery
vehicles, etc.;
§ 190-78 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-79
175:532
(6) Provide access to adjacent properties without unduly interfering
with the flow of traffic;
(7) Provide a simple and logical street pattern; and
(8) Provide an attractive streetscape.
B. Street width. The width of street right-of-way and pavement shall be as
set forth below, according to the Master Plan street classifications,
unless in a particular situation the Master Plan or Official Map require a
greater width, and provided that the Board may require greater width
in a particular situation based upon analysis of traffic and street
conditions:
(1) Width of street.
Street
Classification
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Pavement
(feet)
Village arterial 60 40
Village collector 50 30
Minor 50 30
(2) Subdivisions which abut existing streets that do not conform to the
width standards of this chapter shall dedicate additional width
along one or both sides of such street as may be required or
permitted by law.
(3) Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential
to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity
with other requirements of this chapter and where the Board finds
that it will be practical to require the dedication of the other half of
the street when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a
half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half
street shall be platted within such tract.
C. Street grades and grading. Streets shall be graded in accordance with
the following standards:
(1) Minimum grade. All streets shall have a minimum center-line grade
of 1%.
(2) Maximum grade. No street shall have a center-line grade which
exceeds 10%.
(3) The developer shall be required to grade the full width of the street
right-of-way, and to grade abutting property as necessary to comply
with the design standards of this chapter for streets. Where
required by the Board, the developer shall provide slope-right
easements on property abutting the street right-of- way.
§ 190-79 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-79
175:533
D. Sight easements for horizontal curves. Sight easements shall be
provided at horizontal curves when it is determined by the Planning
Board and the Village Engineer that the same are necessary for proper
visibility. The boundaries of the easement shall be determined based
upon conditions which exist at the curve.
E. Street intersections. The following standards shall apply:
(1) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible,
and in no case shall the angle of intersection be less than 60°.
(2) New intersections created with an existing street shall be aligned
with any existing or planned streets on the opposite side of the
intersecting street and shall minimize jogs and sharp angles.
(3) Sight easements shall be provided at all intersections, when
essential for traffic safety.
F. Dead end streets. The following standards shall apply to dead end
streets:
(1) The maximum length of dead-end streets shall relate to the district
within which the lots fronting on the street are located, in
accordance with the following schedule. The length shall be
measured along the center line of the street(s) between the
extreme dead end of the right-of-way line at the turning circle to
the center line of the nearest intersecting through street.
Zone
Maximum Length of Cul-de-Sac
(feet)
R-125 1,250
R-110 1,100
R-1 1,000
R-2 750
R-3 600
R-4 500
Other As determined by the Board
(2) There shall be a turnaround provided at the end of all dead-end
streets with a minimum outside curb radius of 30 feet and a
minimum right-of-way radius of 40 feet. Whenever possible, the
turnaround shall be tangent to the right side of the street as one
approaches the turnaround.
(3) If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a turnaround shall be
provided in accordance with the standards for permanent
turnarounds. Provision shall be made for the future extension of the
street and the reversion of excess right-of-way to abutting property
owners. Removal of the temporary turnaround and installation of
§ 190-79 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-79
175:534
§ 190-80. Curbs.
Streets, parking areas, loading areas, driveways for nonresidential and
multifamily residential developments and other paved areas required by the
Board shall be bounded by curbs constructed according to the Village street
curb standards.
§ 190-81. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards:
§ 190-82. Driveway aprons.
Flared driveway aprons shall be provided between the street pavement
and the sidewalk or, when no sidewalk is required, between the street
pavement and the right-of-way line, in accordance with the requirements of
the Director of Public Works.
§ 190-83. Stormwater management and flood protection. [Amended
1-15-2003 by Ord. No. 2814; 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2983; 1-17-2007
by Ord. No. 3035]
permanent improvements, including but not limited to pavement,
sidewalks, curbs, topsoil, shade trees, driveway aprons, etc. shall
be at the developer's sole expense.
G. Street pavement. All streets shall be paved in accordance with the
street specifications for the Village.
H. Private streets. Any private street proposed for any development shall
follow the same standards required for public streets.
A. Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of streets.
B. Sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide, except where site conditions
warrant a greater width.
C. Provisions are to be made for access by disabled persons, particularly
as they relate to entranceways and ramps, both within new and
remodeled buildings and structures.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development" and "minor development" as defined in this section. The
standards are intended to:
(1) Minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water quality and
water quantity in receiving water bodies;
(2) Maintain groundwater recharge;
(3) Minimize the potential for erosion and sedimentation;
§ 190-79 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:535
(4) Prevent degradation of wildlife habitat, including but not limited to
stream, swamp, lake and pond habitats;
(5) Consider the impact of the proposed development on the total
watershed area;
(6) Provide for proper maintenance and repair of stormwater facilities;
(7) Provide for proper security of stormwater facilities and prevent
undue hazards; and
(8) Ensure that stormwater facilities are aesthetically pleasing.
(9) Require the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are in
direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or
resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property, to
prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic
bottles, cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Village of
Ridgewood so as to protect public health, safety and welfare.
[Added 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3223]
B. Applicability, scope, exemptions and waivers. This section shall apply to
all aspects of development, municipal or private, that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C.
5:21 or by other law. In addition, the following provisions shall govern
the application of this section:
(1) Minimum requirements. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this section shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
(2) Other approvals. Development approvals issued pursuant to this
section do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure
required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other
applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
(3) Effect upon other regulations. This section is not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinances, rule or
regulation, statute, or other provision of law except that where any
provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher
standards shall control.
(4) Exemption in case of regional plan. The standards for major
development do not apply to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:536
(5) Exemption for certain linear developments. The following linear
development projects are exempt from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 190-83D(4), (5) and (6):
(a) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that
the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that
the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided
that the access is made of permeable material.
(6) Agricultural developments. Any application for a new agricultural
development that meets the definition of major development in
§ 190-83C shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation
District for review and approval in accordance with the
requirements of this section and any applicable Soil Conservation
District guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion
control. For the purposes of this section, "agricultural
development" means land uses normally associated with the
production of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not
include the development of land for the processing or sale of food
and the manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
(7) Waivers for widening of certain transportation improvements. A
waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 190-83D(4), (5) and (6) may be obtained from the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as applicable, in the case
of site plan, subdivision, variance or other development approvals
required pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, or from the
Engineering Department of the Village for other approvals, for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis,
that through the use of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with the requirements of § 190-83D(4), (5)
and (6) to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of § 190-83D(4), (5) and (6), existing structures
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:537
currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to
be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection B(7)(c) above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of § 190-83D(4), (5) and (6) that were not
achievable on-site.
(8) Exceptions; required mitigation. The municipal reviewing agency
may grant an exception from the design and performance
standards set forth in § 190-83D, provided that in granting relief,
the agency shall require the applicant to submit a mitigation plan
that identifies what measures are necessary to offset the deficit
created by granting the variance or exception. The mitigation shall
ensure that mitigation is completed within the drainage area and
for the performance standard for which for the variance or
exception was granted. Such mitigation measures shall comply
with the mitigation project criteria set forth in the Village's
stormwater management plan element of the Village Master Plan.
The developer shall have the obligation to implement the measures
identified in the mitigation plan or, if the developer is unable to
implement the measures, to pay the cost of such mitigation
measures to the Village of Ridgewood.
C. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable
application. The definitions below are the same as or based on the
corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
BMP — Best management practice.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances. The county review
agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
(1) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(2)
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:538
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development
of agricultural lands, development means: any activity that requires a
state permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board
(CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and
municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water
body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which
is of significant environmental value, including, but not limited to:
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are
identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development other than major
development.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyance, including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:539
made channels, or storm drains, that is owned or operated by the
Village of Ridgewood or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.[Added 11-9-2009 by Ord. No.
3223]
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Village of Ridgewood, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.], thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial,
municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other
residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters
or surface waters of the state, or to a domestic treatment works.
"Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curb
opening inlet, slotted inlet and combination inlet.[Added 11-9-2009
by Ord. No. 3223]
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:540
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural
or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject
to its jurisdiction.[Amended 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3223]
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
D. Requirements for major development. Major development, as defined
by this section, shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) General.
(a) All major development shall comply with the design and
performance standards for erosion control, groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity control, maintenance
and other requirements contained in this subsection.
(b) In addition to all other applicable requirements, major
development that results in an additional 1/4 acre of total
impervious surface on a development site shall comply with the
standards for stormwater runoff quality control.
(c) To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management
strategies into the design. Nonstructural strategies include
both environmentally sensitive site design and source controls
that prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or from
being exposed to stormwater. If these strategies alone are not
sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards
shall be incorporated into the design.
(d) Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance
plans.
(e) Source control plans should be developed based upon physical
site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:541
(f) Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to
achieve the established performance standards for water
quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
(g) Development applications and approvals shall incorporate a
maintenance plan for the stormwater management measures
incorporated into the design of the development in accordance
with § 190-83D(8).
(h) Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse
impacts of concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and
endangered species as documented in the Department's
Landscape Project or Natural Heritage Database established
under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150, particularly
Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlnebergi
(bog turtle).
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(a) Strategy prioritization. To the maximum extent practicable, the
standards in § 190-83D(3) through (7) shall be met by
incorporating nonstructural stormwater management
strategies set forth in this § 190-83D(2) into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental,
or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection D(2)(b) below
into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall
identify the strategy considered and provide a basis for the
contention.
(b) Strategy objectives. Nonstructural stormwater management
strategies incorporated into site design shall:
[1] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
[4] Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of
concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the
watershed to the point of interest within a watershed;
[5] Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
[6] Minimize soil compaction;
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:542
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes
the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to
prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are
not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation
of trash and debris in drainage systems, including
features that satisfy § 190-83D(7)(c);
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial developments;
[d] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(c) Perpetual maintenance. Any land area used as a nonstructural
stormwater management measure to meet the performance
standards in § 190-83D(3) through (6) shall be dedicated to a
government agency, subjected to a conservation restriction
filed with the appropriate County Clerk's office, or subject to
an approved equivalent restriction that ensures that measure
or an equivalent stormwater management measure approved
by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(d) Technical guidance. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater
management strategies is available in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP
Manual may be obtained from the address identified in
Subsection G below, or found on the Department's Web site at
www.njstormwater.org.
(3) Erosion control standards. The minimum design and performance
standards for erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:543
(4) Groundwater recharge standards. The minimum design and
performance standards for groundwater recharge are as follows:
(a) Recharge volume. The design engineer shall, using the
assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff and
groundwater recharge calculations at § 190-83D(4) and (5),
either:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the site and its stormwater management measures
maintain 100% of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the site; or
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the increase of stormwater runoff volume from
preconstruction to postconstruction for the two-year storm
is infiltrated.
(b) Calculations. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in
accordance with the New Jersey Geological Survey Report
GSR-32, A Method for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge
Areas in New Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as
amended and supplemented. Information regarding the
methodology is available from the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual; at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/
njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway,
P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609)
984-6587.
(c) Prohibited recharge. The following types of stormwater shall
not be recharged:
[1] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded or
stored; areas where hazardous materials are expected to
be present in greater than "reportable quantities" as
defined by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas where recharge
would be inconsistent with a Department-approved
remedial action work plan or landfill closure plan and
areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials, such as
gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[2] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or machinery,
located at an industrial facility that is directly or indirectly
related to process, manufacturing or other industrial
activities, which could be a source of pollutants in any
industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:544
materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials;
intermediate products; final products; waste materials; byproducts;
industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants,
solvents, and detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are
exposed to stormwater.
(d) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid adverse
hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic impacts
include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a naturally or
seasonally high water table so as to cause surficial ponding,
flooding of basements, or interference with the proper
operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
subsurface structures in the vicinity or downgradient of the
groundwater recharge area.
(5) Runoff quantity standards.
(a) Preconstruction runoff rates to be maintained. In order to
control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design
engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 190-83D(5)(b), complete
one of the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area; or
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:545
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge.
(b) Calculation methodology. Stormwater runoff shall be
calculated in accordance with the following:
[1] The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
[a] The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff
Equation and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as
described in the NRCS National Engineering
Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and Technical
Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
[b] The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified
Rational Method for hydrograph computations.
[2] For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and
groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the
preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a
wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term
"runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology
at § 190-83D(5)(b)[1][a] and the Rational and Modified
Rational Methods at § 190-83D(5)(b)[1][b]. A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an
existing condition may be used on all or a portion of the
site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic
condition has existed on the site or portion of the site for at
least five years without interruption prior to the time of
application. If more than one land cover has existed on the
site during the five years immediately prior to the time of
application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition
(if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good
cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good
hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the
land use type is cultivation).
[3] In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the
design engineer shall account for all significant land
features and structures, such as ponds, wetlands,
depressions, hedgerows, or culverts, that may reduce
preconstruction stormwater runoff rates and volumes.
[4] In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms,
the design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:546
runoff rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious
surfaces separately to accurately compute the rates and
volume of stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate
runoff from unconnected impervious cover, urban
impervious area modifications as described in the NRCS
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
[5] If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design
flood elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design
engineer shall take into account the effects of tailwater in
the design of structural stormwater management
measures. The Village Engineer may also require that the
outfall pipe be equipped with a backflow prevention
measure such as tide gate.
(6) Runoff quality standards. Stormwater management measures shall
only be required for water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre
(10,890 square feet) or more of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. Such measures shall comply with
the following requirements:
(a) Suspended solids, Stormwater management measures shall be
designed to reduce the postconstruction load of total
suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80% of the
anticipated load from the developed site, expressed as an
annual average. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply
to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a
numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement.
[1] The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in
two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality
design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the
volume of runoff may take into account the
implementation of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management measures.
Table 1
Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:547
Table 1
Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
[2] For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual
may be obtained from the address identified in Subsection
G below, or found on the Department's Web site at
www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in § 190-83D(9).
TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal
rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
used if the design engineer provides documentation
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:548
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate
shall be provided to the Department at the following
address: Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
[3] If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the
required eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the
applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate
TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs
A = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2
TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management
Practice
TSS Percent Removal
Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment
device
See § 190-83D(7)(a)[5]
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
[4] If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eightypercent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage
area, unless the runoff from the subareas converges on
site, in which case the removal rate can be demonstrated
through a calculation using a weighted average.
(b) Nutrients. Stormwater management measures shall also be
designed to reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the
postconstruction nutrient load of the anticipated load from the
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:549
developed site in stormwater runoff generated from the water
quality design storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the
maximum extent feasible, the design of the site shall include
nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize
nutrient removal while still achieving the performance
standards in § 190-83D(3) through (6).
(c) Additional information. Additional information and examples
are contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, which may be obtained from the address
identified in § 190-83D(9).
(d) FW1 waters. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at
N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4, stormwater management measures shall be
designed to prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to
waters classified as FW1.
(e) Category 1 waters. Special water resource protection areas
shall be established along all waters designated Category One
at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial or intermittent streams that
drain into or upstream of the Category One waters as shown on
the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the County Soil Surveys,
within the associated HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall
be established for the protection of water quality, aesthetic
value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply
significance, and exceptional fisheries significance of those
established Category One waters. These areas shall be
designated and protected as follows:
[1] The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[a] A three-hundred-foot special water resource
protection area shall be provided on each side of the
waterway, measured perpendicular to the waterway
from the top of the bank outwards or from the center
line of the waterway where the bank is not defined,
consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation allowed
to follow natural succession.
[b] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection
D(6)(e)[1][a] above shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred
(for example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only
be allowed where applicant demonstrates that the
functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area will be maintained to
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:550
the maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the
remaining special water resource protection area be
reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
[2] All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow
through the special water resource protection area and
shall comply with the standard for off-site stability in the
"Standards For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
[3] If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through
the special water resource protection area cannot comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey,"
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization
measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water
resource protection area, provided that:
[a] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150
feet of the Category One waterway;
[b] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by
this section shall achieve a ninty-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[c] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure that there
is no detrimental impact on the receiving waterway;
[d] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource
protection area will be maintained to the maximum
extent practicable;
[e] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with
the appropriate Department staff and Soil
Conservation District staff to identify necessary
stabilization measures; and
[f] All encroachments proposed under this section shall
be subject to review and approval by the Department.
[4] A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:551
an element of a regional stormwater management plan, or
by the Village through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If such a stream corridor protection
plan for a waterway subject to § 190-83D(6)(e) has been
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection,
then the provisions of the plan shall be the applicable
special water resource protection area requirements for
that waterway. A stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 190-83D(6)(e) shall maintain or
enhance the current functional value and overall condition
of the special water resource protection area as defined
in § 190-83D(6)(e)[1][a]. In no case shall a stream corridor
protection plan allow the reduction of the special water
resource protection area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
[5] Section 190-83D(6)(e) does not apply to the construction
of one individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a
larger development on a lot receiving preliminary or final
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004,
provided that the construction begins on or before
February 2, 2009.
(7) Standards for structural stormwater management measures.
Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(a) General.
[1] Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas,
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal
high water table; soil type, permeability and texture;
drainage area and drainage patterns; and the presence of
solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
[2] Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance
and repairs, and ensure proper functioning.
[3] Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed, and installed to be strong, durable,
and corrosion-resistant. Measures that are consistent with
the relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be
deemed to meet this requirement.
[4] Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet
the minimum safety standards for stormwater
management basins at § 190-83D(7)(d).
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:552
[5] Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of § 190-83D, provided that the pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation
for Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
[6] Stormwater management measure guidelines are
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. Other stormwater management
measures may be utilized, provided the design engineer
demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design
will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance
standards established by § 190-83D.
(b) Trash racks. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash
and debris and prevent clogging of outlet structures. Trash
racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet from the
stormwater management basin to ensure proper functioning of
the basin outlets in accordance with the following:
[1] Trash racks shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing
between the bars to the elevation of the water quality
design storm.
[2] For elevations higher than the water quality design storm,
the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no
greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or
1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between
bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches.
[3] At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of
2.5 inches in diameter.
[4] The design of trash racks must also comply with the
requirements of § 190-83D(7)(d).
(c) Grates and inlets to prevent discharge of trash and debris from
drainage systems. Site design features identified under
§ 190-83D(2)(b)[9][b] shall comply with the following standard
to control passage of solid and floatable materials through
storm drain inlets. For purposes of this subsection, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other
floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard see § 190-83D(7)(c)[3] below.
[1] Grates.
[a] Design engineers shall use either of the following
grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or
another ground surface to collect stormwater from
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:553
that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
[i] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[ii] A different grate, if each individual clear space in
that grate has an area of no more than seven
square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch
across the smallest dimension.
[b] Examples of grates subject to this standard include
grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on
storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples
of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
[2] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the
clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear
space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces)
shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or
be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
[3] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be overcome
by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 190-83D(6)(a) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is
designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass
through one of the following:
[i] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1.5
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall
netting facilities); or
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:554
[ii] A bar screen having a bar spacing of one-half
inch.
[c] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that
has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm
as specified in § 190-83D(6)(a); or
[d] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic
property.
(d) Safety standards for stormwater management basins. The
following requirements are intended to protect public safety
through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. These requirements apply to any new
stormwater management basin.
[1] Requirements for trash racks. A trash rack is a device
designed to catch trash and debris and prevent the
clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be installed
at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the
basin outlets in accordance with the following:
[a] The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no
greater than six-inch spacing between the bars.
[b] The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely
affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or
structure.
[c] The average velocity of flow through a clean trash
rack is not to exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full
range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be
computed on the basis of the net area of opening
through the rack.
[d] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of
300 pounds per square foot.
[2] Requirements for overflow grates. An overflow grate is
designed to prevent obstruction of the overflow structure.
If an outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate
shall meet the following requirements:
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:555
[a] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet
structure but be removable for emergencies and
maintenance.
[b] The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two
inches across the smallest dimension.
[c] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed
to be rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall
be designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading
of 300 pounds per square foot.
[3] Requirements for escape provisions. For purposes of this
subsection, "escape provisions" means the permanent
installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that
provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
[a] If a stormwater management basin has an outlet
structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in
or on the structure. With the prior approval of the
reviewing agency a freestanding outlet structure may
be exempted from this requirement.
[b] Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all
new stormwater management basins having a
permanent pool of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such
safety ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each
step shall be four feet to six feet in width. One step
shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below the
permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one foot to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent
water surface. See below for an illustration of safety
ledges in a stormwater management basin.
[c] In new stormwater management basins, the maximum
interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or
berm shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one
vertical.
Illustration of Safety Ledges in a Stormwater
Management Basin
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:556
[4] Relief or exemption from safety standards. A variance or
exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written
finding by the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality,
county or Department) that the variance or exemption will
not constitute a threat to public safety.
(8) Maintenance and repair.
(a) Maintenance plan required. The design engineer shall prepare
a maintenance plan for the stormwater management measures
incorporated into the design of the development. Maintenance
guidelines for stormwater management measures are available
in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual.
(b) Plan contents. The maintenance plan shall contain specific
preventative maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates,
including estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal;
and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or
persons responsible for preventative and corrective
maintenance (including replacement). If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a
public agency or homeowners' association) as having the
responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:557
(c) Maintenance responsibility. Responsibility for maintenance
shall not be assigned or transferred to the owner or tenant of
an individual property in a residential development or project,
unless such owner or tenant owns or leases the entire
residential development or project.
(d) Recording of plan. If the person responsible for maintenance
identified under Subsection D(8)(b) above is not a public
agency, the maintenance plan and any future revisions based
on Subsection D(8)(g) below shall be recorded upon the deed
of record for each property on which the maintenance
described in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(e) Plan implementation. Preventative and corrective maintenance
shall be performed to maintain the function of the stormwater
management measure, including repairs or replacement to the
structure; removal of sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of
eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair or
replacement; restoration of vegetation; and repair or
replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(f) Maintenance log. The person responsible for maintenance
identified under Subsection D(8)(b) above shall maintain a
detailed log of all preventative and corrective maintenance for
the structural stormwater management measures incorporated
into the design of the development, including a record of all
inspections and copies of all maintenance-related work orders.
(g) Ongoing evaluation. The person responsible for maintenance
identified under Subsection D(8)(b) above shall evaluate the
effectiveness of the maintenance plan at least once per year
and adjust the plan and the deed as needed.
(h) Recordkeeping. The person responsible for maintenance
identified under Subsection D(8)(b) above shall retain and
make available, upon request by any public entity with
administrative, health, environmental, or safety authority over
the site, the maintenance plan and the documentation required
by Subsection D(8)(f) and (g) above.
(i) Governmental facilities exempted. The requirements of
Subsection D(8)(c) and (d) above do not apply to stormwater
management facilities that are dedicated to and accepted by
the Village or another governmental agency.
(j) Failure to maintain. In the event that the stormwater
management facility becomes a danger to public safety or
public health, or if it is in need of maintenance or repair, the
Village shall so notify the responsible person in writing. Upon
receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have 14
days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a
manner that is approved by the Village Engineer or his/her
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:558
approved designee. The Village, in its discretion, may extend
the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for good
cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the Village or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to
the responsible person.
(k) Guarantees. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Village
from requiring the posting of a performance or maintenance
guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
(9) Sources for technical guidance.
(a) Department sources. Technical guidance for stormwater
management measures can be found in the documents listed
below, which are available from Maps and Publications, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East
State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
telephone (609) 777-1038.
[1] Guidelines for stormwater management measures are
contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, as amended. Information
is provided on stormwater management measures such as:
bioretention systems, constructed stormwater wetlands,
dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious
paving, sand filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
[2] The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual,
as amended.
(b) Additional sources. Additional technical guidance for
stormwater management measures can be obtained from the
following:
[1] The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation
Committee and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of
these standards may be obtained by contacting the State
Soil Conservation Committee or any of the Soil
Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
Bergen County Soil Conservation District is located at 700
Kinderkamack Road, Suite 106, Oradell, New Jersey
07649; telephone number (201) 261-4407; FAX (201)
261-7573;
[2] The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service,
(732)932-9306; and
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:559
[3] The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C.
2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone number
of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained from
the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540.
E. Requirements for minor development. The following requirements shall
apply to all minor development as defined by § 190-83C:
(1) Erosion control standards. The minimum design and performance
standards for erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(2) Groundwater recharge standards.
(a) Applicability. Stormwater runoff from the following areas shall
be recharged, provided that the types of runoff indicated in
§ 190-83D(4)(c) shall not be recharged:
[1] All roof areas of buildings having an area of at least 200
square feet.
[2] Any impervious surface(s) that represents an increase of at
least 200 square feet of such surfaces from the
predevelopment condition.
(b) Groundwater recharge calculations. Groundwater recharge
calculations, when required, shall be prepared in accordance
with the New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A
Method for Evaluating Groundwater Recharge Areas in New
Jersey.
(c) Roof drain connections. Stormwater runoff that must be
recharged from roof areas shall drain to leaders that are
connected to seepage pits/tanks or equivalent structures with
Schedule 40 or SDR 35 PVC pipe having a minimum six-inch
diameter.
(d) Seepage tank/retention system design.
[1] Storage capacity.
[a] When the amount of impervious surfaces that drains
to the tank/system is at least 200 square feet but less
than 2,000 square feet, the storage volume of the
tank/system must be at least one gallon for each
square foot of impervious cover. The volume of the air
voids in the clean stone surrounding a tank/system
shall not be counted toward the required volume.
[b] When the amount of impervious surfaces that drains
to the tank/system is at least 2,000 square feet, the
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-83
175:560
tank/system must be designed by a professional
engineer so that the stormwater runoff from the site is
no greater after than in the predevelopment condition
for the following storms:
[i] One hour: three-inch rainfall.
[ii] Twenty-four hours: seven-inch rainfall.
[c] Soil tests. Soil percolation tests results shall be
submitted to support design calculations when
required by the Village Engineer.
[2] Tanks/systems shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from
proposed or existing structure foundations, and located
outside the required building envelope (i.e., area formed
by the minimum setback lines for the principal building)
whenever possible.
[3] Tanks/systems shall be located at least five feet from the
property line, provided that the Village Engineer may
require a greater setback when it is determined that such
location is not sufficient to avoid significant detriments to
adjacent lands.
[4] At least two feet of cover shall be provided over tanks/
systems.
(3) Runoff quantity standards.
(a) Applicability. All development that results in an increase of at
least 200 square feet of impervious cover from the
predevelopment condition shall be designed so that there is no
increase in the rate of stormwater runoff from the
predevelopment condition.
(b) Runoff calculation methodology. All runoff calculations shall be
based on the two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year storm events.
Runoff shall be calculated using either the Rational Method
(modified for hydrograph computations) or the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) methodology,
including the NRCS Runoff Equation and Dimensionless Unit
Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4 - Hydrology and Technical Release 55
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds.
(4) Technical guidance. Technical guidance is available on a limited
basis with the Engineering Division during normal office hours.
(5) Soil movement permits. A soil movement permit in accordance with
Chapter 246 is required on a separate application whenever more
than 100 cubic yards of soil is proposed to be moved.
§ 190-83 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-83
175:561
§ 190-84. Street trees.
The following standards shall apply to the placement of street trees:
§ 190-85. Lighting.
Illumination for streets and properties shall be designed in accordance with
the following standards:
F. Retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets. No person in control of
private property (except a residential lot with one single-family house)
shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of
individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing
with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or
altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm
drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either: [Added
11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3223]
(1) Already meets the design standard described under
§ 190-83D(7)(c) for the control of the passage of solid and/or
floatable materials; or
(2) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the design standard under
§ 190-83D(7)(c) prior to the completion of the project.
A. Street trees shall be placed on both sides of the street within the rightof-
way and spaced not more than 50 feet apart.
B. Street trees shall be located where they will not interfere with
sidewalks, utility lines or pipes located above or below the ground;
where they will not interfere with the proper distribution of light from
street lighting fixtures, and where they will not interfere with proper
sight distance.
C. The choice of tree species shall be as approved by the Board. Tree
species to be used shall be appropriate for their neighborhood location,
hardiness, soil characteristics, light exposure and available moisture
and shall not be unusually susceptible to pests or diseases, nor shall
they require a high degree of maintenance.
D. All street trees shall have a minimum trunk caliper of 1 3/4 to two
inches at the time of installation.
E. Street trees shall be trimmed so that the lowest branches will be at
least six feet above the ground at the base of the tree at the time of
planting.
F. The condition of all street trees shall be approved by the Director of
Parks and Recreation prior to planting.
A. General. Site lighting shall be designed to:
§ 190-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-85
175:562
§ 190-86. Street name signs.
The following provisions shall apply to the placement of street name signs:
(1) Provide adequate illumination in appropriate locations for site
users and the general public for purposes of traffic and pedestrian
safety, security, property and building identification, and aesthetic
improvement;
(2) Prevent excessive illumination and glare; and
(3) Provide proper orientation and shielding of fixtures to prevent
undue illumination of adjacent properties.
B. Streetlighting. Light fixtures and standards shall be installed in
accordance with the standards and specifications of the utility company
providing the service.
C. Shielding of fixtures. All lighting fixtures shall be directed downward
and shall be equipped with the necessary shielding so as to prevent the
direct source of light from being visible from any point beyond the
property lines of the premises upon which the lighting structure is
located.
D. Height of fixtures. No lighting structure shall exceed a height of 20 feet,
measured as set forth in § 190-119D(6). [Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 3120]
E. Duration of illumination. Duration of operation of all lighting and
maximum lumen power permitted shall be as determined satisfactory
by the Planning Board with due regard to whether any limitations
imposed will deprive the applicant of a reasonable use of his property
and whether the application will be detrimental to the public health and
general welfare or to the property and personal rights of the abutting
owners. Provision shall be made for the reduction in the intensity of
illumination to the minimum needed for security purposes when the
facility is not in operation.
F. All wiring for light fixtures shall be laid underground, and not strung
between poles or buildings.
A. Street name signs shall be placed at all street intersections, including
those intersections where new streets intersect an existing street.
B. Street name signs shall be of a type and at locations approved by the
Director of Public Works.
C. No name applied to any street shall duplicate or so nearly resemble the
name of any existing street within the Village or nearby locations
outside the Village as to cause confusion. When a street is proposed as
an extension of an existing street, the proposed street shall use the
same name as the existing street, unless the Board directs otherwise.
§ 190-85 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-87
175:563
§ 190-87. Survey monuments.
All survey monuments shall be designed, constructed and located as
required by the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 190-88. Grading and soil disturbance.
§ 190-89. Buildings.
Buildings shall be designed and placed in accordance with the following
provisions:
A. General. The grading of land for development shall be designed to:
(1) Minimize disturbance of steep slopes and vegetation;
(2) Minimize as well as balance the amount of cut and fill, and
minimize the transportation of soil and other materials to and from
the site;
(3) Minimize the potential for erosion, sedimentation, landslides and
subsidence;
(4) Prevent undue concentration or alteration of stormwater flows;
(5) Avoid directing runoff over walks and paved areas, where the
freezing of such runoff would create hazardous conditions for
vehicles and pedestrians;
(6) Protect groundwater supplies, including aquifer recharge areas;
(7) Enable safe and convenient access to properties, seeking to avoid
excessive or insufficient slopes for paved areas and to avoid steps
for pedestrian walks; and
(8) Enable appropriate maintenance of properties.
B. Preservation of topsoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction
shall be redistributed so as to provide at least four inches of cover to all
areas of the site, provided that the depth of topsoil need not exceed six
inches. Said topsoil shall be stabilized by seeding and/or planting.
A. General guidelines. The location and design of buildings shall:
(1) Encourage the most appropriate use and development of the site
and adjacent properties;
(2) Preserve and enhance natural features and the physical
environment;
(3) Promote a desirable visual environment which is harmonious with
the character of existing development and which enhances the
character of the surrounding neighborhood and the Village as a
§ 190-87 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-89
175:564
§ 190-90. Off-street parking and loading, circulation and access.
whole, and avoids adversely affecting the value of adjacent or
nearby properties;
(4) Use exterior colors, facade or roof materials or a combination of
colors and materials that are harmonious;
(5) Create a coordinated and harmonious appearance through the
relationship of design features, such as height and mass, building
proportions, rooflines, building projections and ornamental
features;
(6) Use all sides of the building to contribute to the architectural unity
of the building;
(7) Avoid large unbroken building masses;
(8) Use attractive and quality building materials;
(9) Provide for appropriate access by vehicles, including emergency
and service vehicles, and pedestrians; and
(10) Enable service by the appropriate utilities.
B. Prohibited materials. The use of exposed concrete block is prohibited,
unless the same is textured. Metal siding should not be used to such an
extent that it will be a dominant architectural feature. In addition,
metal siding with exposed fastenings shall not be allowed.
C. Durability of materials. All buildings shall use durable material
requiring low maintenance, such as brick, stone, glass, precast
concrete and wood, when properly treated. Where durability and
performance are questionable, the applicant may be asked to provide a
manufacturer's guaranty or proof of durability from an independent
testing laboratory certification.
D. Use of color. Bright or brilliant colors shall be used only for accent and
shall not substantially depart from the character of existing
neighborhood colors so as to detract from the overall appearance of the
neighborhood.
E. Trademark or prototypical designs. The use of trademarks and/or
prototypical designs of roofs, facades, windows, doors, awnings, signs,
lights and other improvements shall be permitted after approval in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that
the use of such marks and designs shall not, by itself, be accepted as
satisfaction of the requirements for relief from any provision of this
chapter. [Added 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3323]
A. General. Off-street parking, loading, circulation and access
improvements shall be designed to:
§ 190-89 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-90
175:565
(1) Provide adequate space in appropriate locations for vehicles of
employees, patrons, and visitors and for shipping and delivery
vehicles, including future space needs;
(2) Be compatible with the internal circulation system of a site and
avoid unusual risks of traffic congestion, public safety or hazards;
(3) Avoid substantial negative impacts to adjacent properties;
(4) Discourage illegal and improper parking of vehicles;
(5) Provide only the minimum area of pavement necessary to meet site
needs, and to break up large areas of pavement with landscaping;
(6) Ensure proper drainage;
(7) Provide for access by disabled persons; and
(8) Enable appropriate property maintenance and security.
B. Dimensions of parking and loading spaces. Parking and loading spaces
shall be designed to provide a rectangular area with the following
minimum dimensions, which shall exclude any roadway, driveway or
access aisle adjacent to the parking or loading space: [Amended
6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 2606]
Type of Space
Space Width
(feet)
Space Depth
(feet)
Vertical
Clearance
(feet)
Automobile parking
No curb
overhang
9 20 8.5
With 2-foot curb
overhang
9 18 8.5
Reserved for
employees and
visitors*
8.5 Same as
above
8.5
Truck parking and
loading
12 40 14
* NOTE: Reduced dimensions not permitted for spaces designed to
primarily serve retail sales and retail service establishments, banks
and other high turnover establishments. Reduced dimension spaces
shall require special hairpin striping as specified in Subsection E
below.
C. Driveways and access aisles. All parking areas and structures shall be
provided with adequate means of ingress and egress which shall be
open and unobstructed at all times and which shall be designed to meet
the following standards:
§ 190-90 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-90
175:566
(1) Driveways for parking and loading facilities shall have a minimum
width of 10 feet for one-way traffic and 20 feet for two-way traffic.
(2) Access aisles serving parking areas for multifamily residential and
nonresidential uses shall have the following minimum widths,
provided that any access aisle less than 24 feet wide shall only be
permitted if designed for one-way traffic only:
Angle of Parking Space
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
0 12
30 11
45 13
60 18
90 24
(3) When appropriate, off-street parking and loading areas shall be
designed so that all vehicles may turn around within the parking or
loading area, thus preventing the necessity of any vehicle backing
into a public street.
D. Pavement. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be paved in
accordance with the following:
(1) All off-street parking areas and driveways for nonresidential
districts and nonresidential uses permitted in residential districts,
single-family attached dwellings and multifamily dwellings shall be
surfaced with either bituminous concrete or concrete pavement in
accordance with the Village specifications for streets.
(2) Provision shall be made for adequate drainage facilities for all
parking and loading areas and other paved areas. All such
installations shall be connected with an adequate, approved system
and shall be adequate to accommodate the storm drainage runoff of
the facility it is designed to serve. All drainage facilities shall be
approved by the Village Engineer prior to Board approval.
E. Striping. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be striped with
painted lines in accordance with the following:
(1) All spaces within any parking or loading area shall be clearly
marked and maintained to show the arrangement of spaces within
said parking and loading areas.
(2) All parking spaces permitted to be reduced to 8 1/2 feet in width by
this section shall utilize hairpin striping as follows:
(a) There shall be a double parallel painted line on each side of the
parking space.
§ 190-90 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-90
175:567
§ 190-91. Water supply.
§ 190-92. Sanitary sewers and septic disposal systems.
The developer shall provide for the installation of sanitary sewers to service
the development in accordance with the standards of the Village of
Ridgewood, and as follows:
§ 190-93. Electric, telephone, gas and cable television service.
(b) The width of each double line shall be four inches.
(c) The distance between the parallel lines on each side of the
parking space shall be 10 inches.
(d) The distance between the parallel lines on opposite sides of
each parking space shall be at least seven feet.
F. Pedestrian circulation. Paved walkways will be provided as necessary to
ensure safe pedestrian circulation throughout the parking lots and into
building entrances.
A. Provision of adequate supply. The developer shall make an adequate
supply of water available to each property within the development, with
the supply subject to the approval of the Board, Village Engineer and
the Village Water Department.
B. Floodwater protection. Water supply systems shall be designed to
prevent infiltration of floodwaters into said systems or discharges from
such systems into floodwaters.
C. Fire protection facilities. Fire protection facilities shall be provided for
any development connected to a public water system. Hydrants shall be
installed and connected in locations approved by the Village.
A. Floodwater protection. Sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to
prevent infiltration of floodwaters into said systems or discharges from
such systems into floodwaters. Septic disposal systems shall be
designed and located so as to avoid impairment of them or
contamination from them during periods of flooding.
B. Manholes. Locking-type manholes shall be provided except when
located in the pavement of a public street.
A. The applicant shall arrange with the serving utility for the underground
installation of the utility's distribution supply lines, appurtenant
equipment and service connections in accordance with the provisions of
the applicable standards, terms and conditions incorporated as a part of
its tariff as the same are then on file with Board of Public Utilities.
B. Prior to the grant of final approval, the developer shall submit to the
Board a written instrument from each serving utility which shall
evidence full compliance with the provisions of this article; provided,
§ 190-90 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-93
175:568
§ 190-94. Landscaping and buffers.
however, that lots which abut existing streets where overhead electric
or telephone distribution supply lines have theretofore been installed
on any portion of the streets involved may be supplied with overhead
service, but the service connections must be underground.
A. General. Landscaping for site plans and subdivisions shall be designed
to:
(1) Preserve and enhance the visual identity of the site, neighborhood
and Village as a whole;
(2) Mitigate the potentially harmful effects of soil and vegetative
disturbance, lighting and noise;
(3) Buffer incompatible uses;
(4) Screen various improvements, including buildings, parking and
loading areas, utilities and drainage structures, storage areas, etc.,
from streets and adjacent properties; and
(5) Not conflict with traffic safety, light fixtures, electric and telephone
lines or other utilities.
B. General site landscaping. Any part or portion of the site which is not
used for buildings, accessory structures, loading or parking spaces or
aisles, sidewalks and designated storage areas and which does not
contain existing vegetation to remain shall be landscaped in accordance
with an overall landscape planting plan, as approved by the Board. All
landscaped portions of the site shall be maintained adequately
throughout the year.
C. Protection of existing vegetation. Existing vegetation shall be preserved
to the maximum extent practicable. The following shall apply:
(1) Snow fence or silt fence shall be installed at the limits of
disturbance as shown on the approved development plans, which
shall be at a sufficient distance to prevent disturbance of the root
systems or branches of the vegetation to be preserved.
(2) Cut or fill near existing trees to be preserved shall require the
installation of tree wells or retaining walls, as appropriate, to
maintain the existing grade above the roots of the tree.
D. Buffers. A buffer in the form of landscaping, fences, berms and/or walls
shall be provided by the developer of any nonresidential use which
abuts a residentially zoned property, and by the developer of any
multifamily residential use which abuts a property located in a singlefamily
or two-family residential zone. Any buffer provided between
properties shall be sufficient to provide visual separation during all
seasons and to minimize the effects of headlights from vehicles, light
from structures, noise and the movements of people and vehicles. The
§ 190-93 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-94
175:569
§ 190-95. Energy conservation, waste removal and recycling.
following provisions shall apply, provided that additional and/or more
restrictive standards may be required by the zoning regulations, Article
X of this chapter. [Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3579]
(1) When topographical conditions, existing vegetation or other
conditions provide a sufficient buffer as determined by the Board,
no additional buffer shall be required.
(2) Buffer depths. The depth of required buffers shall be sufficient to
accommodate the ultimate growth of any plantings in the buffer.
(3) Trees and shrubs used in a buffer for screening purposes shall be at
least five feet high at the time of planting, and shall be of a species
that will naturally grow to such additional height within five years
as needed to provide a suitable visual screen, as determined by the
reviewing board. The spacing of the trees and shrubs shall be
designed to accommodate the mature spread of the plant species
and to provide a suitable visual screen within five years, again as
determined by the reviewing board.
(4) Buffers shall be protected from impact by motor vehicles and from
the negative effects of road salt and snowplowing. A curb, bumper
guard or the equivalent at least five inches in height above the
pavement shall separate buffers from vehicle use areas, provided
that utility poles or railroad ties shall not be used.
(5) In cases where berms, fences and/or walls are proposed or
required, the reviewing board shall determine the required location
of such features, taking into consideration topography, the location
of existing structures, trees and other vegetation to remain, sight
lines and other factors as necessary to determine the location
where such features would provide the most effective screen and
would not unduly impair the design and function of the subject
properties.
A. Energy conservation. Site plans and subdivisions shall be designed, to
the greatest degree practicable, in accordance with the following
provisions:
(1) Streets and lots shall be oriented in order to permit buildings to be
constructed to maximize solar gain. Where possible, streets shall
run in an east-west direction, and the long axis of a lot shall run in a
north-south direction.
(2) Development shall take advantage of topographic conditions in
order to permit buildings to be constructed to maximize solar gain
and in order to provide protection from winter winds. Where
possible, development shall be oriented to south-facing slopes.
§ 190-94 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-95
175:570
(3) Existing vegetation shall be preserved and new landscaping
provided to enable vegetation to provide protection from winter
winds and summer sun. Where practical, evergreen trees shall be
placed on the north and west sides of buildings, and deciduous
trees placed on the south and east sides of buildings.
B. Waste removal and recycling. Every site plan shall show an area
reserved for storage and removal of trash, refuse and recyclable
materials, which shall comply with the following provisions:
(1) Such areas shall be accessible to solid waste trucks at all times.
(2) Areas for storage of trash or refuse shall be screened by an
attractive and appropriate wall, fence and/or planting to obscure
same from view of adjacent properties.
(3) New multifamily housing developments shall conform with the
model ordinance promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Department of Community Affairs
pursuant to Section 2 of P.L. 1993, c. 81 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a)
regarding the inclusion of facilities for the collection or storage of
source-separated recyclable materials.
§ 190-95 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-95
175:571

ARTICLE X
Zoning
§ 190-96. Applicability.
A. General.
(1) No land or premises may be used and no building or structure may
be erected, raised, moved, extended, enlarged, altered or used for
any purpose other than a purpose permitted by this chapter for the
zone district in which the land, premises, building or structure is
located. All uses and construction shall be in conformity with the
regulations provided for the zone district in which such land,
premises, building or structure is located and any other applicable
regulations of this article.
(2) No lot, yard, parking area or other open space shall be so reduced
in area or dimension as to make it less than the minimum required
under this chapter. No lot, yard, parking area or other open space
which is already less than the minimum required under this
chapter shall be further reduced in area or dimension.
(3) The control and regulation of the uses of buildings and structures
by this chapter shall apply equally to the nature and extent of the
uses of the lot or lots upon which they are erected.
(4) In the case of a lot that is split by a zone district boundary line, and
the zone districts on the lot have different requirements,
application of the requirements shall be as follows, unless the
provisions of this chapter specifically indicate otherwise: [Added
7-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2830]
(a) The use shall comply with the required use standards for the
zone district within which the use is located.
(b) The lot shall be required to comply with the most restrictive of
the minimum lot area, minimum lot width, minimum average
lot width, minimum lot frontage, minimum lot depth, minimum
buildable area and minimum usable area standards of the
various zone districts on the lot.
(c) The yard setbacks shall be required to comply with the
required dimensions for such setbacks of the zone district
within which the yard is located; thus, each portion of a
building that is split by a zone boundary would be subject to
the setback standards of the zone within which that portion of
the building is located. In the event that it is not possible to
measure the yard depth without crossing a zone district
boundary, the most restrictive setback standard of the various
zones shall apply, but only to those locations where the
measurement would cross the zone boundary.
§ 190-96 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-96
175:573
(d) The height of structures shall comply with the height
requirements for the zone district within which such structures
are located. In the case of a structure that is split by a zone
district boundary, the most restrictive height standard shall
apply.
(e) The number of parking spaces required based upon floor area
shall comply with the standard applicable to the zone within
which the building is located. In the case of a building that is
split by a zone boundary, the parking standard in each zone
shall apply to that portion of the building floor area located in
such zone.
(f) The coverage by above-grade structures, the coverage by
improvements, floor area ratio and density shall be required to
comply with the standard for the zone in which the structures
and improvements are located, calculated using the entire lot
area. In the case of a building or buildings or improvements
located partially in more than one zone district, a pro rata
standard shall apply to the entire lot, using the following
formula:
[1] Calculate that percentage of the total coverage, floor area
or number of dwelling units on the lot, as applicable,
proposed in each zone.
[2] Multiply the percentages resulting from the calculation in
Subsection A(4)(f)[1] above for each zone times the
applicable standard for coverage, floor area ratio or
density, of the same zone.
[3] Add the results from the calculations in Subsection
A(4)(f)[2] above to determine the applicable standard.
As an example, consider a development located on a lot
split by a zone boundary: Zone A permits 25%
improvement coverage and Zone B permits 20%
coverage. The development proposes 3,000 square feet of
coverage in Zone A and 2,000 square feet of coverage in
Zone B, for a total of 5,000 square feet of coverage. The
permitted coverage for the above-grade structures would
be 23% of the lot area, calculated as follows:
3,000 square feet coverage proposed in Zone A ÷ 5,000
square feet total proposed coverage = 60% of total
coverage proposed in Zone A
2,000 square feet coverage proposed in Zone B ÷ 5,000
square feet total proposed coverage = 40% of total
coverage proposed in Zone B
60% of total coverage proposed in Zone A x 25% coverage
permitted in Zone A = 15%
§ 190-96 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-96
175:574
§ 190-97. Building, zoning, and other permits; certificates of
occupancy. [Amended 1-15-2003 by Ord. No. 2814; 3-12-2003 by
Ord. No. 2818; 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 3109]
The use or occupancy of land or buildings shall require the issuance of
building, zoning or other permits and/or certificates of occupancy in
accordance with the following provisions:
40% of total coverage proposed in Zone B x 20% coverage
permitted in Zone B = 8%
15% + 8% equals 23% coverage permitted in lot split by
zone boundary
(5) Applicability to governmental flags. The display of the official flags
of the United States, New Jersey or its political subdivisions, and
any poles upon which such flags are hung, shall not be considered
signs, and such flags shall be exempt from the sign regulations and
historic preservation regulations of this article. [Added
12-11-2013 by Ord. No. 3400]
B. Permits. No zoning permit, building permit, certificate of occupancy,
sign permit or historic preservation permit shall be issued until all the
requirements of this chapter, any other applicable Village or state
regulations and ordinances, Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
decisions, necessary resolutions of the Village Council and the site plan,
as approved by the Planning Board, have been and are fully complied
with.
C. Subdivisions. Whenever a new lot is formed from a part of any other lot
or lots, the assembly or separation shall be effected in such a manner as
not to impair any of the requirements of this article. No subdivision
shall be permitted which results in a change in a front, side or rear yard
that fails to comply in every respect with the required provisions of the
zone in which it falls.
D. Site plans. All site plans submitted to the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be required to conform to the provisions of
this article.
A. Building permits. Building permits shall be required and shall be
administered in accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq., adopted pursuant to
the State Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. In
addition, the following shall apply:
(1) No building permit shall be issued unless and until the plans and
intended uses therefor indicate that such building or structure is
designed to conform in all respects to the provisions of this chapter
and all other applicable ordinances of the Village or it is
demonstrated that such building or structure is legally
nonconforming or is the subject of a valid and current variance.
§ 190-96 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-97
175:575
(2) Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any development
involving an increase of at least 200 square feet of impervious
surface area, the applicant shall be required to submit to and
obtain approval of a site grading and stormwater control plan by
the Village Engineering Department, Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, as applicable, in accordance with §§ 190-83 and
190-120A.
(3) No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure or
part thereof located in a flood hazard area unless and until the
provisions of Chapter 154 and § 190-120 are complied with or it is
demonstrated that such building or structure is legally
nonconforming or is the subject of a valid and current variance.
(4) No building permit shall be issued for any development which
requires site plan or subdivision approval, or for any improvement
that may be determined to be exempt from formal site plan
approval procedures in accordance with § 190-37C, unless and
until the requirements of Article VII of this chapter have been met.
No building permit may be issued for developments that are
determined exempt from formal site plan approval procedures
unless and until the Village Engineer and/or the Village Planner
certifies that the development complies with the design standards
in Article IX of this chapter. [Amended 8-13-2014 by Ord. No.
3426]
(5) Issuance of a building permit shall include all required zoning
permits and shall negate the necessity for a separate zoning permit
for the same building and/or other structure and shall supersede
and revoke any zoning permit previously issued for such building
and/or other structure.
B. Zoning permits. If no building permit and certificate of occupancy shall
have previously been issued, or if none is required, no land shall be
developed, occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose
whatsoever unless and until a zoning permit therefor shall have been
issued by the Zoning Officer, unless exempted by this chapter or other
law. The following shall apply:
(1) A zoning permit shall be required for the use of any premises which
does not have upon it a building. Whenever there shall be a change
contemplated in the use of any premises which does not have a
building upon it, a new zoning permit therefor shall be required.
(2) Any change in use of a building or site shall be treated as a new
use, and a new zoning permit shall be required therefor. Before any
zoning permit shall be issued for any such change in use, all
provisions of this article shall be complied with in the same manner
as if the new use were an initial use of land.
(3) A zoning permit shall be required for the following improvements:
§ 190-97 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-97
175:576
(a) A zoning permit shall be required for any exterior improvement
involving a residential use, if such improvement is regulated by
the zoning regulations, Articles X, XII and XIII of this chapter.
Examples of improvements for which a zoning permit shall be
required include, but are not limited to, fences and
freestanding walls, driveways, walkways, patios, play
equipment, certain sheds and other roofed structures not
requiring a building permit. Retaining walls shall require a
retaining wall permit as set forth in § 190-97J. Soil movement
may require a soil permit as set forth in Chapter 246, Soil
Removal.
(b) A zoning permit shall be required for any exterior improvement
involving a nonresidential use, unless a building permit,
certificate of occupancy, sign permit or historic preservation
permit is required for the improvement, in which case issuance
of said permits shall negate the necessity for issuance of a
zoning permit for the improvement. Notwithstanding the
above, signs which are exempt from the requirement to obtain
a sign permit shall also be exempt from the requirement to
obtain a zoning permit. Also exempt from the requirement to
obtain a zoning permit shall be minor repairs to existing
improvements or replacement of conforming improvements
with identical conforming improvements. Improvements for
which the issuance of a zoning permit is required shall include,
but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
[1] Installation or modification of paving, curbing or drainage
improvements;
[2] Modification of the exterior improvements of a building,
including, but not limited to, roofing, siding, doors and
windows, decorative trim and molding, drain gutters and
leaders, and change of paint color;
[3] Installation or modification of landscaping improvements,
and removal of existing vegetation;
[4] Installation or modification of exterior improvements
related to lighting, heating, ventilating, cooling, security
or access; and
[5] Modification of the existing grade, including any
excavation, filling, berming or other regrading.
(4) A zoning permit shall specify the use of the land or buildings and
the nature of improvements and any terms or conditions imposed
thereunder.
(5) When site plan, subdivision and/or conditional use approval is
required, no zoning permit shall be issued until final site plan and/
or final subdivision approval has been obtained and until all
§ 190-97 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-97
175:577
conditions precedent to said approval have been satisfied. In the
case of improvements that are exempt from formal site plan
approval procedures, no zoning permit may be issued unless and
until the Village Engineer or the Village Planner certifies that the
development complies with the design standards in Article IX of
this chapter. [Amended 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 3426]
(6) An application for a zoning permit shall include a completed
application form obtained from the Zoning Officer, the application
fee specified in Chapter 145 and all plans and other information
necessary to determine compliance with the applicable zoning
regulations. Such plan information may, at the discretion of the
Zoning Officer, be required to include a current survey. The Zoning
Officer shall issue or deny a zoning permit within 10 business days
of the receipt of an application therefor.
(7) Once issued, a zoning permit shall be valid for up to one year from
the date of issuance; if the authorized work is not commenced
within such period, or if the work is suspended or abandoned for a
period of six months after commencement, the permit shall become
invalid.
(8) Sign permits, historic preservation permits and retaining wall
permits shall be considered to be zoning permits for the affected
activity and shall be subject to the provisions of this Subsection B,
unless specifically exempted by the provisions for such permits.
The issuance of such permits shall negate the necessity for a
separate zoning permit for the improvements authorized by such
permits. If such permits do not authorize all of the improvements
that are the subject of the development, no zoning permit shall be
issued for the balance of the improvements unless and until any
and all such other permits have first been issued.
C. Sign permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or relocate any
sign within the Village without first obtaining a sign erection permit
from the Construction Official pursuant to the following:
(1) The Construction Official shall issue permits only for such signs as
are specifically allowed for the particular premises and zone
district in which the premises are located.
(2) Signs exempted by § 190-122A shall not require applications or the
payment of any license fees or charges, but this shall not be
construed to enlarge the scope of permitted and exempt signs nor
to diminish the power of the Construction Official to enforce this
article.
(3) Application for a sign erection permit shall be made upon a form
provided by the Construction Official and shall contain or have
attached the following information: [Amended 12-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 3562]
§ 190-97 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-97
175:578
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, the
business to which the sign is accessory and the party
responsible for maintaining the sign in compliance with this
chapter and in compliance with any permit conditions.
(b) The location of the premises on which or to which the sign is
proposed to be erected or attached.
(c) A plan or other diagram, with dimensions, depicting the
position of the sign, indicating its location in relation to
buildings, streets and sidewalks, and other improvements on
its premises and on adjoining premises, including any
improvements within the street right-of-way.
(d) Blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications of
the signs and method of erection and attachment to the
premises, or a photograph of the actual sign in lieu thereof,
and such information as the Construction Official may
reasonably require to indicate the work to be performed and to
show full compliance with this chapter and all other applicable
laws and ordinances of the Village.
(e) The name, address, and telephone number of the person
performing the work.
(f) The written consent of the owner and lessor of the premises.
(g) The electrical permit, if any, required by the Uniform
Construction Code.
(h) In the case of temporary portable signs permitted in the
Central Business District by § 190-122H(9), a valid current
certificate of insurance naming the Village of Ridgewood as
additional insured for comprehensive general liability
(occurrence form) with a combined single limit for bodily
injury, personal injury and property damage of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and aggregate, meeting the Village's requirements.
Such certificate of insurance shall cover the entire calendar
year for which the permit is valid.
(4) Each application for each sign shall be accompanied by a filing fee
as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, with the exception of real estate
for sale signs, the application for which shall be accompanied by a
separate fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. [Amended
12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3562]
(a) Approval of an application for a real estate for sale sign shall
entitle the applicant to a permit for a period of 60 days,
provided that an additional fee as set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees, shall be charged for extension of permits for each 30
days or part thereof and the applicant shall be required to file
an additional written application for each extension requested.
§ 190-97 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-97
175:579
(b) Approval of an application for a temporary portable sign
permitted by § 190-122H(9) shall entitle the applicant to
display such sign for the calendar year for which the permit is
issued. For any succeeding calendar year, reapplication and
approval of a new permit, along with a new application fee,
shall be required, and such sign shall be required to comply
with the regulations in effect at the time of the reapplication.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Construction Official, upon the filing of an
application for a sign erection permit, to examine such plans and
specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is
proposed to erect the sign, and if it shall appear that the proposed
sign is in compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and
all other laws and ordinances of the Village, he shall then issue a
sign erection permit therefor.
(6) If the work authorized under an erection permit has not been
completed within six months after date of issuance of the sign
erection permit therefor, such permit shall become null and void.
D. Historic preservation permits. An historic preservation permit issued by
the Construction Official shall be required for any of the activities
described below within an historic district or on an historic site as
designated by this chapter. The following provisions shall apply:
(1) When required. A report of the Historic Preservation Commission
issued by the Historic Preservation Commission shall be required
before a preservation permit is issued for any of the following or
before work can commence on any of the following within an
historic district or on an historic site:
(a) Demolition of all or part of any building, improvement, site,
place or structure.
(b) Relocation of any building, improvement, site, place or
structure.
(c) Change in the exterior appearance of any building,
improvement, site, place or structure by addition,
reconstruction, alteration, partial demolition or dismantling or
repair which change is visible from a public street. Exterior
change for all primary and accessory structures shall include
but is not limited to removal, repair or replacement of
windows, doors, surfaces, facades, attachments, stairs, steps,
porches, signs, walls, fences, antennas, solar panels, lighting,
and sidewalks, including sidewalks located within the public
right-of-way, where work is being performed by a private
property owner.
(d) Any addition to or new construction of a principal or accessory
building or structure.
§ 190-97 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-97
175:580
(2) Exemptions. A report of the Historic Preservation Commission shall
not be required before a preservation permit is issued by the
Construction Official for the following:
(a) Changes to the interior of structures.
(b) Repair or exact replacement to any existing improvement,
provided that the work does not alter the exterior appearance
of the structure. In the event, however, that repair work is
being undertaken on a building with previously installed
noncontributing or disharmonious features, the provisions of
this section shall not apply. The following are the types of
activities permitted under this exemption:
[1] Identical replacement of existing windows and doors.
[2] Repairs of existing windows and doors and the installation
of storm doors and windows that do not change their
design scale or appearance.
[3] Maintenance and repair of existing roofing materials
involving no change in the design, scale or appearance of
the structure.
[4] Structural repairs which do not alter the exterior
appearance of the structure.
[5] Maintenance, repair or replacement of existing
clapboards, shingles or other siding with identical
material.
[6] Interior painting.
[7] Exterior repainting with the same color paint that exists
legally.
(3) Referral of preservation permits. All applications for issuance of
preservation permits pertaining to historic sites or property in
historic districts shall be referred to the Historic Preservation
Commission for a report of the Historic Preservation Commission
on the application of the zoning ordinance provisions concerning
historic preservation to any of those aspects of the change
proposed, which aspects were not determined by approval of an
application for development by a municipal agency.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the case of an application
exempted from site plan approval requirements, the Chair of the
Commission, or the Vice Chair in the Chair's absence, may act on
behalf of the Commission regarding the referral of any historic
preservation permit application, as determined by the Chair or Vice
Chair, as applicable. [Amended 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 3426]
(a) The Historic Preservation Commission shall submit its report
to the Construction Official within 45 days of the referral of the
§ 190-97 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-97
175:581
application to the Historic Preservation Commission. In the
case of those matters where the Chair or Vice Chair acts
on behalf of the entire Commission, The Chair, or Vice Chair
when applicable, shall provide his/her recommendation to the
Site Plan Exemption Committee. For those permit applications
submitted to the Construction Official/Zoning Officer, the Chair
shall submit his report to the Construction Official.
(b) If, within the forty-five-day period, the Historic Preservation
Commission, its Chair or Vice Chair, as applicable,
recommends to the Construction Official against the issuance
of the preservation permit or recommends conditions to the
preservation permit to be issued, the Construction Official
shall deny issuance of the preservation permit or include the
conditions in the preservation permit, as the case may be.
(c) Failure to report within the forty-five-day period shall be
deemed to constitute a report in favor of issuance of the
preservation permit and without the recommendation of
conditions to the preservation permit.
(4) Procedure where demolition disapproved. In the event that the
Construction Official disapproves an application for a preservation
permit to move or demolish a historic building, place or structure,
the owner shall, nevertheless, as a matter of right, be entitled to
raze or demolish such building, place or structure, provided that all
of the following requirements shall be fully met prior to such
demolition:
(a) After applying for the necessary preservation permit and
receiving notice of denial for the same from the Construction
Official, the owner shall appeal the denial to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
(b) If the Zoning Board of Adjustment affirms the permit denial,
the owner shall comply with the notice requirements set forth
below.
[1] Demolition notice posted; publication. Notice of proposed
demolition shall be posted on the premises of the building,
place or structure throughout the notice period in a
location such that it is clearly readable from the street. In
addition, the applicant shall publish a notice in the official
newspaper of the Village as follows:
[a] Within the first 10 days of the notice period.
[b] Within not less than 10 nor more than 15 days prior to
the expiration of the notice period.
[c] At least once each 30 days between the above first and
last notifications, throughout the notice period.
§ 190-97 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-97
175:582
[2] Notice period. The period of time during which notice
must be given in the manner herein before set forth shall
be known as the "notice period." The notice period shall be
as follows:
[a] The notice period shall commence on the 10th day
following the date of the notice of denial received from
the Zoning Board of Adjustment after an appeal and
such notice period shall run for a period time of up to
six months, as determined by the Commission.
[b] A property owner may satisfy the notice period
required for demolition of an historic site or of a
building, place or structure in an historic district by
following the procedures set forth herein prior to or
concurrently with applying for the demolition permit.
The applicant must also attempt to take any and all
steps to market the property in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Provided that the
procedures set forth herein have been fully complied
with, the property owner will be entitled to credit for
the actual time during which the notice of demolition
was properly given prior to the application to the
Construction Official.
(c) The owner shall, during the notice period and at a price
reasonably related to its fair market value, make a bona fide
offer to sell such building, place or structure and the land
pertaining thereto to any person, organization, government or
agency thereof or political subdivision which gives reasonable
assurance that it is willing to preserve the building, place or
structure and the land pertaining thereto.
(d) The owner shall not be a party to any bona fide contract,
binding upon all parties thereto, for the sale of any such
building, place or structure and the land pertaining thereto
executed prior to the expiration of the notice period, except a
contract made in accordance with Subsection D(4)(c) above.
E. Time limit for completion of exterior site improvements. All exterior site
improvements authorized by a building permit, demolition permit,
zoning permit, sign permit or historic preservation permit issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be substantially completed in a timely
manner. The intent of this provision is to prevent visual blight, property
damage, erosion and sedimentation, wind-blown dust and debris,
excessive weed growth, litter, vandalism, unsafe or hazardous
conditions, the depreciation of property values and other harmful
effects. For purposes of administering this provision, the following shall
apply:
§ 190-97 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-97
175:583
(1) "Exterior site improvements" are defined to include, but not
necessarily be limited to, exterior building siding or facing, roofing,
exterior doors and windows, exterior steps, porches, driveway and
parking area pavement, walks, fences, walls and lawns, as well as
demolition of any of the foregoing.
(2) The following improvements shall be substantially completed
within one year of the date of the issuance of the permit for the
same:
(a) Exterior site improvements authorized pursuant to a permit to
construct a new dwelling unit, or exterior site improvements
accessory to the construction of a new dwelling unit.
(b) Exterior site improvements authorized pursuant to final major
site plan approval.
(3) The following improvements shall be substantially completed
within six months of the date of the issuance of the permit for the
same:
(a) Exterior site improvements authorized pursuant to a permit to
construct an addition to an existing dwelling unit or to alter,
repair, renovate or demolish an existing dwelling unit or other
exterior site improvements accessory to an existing dwelling
unit, except as provided otherwise in Subsection E(2) above;
(b) Exterior site improvements authorized pursuant to a sign
permit or historic preservation permit, except as provided
otherwise in Subsection E(2) above; and
(c) Exterior site improvements authorized pursuant to minor site
plan approval.
(4) In the case of exterior site improvements which were the subject of
site plan approval, the approving Board may, in exceptional
circumstances and upon good cause shown by the applicant, grant
an extension of the time within which exterior site improvements
shall be completed. In the case of exterior site improvements which
were not the subject of site plan approval, the agency issuing the
permit may grant similar extensions in the same manner.
(5) If no construction or demolition of exterior site improvements
authorized pursuant to a zoning permit, sign permit or historic
preservation permit has been initiated within the above time
periods, then the permit shall be considered null and void. Failure
to initiate construction or demolition pursuant to a building permit
shall be subject to the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code.
(6) If construction or demolition of exterior site improvements has
been initiated, but not substantially completed, within the above
time periods, the failure to complete said improvements shall be
§ 190-97 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-97
175:584
considered a violation of this article, and shall subject the violator
or violators to the penalties hereinafter prescribed.
(7) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to conflict with any
other law or regulation, nor to limit the power of the Village to
enforce the provisions of this article by whatever means that may
exist.
F. Certificates of occupancy. Certificates of occupancy shall be required
and shall be administered in accordance with the requirements of the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq., adopted
pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq. In addition, the following shall apply:
(1) The issuance of a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of
continued occupancy shall include all required zoning permits and
shall negate the necessity of obtaining a separate zoning permit for
the same building and/or other structure on the same premises.
The issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy or a
certificate of continued occupancy shall supersede and revoke any
zoning permit already granted for such building and/or other
structure on the same premises.
(2) When site plan, subdivision and/or conditional use approval is
required, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until final site
plan and/or final subdivision approval has been obtained and until
all conditions precedent to said approval have been satisfied.
(3) No certificate of occupancy or continued occupancy shall be issued
for a use and/or structure which is not permitted by the zoning
regulations, unless it is shown that such use and/or structure, as
applicable, is a nonconforming use and/or structure or received
variance approval from the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
(4) Temporary certificates of occupancy. Temporary certificates of
occupancy may be permitted under certain circumstances. Such
certificates shall be issued and administered in accordance with
the requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq., adopted pursuant to the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
G. (Reserved)
H. Records of applications and permits and certificates issued. It shall be
the duty of the Zoning Officer and the Construction Official,
respectively, to keep records of all applications for zoning permits,
building permits, sign permits or certificates of occupancy and of all
such permits and certificates issued, together with a notation of all
special terms or conditions imposed thereunder. Each shall be
responsible for the filing and safekeeping of all plans and specifications
submitted to him with any application, and the same shall form a part of
the records of his office and shall be available to all officials of the
§ 190-97 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-97
175:585
Village. Copies of any permits or certificates shall be furnished upon
request to any person who shall have a right thereto by law.
I. Violations. The use or occupancy of land, buildings or structures prior
to securement of a zoning permit, building permit, sign permit or a
certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, when one is required shall
be a direct violation of this chapter and shall subject the violator or
violators to the penalties hereinafter prescribed.
J. Permits for retaining walls. Zoning permits issued by the Zoning Officer
shall be required prior to the construction, reconstruction or alteration
of retaining walls, except that retaining walls having a height of not
more than two feet, as measured pursuant to § 190-124F, shall be
exempt from this permit requirement. Walls that are exempt from
permit requirements shall nonetheless comply with all applicable
substantive requirements. Applications for zoning permits for retaining
walls shall be referred to the Engineering Department for review. No
such permit shall be issued unless construction details and, if deemed
necessary by the Village Engineer, structural calculations, soil reports,
foundation details, compaction certificates and grading plans, signed
and sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State
of New Jersey, are submitted and approved by the Village Engineer
demonstrating that such wall(s) is (are) designed to avoid wall failure,
protection from falls, drainage or erosion problems, or other hazardous
or harmful conditions. [Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120]
(1) All retaining wall permits shall require the payment of a filing fee
as set forth in § 145-6, and major retaining wall permits shall
require the posting of an escrow deposit to cover the costs of
professional services by the Village, as set forth in § 190-23A and
§ 145-6.
(2) No permit shall be issued unless the application complies with all
applicable requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to
§ 190-124F.
(3) Denial of retaining wall permits may be appealed to the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment, depending upon which Board has
jurisdiction as set forth in this chapter and in the Municipal Land
Use Law.108 The procedures for such appeals shall be the same as
set forth in § 190-28, 190-29, 190-30, 190-31, 190-32, 190-33 or
190-34, as applicable, depending upon the particular basis for the
appeal. In addition, any variance application before the Board of
Adjustment involving a retaining wall that requires a major
retaining wall permit shall be referred to the Planning Board for
review and comment. No action shall be taken by the Board of
Adjustment until the Planning Board has reviewed and made
recommendations concerning the application, or until 35 days have
108. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 190-97 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-97
175:586
§ 190-98. Zoning districts and historic sites enumerated. [Amended
2-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3240;109 6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 3343]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Village is hereby divided into the zone
districts, plus one historic district zone containing a number of historic
sites, as described below and in Subsection B following:
elapsed since the referral to the Planning Board, whichever occurs
first.
A. Zoning districts. The following districts in the Village are hereby
designated, as shown on the Zoning Map:110 [Amended 3-23-2016 by
Ord. No. 3489; 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3490; 3-23-2016 by Ord.
No. 3491]
R-125 Single-Family Residence District
R-110 Single-Family Residence District
R-1 Single-Family Residence District
R-1A Single-Family Attached Residence District
R-2 Single-Family Residence District
R-2A Residence District
R-3 Two-Family Residence District
R-4 Garden Apartment Residence District
R-5 Multifamily Residence District
R-7 Multifamily Residence District
B-1 Retail Business District
B-2 Retail Business District
B-3-R Business - Residential Zone District
C Commercial District
CR Commercial - Residential Zone District
HC Highway Commercial District
P Professional and Office District
P-2 Professional and Office District
H Hospital District
OB-1 Office Building District
OB-2 Office Building District
T Transition District
109. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it shall take effect after execution of a
settlement agreement that resolves West Bergen Mental Healthcare’s objection to the
Village’s housing element and fair share plan and after COAH’s approval of such
agreement.
110. Editor’s Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 190-97 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-98
175:587
NWSR North Walnut Street Redevelopment Area
AH-1 Affordable Housing District
AH-2 Affordable Housing District
B. Historic district zone and sites.
(1) The Village Center Historic District and historic sites indicated
below and on the Zoning Map are hereby designated. All properties
within the district, whether designated historic sites or not, are
subject to the historic preservation regulations of this chapter, as
applicable. The historic district and site designations and the
historic preservation regulations shall be in addition to such zoning
designation and regulation as this article may otherwise require.
(2) Designated historic sites:
Block Lot Block Lot Block Lot
2005 15 3801 3 3807 6.01
2114 6 3801 4.01 3808 2
2201 12 3802 1 3809 2
3701 3 3803 1 3809 3
3702 12 3804 13 3809 7.01
3703 1 3804 14 3810 1
3704 4 3804 16 3810 2,3,4
3704 6.01 3805 6 3810 5
3704 7 3805 10-13 3810 6
3704 9 3805 17 3810 7
3801 1 3805 18 3811 1
3801 2 3807 4
C. Publication of designation of historic districts and historic sites. In
addition to other requirements for adoption of ordinances, notice of
designation of an historic site or district shall be published in the
official newspaper of the Village of Ridgewood and shall be distributed
to all Village agencies and officers reviewing development applications
and permits. A letter of designation shall be provided by either regular
or bulk mail or personal service to each property owner affected by the
designation.
§ 190-98 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-99
175:588
§ 190-99. Zoning Map. [Amended 8-9-2006 by Ord. No. 3015;
2-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3240111; 6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 3343]
The Zoning Map of the Village of Ridgewood, dated June 2012, a copy of
which is attached to this chapter and made a part hereof, and delineating
the districts and sites designated by § 190-98, is hereby declared to be
a part of this chapter.112 The zone district boundary lines are intended
generally to follow street center lines, existing lot lines, center lines of
railroad rights-of-way and the like, as indicated on such Zone Map. In
cases of uncertainty or disagreement as to the true location of any zone
district boundary line, the determination thereof shall lie with the Board of
Adjustment.
§ 190-100. R-125 Single-Family Residence District.
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643;; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
(2) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(3) Community residences and shelters as defined in § 190-3.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Private garages as an accessory use for up to four motor vehicles,
subject to § 190-121G(3).
(2) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
(3) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities designed to serve the residents on the premises, all as
regulated in § 190-124G.
(4) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(5) (Reserved)113
111. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided that it shall take effect after execution of a
settlement agreement that resolves West Bergen Mental Healthcare’s objection to the
Village’s housing element and fair share plan and after COAH’s approval of such
agreement.
112. Editor’s Note: The Zoning Map is included at the end of this chapter.
113. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), pertaining to home professional offices, was
repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
§ 190-99 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-100
175:589
(6) The office, contained in a detached single-family residence, of an
ordained clergyman of any faith or Christian Science practitioner,
or home office use as defined and regulated by § 190-124Q.
[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(7) Family day-care homes, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(8) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that they shall not include any activity commonly
conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this section.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-125 District only if they comply
with the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in
§ 190-123: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2620; 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 2643]
(1) Public or private schools for kindergarten through grade 12.
(2) Houses of worship.
(3) Public utility buildings and structures.
(4) Nonprofit club uses.
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. The following conditions and requirements
shall be complied with:
(1) Maximum building height: 30 feet, measured as set forth in §
190-119D, and 2 1/2 stories. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
height of principal buildings shall be permitted to be greater than
30 feet, but not more than 35 feet, when all of the following
requirements are met: [Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120]
(a) The lot in question has a width, as defined in § 190-3, of at least
75 feet;
(b) The height of the building does not exceed 150% of the
shallowest side yard depth; and
(c) The pitch of any roof greater than 30 feet high is at least 8:12
(eight inches vertical for every 12 inches horizontal).
(2) Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum side yard: 20 feet.
(4) Minimum both side yards: 33% of the lot width measured at the
minimum front yard setback line.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
§ 190-100 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-100
175:590
(6) Minimum lot area: 25,000 square feet; provided, however, that the
minimum lot area of corner lots shall be 31,000 square feet.
[Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(7) Minimum lot width: 125 feet, measured at the minimum front yard
setback line, and 100 feet at any other point within 200 feet of the
front lot line; provided, however, that the minimum lot width of
corner lots shall be 155 feet at the minimum front yard setback line
and 130 feet at any other point within 200 feet of the front lot line.
[Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(8) Minimum average lot width: 125 feet, calculated so that at least
25,000 square feet of lot area shall be provided within 200 feet of
the front lot line; provided, however, that the minimum average lot
width of corner lots shall be 155 feet, calculated so that at least
31,000 square feet of lot area shall be provided within 200 feet of
the front lot line. [Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(9) Minimum lot depth: 160 feet.
(10) Maximum total coverage by above-grade structures: 20% of the
land area of the lot.
(11) Maximum coverage by above-grade structures located within 200
feet of the front lot line: 20% of the lot area within 200 feet of the
front lot line.
(12) Maximum gross building area: as set forth in § 190-119J.
[Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 3083]
(13) Maximum gross building area within 200 feet of the front lot line:
as set forth in § 190-119J, provided that the gross building area
restrictions shall be calculated using only those buildings or
portions of buildings, and only that portion of the lot, located within
200 feet of the front lot line. [Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No.
3083]
(14) Minimum buildable area. Within any lot developed or intended to
be developed for residential purposes, there shall be provided
within the building envelope a rectangular area having a width of
80 feet and a depth of 70 feet. For purposes of administering this
requirement, the rectangle width shall be construed to be that
dimension that is generally parallel with the lot width, and the
rectangle depth shall be construed to be that dimension that is
generally parallel with the lot depth. The buildable area rectangle
shall be located so as to encompass the existing principal building
and above-grade structures attached to the principal building,
unless such building and structures occupy an area larger than the
rectangle or are located outside of the building envelope, in which
case the rectangle shall encompass as much as possible of such
building and structures within the building envelope. New principal
buildings and attached above-grade structures shall also be located
§ 190-100 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-100
175:591
§ 190-101. R-110 Single-Family Residence District.
so as to result in compliance with the foregoing requirement.
[Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2713; amended 7-18-2001 by
Ord. No. 2744]
(15) Minimum usable area. [Added 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(a) Within any lot developed or intended to be developed for
residential purposes, there shall be provided a usable area
rectangular in shape and having a width of 100 feet and a
depth of 160 feet. For purposes of administering this
requirement, the rectangle width shall be construed to be that
dimension that is generally parallel with the lot width, and the
rectangle depth shall be construed to be that dimension that is
generally parallel with the lot depth. Such usable area
rectangle shall encompass the buildable area rectangle on the
lot required by Subsection E(14) above and shall also be
located to comply with the following requirements:
[1] The front of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 50 feet from the front of the buildable area rectangle.
[2] The sides of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 10 feet from the sides of the buildable area rectangle.
[3] The rear of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 40 feet from the rear of the buildable area rectangle.
(b) The terms "front," "side" and "rear" in the foregoing
Subsection E(15)(a)[1], [2] and [3] shall be construed to mean
those sides of the rectangle that generally face the front, side
and rear lot lines, respectively. The area within the usable area
rectangle, and including the area within the buildable area
rectangle, shall comply with the provisions of § 190-120.
(16) Maximum coverage by improvements: as set forth in § 190-119H(1)
and (2). [Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
(2) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(3) Community residences and shelters as defined in § 190-3.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
§ 190-100 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-101
175:592
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Private garages as an accessory use for up to four motor vehicles,
subject to § 190-121G(3).
(2) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
(3) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities designed to serve the residents on the premises, all as
regulated in § 190-124G.
(4) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(5) (Reserved)114
(6) The office, contained in a detached single-family residence, of an
ordained clergyman of any faith or Christian Science practitioner,
or home office use as defined and regulated by § 190-124Q.
[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(7) Family day-care homes, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(8) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that they shall not include any activity commonly
conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this section.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-110 District only if they comply
with the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in
§ 190-123: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2620; 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 2643]
(1) Public or private schools for kindergarten through grade 12.
(2) Houses of worship.
(3) Public utility buildings and structures.115
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. The following conditions and requirements
shall be complied with:
(1) Maximum building height: 30 feet, measured as set forth in §
190-11D, and 2 1/2 stories. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
height of principal buildings shall be permitted to be greater than
114. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), pertaining to home professional offices, was
repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
115. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), which permitted nonprofit club uses as a
conditional use, was repealed 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3177.
§ 190-101 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-101
175:593
30 feet, but not more than 35 feet, when all of the following
requirements are met: [Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120]
(a) The lot in question has a width, as defined in § 190-3, of at least
75 feet;
(b) The height of the building does not exceed 150% of the
shallowest side yard depth; and
(c) The pitch of any roof greater than 30 feet high is at least 8:12
(eight inches vertical for every 12 inches horizontal).
(2) Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
(3) Minimum side yard: 2/3 the height of the principal building on the
site or 15 feet, whichever is greater.
(4) Minimum both side yards: 33% of the lot width measured at the
minimum front yard setback line.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 40 feet.
(6) Minimum lot area: 19,250 square feet; provided, however, that the
minimum lot area of corner lots shall be 22,750 square feet.
[Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(7) Minimum lot width: 110 feet, measured at the minimum front yard
setback line, and 90 feet at any other point within 175 feet of the
front lot line; provided, however, that the minimum lot width of
corner lots shall be 130 feet at the minimum front yard setback line
and 110 feet at any other point within 200 feet of the front lot line.
[Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(8) Minimum average lot width: 110 feet, calculated so that at least
19,250 square feet of lot area shall be provided within 175 feet of
the front lot line; provided, however, that the minimum average lot
width of corner lots shall be 130 feet, calculated so that at least
22,750 square feet of lot area shall be provided within 175 feet of
the front lot line. [Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(9) Minimum lot depth: 140 feet.
(10) Maximum total coverage by above-grade structures: 20% of the
land area of the lot.
(11) Maximum coverage by above-grade structures located within 175
feet of the front lot line: 20% of the lot area within 175 feet of the
front lot line.
(12) Maximum gross building area: as set forth in § 190-119J.
[Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 3083]
(13) Maximum gross building area within 175 feet of the front lot line:
as set forth in § 190-119J; provided that the gross building area
§ 190-101 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-101
175:594
restrictions shall be calculated using only those buildings or
portions of buildings, and only that portion of the lot, located within
175 feet of the front lot line. [Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No.
3083]
(14) Minimum buildable area. Within any lot developed or intended to
be developed for residential purposes, there shall be provided
within the building envelope a rectangular area having a width of
70 feet and a depth of 60 feet. For purposes of administering this
requirement, the rectangle width shall be construed to be that
dimension that is generally parallel with the lot width, and the
rectangle depth shall be construed to be that dimension that is
generally parallel with the lot depth. The buildable area rectangle
shall be located so as to encompass the existing principal building
and above-grade structures attached to the principal building,
unless such building and structures occupy an area larger than the
rectangle or are located outside of the building envelope, in which
case the rectangle shall encompass as much as possible of such
building and structures within the building envelope. New principal
buildings and attached above-grade structures shall also be located
so as to result in compliance with the foregoing requirement.
[Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2713; amended 7-18-2001 by
Ord. No. 2744]
(15) Minimum usable area. [Added 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(a) Within any lot developed or intended to be developed for
residential purposes, there shall be provided a usable area
rectangular in shape and having a width of 90 feet and a depth
of 140 feet. For purposes of administering this requirement,
the rectangle width shall be construed to be that dimension
that is generally parallel with the lot width, and the rectangle
depth shall be construed to be that dimension that is generally
parallel with the lot depth. Such usable area rectangle shall
encompass the buildable area rectangle on the lot required by
Subsection E(14) above, and shall also be located to comply
with the following:
[1] The front of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 40 feet from the front of the buildable area rectangle.
[2] The sides of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 10 feet from the sides of the buildable area rectangle.
[3] The rear of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 40 feet from the rear of the buildable area rectangle.
(b) The terms "front," "side" and "rear" in the foregoing
Subsection E(15)(a)[1], [2] and [3] shall be construed to mean
those sides of the rectangle that generally face the front, side
and rear lot lines, respectively. The area within the usable area
§ 190-101 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-101
175:595
§ 190-102. R-1 Single-Family Residence District.
rectangle, and including the area within the buildable area
rectangle, shall comply with the provisions of § 190-120.
(16) Maximum coverage by improvements: as set forth in § 190-119H(1)
and (2). [Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
(2) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(3) Community residences and shelters as defined in § 190-3.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Private garages as an accessory use for up to four motor vehicles,
subject to § 190-121G(3).
(2) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
(3) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities designed to serve the residents on the premises, all as
regulated in § 190-124G.
(4) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(5) (Reserved)116
(6) The office, contained in a detached single-family residence, of an
ordained clergyman of any faith or Christian Science practitioner,
or home office use as defined and regulated by § 190-124Q.
[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(7) Family day-care homes, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(8) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that they shall not include any activity commonly
conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this section.
116. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), pertaining to home professional offices, was
repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
§ 190-101 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-102
175:596
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures, shall be permitted in the R-1 District only if they comply
with the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in
§ 190-123: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2620; 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 2643]
(1) Public or private schools for kindergarten through grade 12.
(2) Houses of worship.
(3) Public utility buildings and structures.117
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. The following conditions and requirements
shall be complied with, except where such requirements are specifically
superseded by the regulations for cluster developments in § 190-124:
(1) Maximum building height: 30 feet, measured as set forth in §
190-119D, and 2 1/2 stories. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
height of principal buildings shall be permitted to be greater than
30 feet, but not more than 35 feet, when all of the following
requirements are met: [Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120]
(a) The lot in question has a width, as defined in § 190-3, of at least
75 feet;
(b) The height of the building does not exceed 150% of the
shallowest side yard depth; and
(c) The pitch of any roof greater than 30 feet high is at least 8:12
(eight inches vertical for every 12 inches horizontal).
(2) Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
(3) Minimum side yard: 2/3 the height of the principal building on the
site or 15 feet, whichever is greater.
(4) Minimum both side yards: 33% of the lot width measured at the
minimum front yard setback line.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(6) Minimum lot area: 14,000 square feet; provided, however, that the
minimum lot area of corner lots shall be 16,800 square feet.
[Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(7) Minimum lot width: 100 feet, measured at the minimum front yard
setback line, and 80 feet at any other point within 140 feet of the
front lot line; provided, however, that the minimum lot width of
117. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), which permitted nonprofit club uses as a
conditional use, was repealed 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3177.
§ 190-102 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-102
175:597
corner lots shall be 120 feet at the minimum front yard setback line
and 100 feet at any other point within 140 feet of the front lot line.
[Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(8) Minimum average lot width: 100 feet, calculated so that at least
14,000 square feet of lot area shall be provided within 140 feet of
the front lot line; provided, however, that the minimum average lot
width of corner lots shall be 120 feet, calculated so that at least
16,800 square feet of lot area shall be provided within 140 feet of
the front lot line. [Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(9) Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.
(10) Maximum total coverage by above-grade structures: 20% of the
land area of the lot.
(11) Maximum coverage by above-grade structures located within 140
feet of the front lot line: 20% of the lot area within 140 feet of the
front lot line.
(12) Maximum gross building area: as set forth in § 190-119J.
[Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 3083]
(13) Maximum gross building area within 140 feet of the front lot line:
as set forth in § 190-119J, provided that the gross building area
restrictions shall be calculated using only those buildings or
portions of buildings, and only that portion of the lot, located within
140 feet of the front lot line. [Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No.
3083]
(14) Minimum buildable area. Within any lot developed or intended to
be developed for residential purposes, there shall be provided
within the building envelope a rectangular area having a width of
60 feet and a depth of 50 feet. For purposes of administering this
requirement, the rectangle width shall be construed to be that
dimension that is generally parallel with the lot width, and the
rectangle depth shall be construed to be that dimension that is
generally parallel with the lot depth. The buildable area rectangle
shall be located so as to encompass the existing principal building
and above-grade structures attached to the principal building,
unless such building and structures occupy an area larger than the
rectangle or are located outside of the building envelope, in which
case the rectangle shall encompass as much as possible of such
building and structures within the building envelope. New principal
buildings and attached above-grade structures shall also be located
so as to result in compliance with the foregoing requirement.
[Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2713; amended 7-18-2001 by
Ord. No. 2744]
(15) Minimum usable area. [Added 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
§ 190-102 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-102
175:598
§ 190-103. R-1A Single-Family Residence District.
(a) Within any lot developed or intended to be developed for
residential purposes, there shall be provided a usable area
rectangular in shape and having a width of 80 feet and a depth
of 120 feet. For purposes of administering this requirement,
the rectangle width shall be construed to be that dimension
that is generally parallel with the lot width, and the rectangle
depth shall be construed to be that dimension that is generally
parallel with the lot depth. Such usable area rectangle shall
encompass the buildable area rectangle on the lot required by
Subsection E(14) above and shall also be located to comply
with the following:
[1] The front of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 40 feet from the front of the buildable area rectangle.
[2] The sides of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 10 feet from the sides of the buildable area rectangle.
[3] The rear of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 30 feet from the rear of the buildable area rectangle.
(b) The terms "front," "side" and "rear" in the foregoing
Subsections E(15)(a)[1], [2] and [3] shall be construed to mean
those sides of the rectangle that generally face the front, side
and rear lot lines, respectively. The area within the usable area
rectangle, and including the area within the buildable area
rectangle, shall comply with the provisions of § 190-120.
(16) Maximum coverage by improvements: as set forth in § 190-119H(1)
and (2). [Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
(2) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(3) Community residences and shelters as defined in § 190-3.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Private garages as an accessory use for up to four motor vehicles,
subject to § 190-121G(3).
§ 190-102 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-103
175:599
§ 190-104. R-2 Single-Family Residence District.
(2) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
(3) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities designed to serve the residents on the premises, all as
regulated in § 190-124G.
(4) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(5) (Reserved)118
(6) The office, contained in a detached single-family residence, of an
ordained clergyman of any faith or Christian Science practitioner,
or home office use as defined and regulated by § 190-124Q.
[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(7) Family day-care homes, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(8) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that they shall not include any activity commonly
conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this section.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-1A District only if they comply
with the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in
§ 190-123: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2620; 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 2643]
(1) Single-family attached dwelling units.
(2) Public or private schools for kindergarten through grade 12.
(3) Houses of worship.
(4) Public utility buildings and structures.119
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Required conditions.
(1) All required conditions as set forth in § 190-102E shall be complied
with.
(2) Residential cluster shall be permitted as regulated in § 190-124A.
118. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), pertaining to home professional offices, was
repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
119. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(5), which permitted nonprofit club uses as a
conditional use, was repealed 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3177.
§ 190-103 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-104
175:600
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
(2) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(3) Community residences and shelters as defined in § 190-3.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Private garages as an accessory use for up to four motor vehicles,
subject to § 190-121G(3).
(2) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
(3) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities designed to serve the residents on the premises, all as
regulated in § 190-124G.
(4) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(5) (Reserved)120
(6) The office, contained in a detached single-family residence, of an
ordained clergyman of any faith or Christian Science practitioner,
or home office use as defined and regulated by § 190-124Q.
[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(7) Family day-care homes, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(8) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that they shall not include any activity commonly
conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this section.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-2 District only if they comply with
the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in § 190-123:
[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No.
2643]
(1) Public or private schools for kindergarten through grade 12.
120. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), pertaining to home professional offices, was
repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
§ 190-104 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-104
175:601
(2) Houses of worship.
(3) Public utility buildings and structures.121
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. The following conditions and requirements
shall be complied with:
(1) Maximum building height: 30 feet, measured as set forth in §
190-119D, and 2 1/2 stories. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
height of principal buildings shall be permitted to be greater than
30 feet, but not more than 35 feet, when all of the following
requirements are met: [Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120]
(a) The lot in question has a width, as defined in § 190-3, of at least
75 feet;
(b) The height of the building does not exceed 300% of the
shallowest side yard depth; and
(c) The pitch of any roof greater than 30 feet high is at least 8:12
(eight inches vertical for every 12 inches horizontal).
(2) Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
(3) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(4) Minimum both side yards: 33% of the lot width measured at the
minimum front yard setback line.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(6) Minimum lot area: 10,500 square feet; provided, however, that the
minimum lot area of corner lots shall be 14,700 square feet.
[Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(7) Minimum lot width: 75 feet, measured at the minimum front yard
setback line, and 60 feet at any other point within 140 feet of the
front lot line; provided, however, that the minimum lot width of
corner lots shall be 105 feet at the minimum front yard setback line
and 90 feet at any other point within 140 feet of the front lot line.
[Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(8) Minimum average lot width: 75 feet, calculated so that at least
10,500 square feet of lot area shall be provided within 140 feet of
the front lot line; provided, however, that the minimum average lot
width of corner lots shall be 105 feet, calculated so that at least
14,700 square feet of lot area shall be provided within 140 feet of
the front lot line. [Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
121. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), which permitted nonprofit club uses as a
conditional use, was repealed 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3177.
§ 190-104 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-104
175:602
(9) Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.
(10) Maximum total coverage by above-grade structures: 20% of the
land area of the lot.
(11) Maximum coverage by above-grade structures located within 140
feet of the front lot line: 20% of the lot area within 140 feet of the
front lot line.
(12) Maximum gross building area: as set forth in § 190-119J.
[Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 3083]
(13) Maximum gross building area within 140 feet of the front lot line:
as set forth in § 190-119J, provided that the gross building area
restrictions shall be calculated using only those buildings or
portions of buildings, and only that portion of the lot, located within
140 feet of the front lot line. [Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No.
3083]
(14) Minimum buildable area. Within any lot developed or intended to
be developed for residential purposes, there shall be provided
within the building envelope a rectangular area having a width of
50 feet and a depth of 50 feet. For purposes of administering this
requirement, the rectangle width shall be construed to be that
dimension that is generally parallel with the lot width, and the
rectangle depth shall be construed to be that dimension that is
generally parallel with the lot depth. The buildable area rectangle
shall be located so as to encompass the existing principal building
and above-grade structures attached to the principal building,
unless such building and structures occupy an area larger than the
rectangle or are located outside of the building envelope, in which
case the rectangle shall encompass as much as possible of such
building and structures within the building envelope. New principal
buildings and attached above-grade structures shall also be located
so as to result in compliance with the foregoing requirement.
[Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2713; amended 7-18-2001 by
Ord. No. 2744]
(15) Minimum usable area. [Added 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(a) Within any lot developed or intended to be developed for
residential purposes, there shall be provided a usable area
rectangular in shape and having a width of 60 feet and a depth
of 120 feet. For purposes of administering this requirement,
the rectangle width shall be construed to be that dimension
that is generally parallel with the lot width, and the rectangle
depth shall be construed to be that dimension that is generally
parallel with the lot depth. Such usable area rectangle shall
encompass the buildable area rectangle on the lot required by
Subsection E(14) above, and shall also be located to comply
with the following:
§ 190-104 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-104
175:603
§ 190-105. R-2A Residence District.
[1] The front of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 40 feet from the front of the buildable area rectangle.
[2] The sides of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and five feet from the sides of the buildable area rectangle.
[Amended 8-21-2001 by Ord. No. 2753]
[3] The rear of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 30 feet from the rear of the buildable area rectangle.
(b) The terms "front," "side" and "rear" in the foregoing
Subsection E(15)(a)[1], [2] and [3] shall be construed to mean
those sides of the rectangle that generally face the front, side
and rear lot lines, respectively. The area within the usable area
rectangle, and including the area within the buildable area
rectangle, shall comply with the provisions of § 190-120.
(16) Maximum coverage by improvements: as set forth in § 190-119H(1)
and (2). [Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
(2) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(3) Community residences and shelters as defined in § 190-3.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Private garages as an accessory use for up to four motor vehicles,
subject to § 190-121G(3).
(2) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
(3) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities designed to serve the residents on the premises, all as
regulated in § 190-124G.
(4) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(5) (Reserved)122
§ 190-104 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-105
175:604
§ 190-106. R-3 Two-Family Residence District.
(6) The office, contained in a detached single-family residence, of an
ordained clergyman of any faith or Christian Science practitioner,
or home office use as defined and regulated by § 190-124Q.
[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(7) Family day-care homes, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(8) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that they shall not include any activity commonly
conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this section.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-2A District only if they comply
with the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in
§ 190-123: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2620; 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 2643]
(1) Renovation and conversion of a single existing structure for
dwelling units.
(2) Public or private schools for kindergarten through grade 12.
(3) Houses of worship.
(4) Public utility buildings and structures.123
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. All bulk and lot regulations set forth in
§ 190-102E shall be complied with.
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
(2) Two-family residential uses in a single structure on the same lot.
(3) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(4) Community residences and shelters as defined in § 190-3.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
122. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), pertaining to home professional offices, was
repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
123. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(5), which permitted nonprofit club uses as a
conditional use, was repealed 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3177.
§ 190-105 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-106
175:605
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Private garages as an accessory use for up to four motor vehicles,
subject to § 190-121G(3).
(2) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
(3) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities designed to serve the residents on the premises, all as
regulated in § 190-124G.
(4) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(5) (Reserved)124
(6) The office, contained in a detached single-family or two-family
residence, of an ordained clergyman of any faith or Christian
Science practitioner, or home office use as defined and regulated
by § 190-124Q. [Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(7) Family day-care homes, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(8) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that they shall not include any activity commonly
conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this section.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-3 District only if they comply with
the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in § 190-123:
[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No.
2643]
(1) Public or private schools for kindergarten through grade 12.
(2) Houses of worship.
(3) Public utility buildings and structures.125
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. The following conditions and requirements
shall be complied with:
(1) Maximum building height: 30 feet.
(2) Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
124. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), pertaining to home professional offices, was
repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
125. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), which permitted nonprofit club uses as a
conditional use, was repealed 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3177.
§ 190-106 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-106
175:606
(3) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(4) Minimum both side yards: 33% of the lot width measured at the
minimum front yard setback line.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(6) Minimum lot area: 8,400 square feet; provided, however, that the
minimum lot area of corner lots shall be 12,600 square feet.
[Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(7) Minimum lot width: 60 feet, measured at the minimum front yard
setback line, and 50 feet at any other point within 140 feet of the
front lot line; provided, however, that the minimum lot width of
corner lots shall be 90 feet at the minimum front yard setback line
and 80 feet at any other point within 140 feet of the front lot line.
[Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(8) Minimum average lot width: 60 feet, calculated so that at least
8,400 square feet of lot area shall be provided within 140 feet of the
front lot line; provided, however, that the minimum average lot
width of corner lots shall be 90 feet, calculated so that at least
12,600 square feet of lot area shall be provided within 140 feet of
the front lot line. [Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(9) Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.
(10) Maximum total coverage by above-grade structures: 25% of the
land area of the lot.
(11) Maximum coverage by above-grade structures located within 140
feet of the front lot line: 25% of the lot area within 140 feet of the
front lot line.
(12) Maximum gross building area: as set forth in § 190-119J.
[Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 3083]
(13) Maximum gross building area within 140 feet of the front lot line:
as set forth in § 190-119J, provided that the gross building area
restrictions shall be calculated using only those buildings or
portions of buildings, and only that portion of the lot, located within
140 feet of the front lot line. [Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No.
3083]
(14) Minimum buildable area. Within any lot developed or intended to
be developed for residential purposes, there shall be provided
within the building envelope a rectangular area having a width of
40 feet and a depth of 50 feet. For purposes of administering this
requirement, the rectangle width shall be construed to be that
dimension that is generally parallel with the lot width, and the
rectangle depth shall be construed to be that dimension that is
generally parallel with the lot depth. The buildable area rectangle
shall be located so as to encompass the existing principal building
§ 190-106 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-106
175:607
§ 190-107. R-4 Garden Apartment Residence District.
and above-grade structures attached to the principal building,
unless such building and structures occupy an area larger than the
rectangle or are located outside of the building envelope, in which
case the rectangle shall encompass as much as possible of such
building and structures within the building envelope. New principal
buildings and attached above-grade structures shall also be located
so as to result in compliance with the foregoing requirement.
[Added 10-25-2000 by Ord. No. 2713; amended 7-18-2001 by
Ord. No. 2744]
(15) Minimum usable area. [Added 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(a) Within any lot developed or intended to be developed for
residential purposes, there shall be provided a usable area
rectangular in shape and having a width of 50 feet and a depth
of 120 feet. For purposes of administering this requirement,
the rectangle width shall be construed to be that dimension
that is generally parallel with the lot width, and the rectangle
depth shall be construed to be that dimension that is generally
parallel with the lot depth. Such usable area rectangle shall
encompass the buildable area rectangle on the lot required by
Subsection E(14) above and shall also be located to comply
with the following:
[1] The front of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 40 feet from the front of the buildable area rectangle.
[2] The sides of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and five feet from the sides of the buildable area rectangle.
[Amended 8-21-2001 by Ord. No. 2753]
[3] The rear of the usable area rectangle shall be parallel to
and 30 feet from the rear of the buildable area rectangle.
(b) The terms "front," "side" and "rear" in the foregoing
Subsection E(15)(a)[1], [2] and [3] shall be construed to mean
those sides of the rectangle that generally face the front, side
and rear lot lines, respectively. The area within the usable area
rectangle, and including the area within the buildable area
rectangle, shall comply with the provisions of § 190-120.
(16) Maximum coverage by improvements: as set forth in § 190-119H(1)
and (2). [Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 8-9-2006 by Ord. No. 3015;
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
§ 190-106 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-107
175:608
(1) Garden apartments, multifamily dwellings and single-family
attached residential dwelling units.
(2) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
(3) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(4) Community residences and shelters as defined in § 190-3.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Private garages as an accessory use for up to four motor vehicles,
subject to § 190-121G(3).
(2) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
(3) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities designed to serve the residents on the premises, all as
regulated in § 190-124G.
(4) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(5) (Reserved)126
(6) The office, contained in a permitted residence, of an ordained
clergyman of any faith or Christian Science practitioner, or home
office use as defined and regulated by § 190-124Q. [Amended
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(7) Family day-care homes, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(8) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that they shall not include any activity commonly
conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this section.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-4 District only if they comply with
the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in § 190-123:
[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No.
2643]
(1) Public or private schools for kindergarten through grade 12.
(2) Houses of worship.
126. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), pertaining to home professional offices, was
repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
§ 190-107 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-107
175:609
(3) Public utility buildings and structures.127
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. All required conditions as set forth in
§ 190-102E shall be complied with, except that the following conditions
and requirements shall be complied with for all garden apartments,
multifamily dwellings and single-family attached residential dwelling
units: [Amended 8-9-2006 by Ord. No. 3015]
(1) Maximum building height: 30 feet, and two stories.
(2) Minimum front, side and rear yard: 30 feet.
(3) Minimum distance between principal buildings: 30 feet.
(4) Minimum distance between arms of U-shaped buildings or groups
of buildings forming a courtyard: 60 feet. No accessory building
shall be permitted in any such court.
(5) Maximum bedrooms per gross acre: 32.
(6) Maximum density: 20 units per acre.
(7) Maximum unbroken wall length: 115 feet.
(8) Maximum building dimension: 150 feet.
(9) Minimum lot area in garden apartment district: 44,000 square feet.
(10) Maximum total coverage by above-grade structures: 25% of the
land area of the lot. The calculation shall include the area of all
balconies, fire escapes, canopies and the like, any other provisions
notwithstanding.
F. Additional requirements for garden apartment and multifamily dwelling
developments. Every garden apartment or multifamily dwelling project
shall meet the following requirements: [Amended 8-9-2006 by Ord.
No. 3015]
(1) A building superintendent shall reside in the project.
(2) All dwelling units shall be limited to the first and second floors
thereof, and no floor of any dwelling unit shall be in any basement.
(3) The exteriors of all accessory buildings shall conform
architecturally and be constructed of materials of a like character
to those used in the garden apartment or multifamily dwelling unit
structures to which they are accessory.
127. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), which permitted nonprofit club uses as a
conditional use, was repealed 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3177.
§ 190-107 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-107
175:610
§ 190-108. R-5 Multifamily Residence District.
(4) A minimum storage area of 500 cubic feet shall be provided for
each dwelling unit within any garden apartment or multifamily
dwelling structure, exclusive of any garage or dwelling unit or
closet space.
(5) All outside clothes-drying areas shall be fenced or screened.
[Amended 4-7-2010 by Ord. No. 3242]
(6) All open spaces in any garden apartment or multifamily dwelling
project shall be adequately landscaped and maintained in good
condition. [Amended 4-7-2010 by Ord. No. 3242]
(7) All garden apartment and multifamily dwelling developments shall
be screened and buffered as required by § 190-94.
G. Additional requirements for single-family attached residential dwelling
developments. Every single-family attached residential dwelling
development shall meet the following requirements: [Added 8-9-2006
by Ord. No. 3015]
(1) No more than four dwelling units shall be permitted in any
principal building.
(2) There shall be no more than two driveways providing direct access
to a public street from any development.
(3) Screening and buffers shall be provided as required by § 190-94.
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) Multifamily dwelling units.
(2) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
(3) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(4) Community residences and shelters as defined in § 190-3.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Private garages as an accessory use for up to four motor vehicles,
subject to § 190-121G(3).
(2) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
§ 190-107 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-108
175:611
(3) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities designed to serve the residents on the premises, all as
regulated in § 190-124G.
(4) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(5) (Reserved)128
(6) The office, contained in a permitted residence, of an ordained
clergyman of any faith or Christian Science practitioner, or home
office use as defined and regulated by § 190-124Q. [Amended
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(7) Family day-care homes, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(8) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that they shall not include any activity commonly
conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this section.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the R-5 District only if they comply with
the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in § 190-123:
[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No.
2643]
(1) Public or private schools for kindergarten through grade 12.
(2) Houses of worship.
(3) Public utility buildings and structures.129
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. All required conditions as set forth in
§ 190-102E shall be complied with, except that the following conditions
and requirements shall be complied with for multifamily dwelling units:
(1) Maximum building height: 30 feet and two stories.
(2) Minimum front, side and rear yard: 40 feet.
(3) Minimum distance between principal buildings: 40 feet.
(4) Minimum distance between arms of U-shaped buildings or groups
of buildings forming a courtyard: 60 feet, and no accessory building
shall be permitted in any such court.
(5) Maximum bedrooms per gross acre: 24.
128. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), pertaining to home professional offices, was
repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
129. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), which permitted nonprofit club uses as a
conditional use, was repealed 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3177.
§ 190-108 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-108
175:612
§ 190-109. R-7 Multifamily Residence District.
(6) Maximum density: 14 1/2 dwelling units per acre.
(7) Maximum unbroken wall length: 115 feet.
(8) Maximum total building dimension: 150 feet.
(9) Minimum lot area in multifamily district: 44,000 square feet.
(10) Maximum total coverage by above-grade structures: 25% of the
land area of the lot, including balconies, fire escapes, canopies and
the like, notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary.
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2620]
(1) Multifamily dwelling units.
(2) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
(3) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(4) Community residences and shelters. [Amended 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 2643]
(5) Community shelters for victims of domestic violence and
community residences for persons with head injuries, either of
which house up to six persons, excluding resident staff.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Private garages as an accessory use for up to four motor vehicles,
subject to § 190-121G(3).
(2) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
(3) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities designed to serve the residents on the premises, all as
regulated in § 190-124G.
(4) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(5) (Reserved)130
130. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), pertaining to home professional offices, was
repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
§ 190-108 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-109
175:613
(6) The office, contained in a detached single-family residence, of an
ordained clergyman of any faith or Christian Science practitioner.
(7) Family day-care homes, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(8) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that they shall not include any activity commonly
conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this section.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall he permitted in the R-7 District only if they comply with
the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in § 190-123:
[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No.
2643]
(1) Public or private schools for kindergarten through grade 12.
(2) Houses of worship.
(3) Public utility buildings and structures.131
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. All required conditions as set forth in
§ 190-102E shall be complied with, except that the following conditions
and requirements shall be complied with for multifamily dwelling units:
(1) Maximum building height: 35 feet, and three stories.
(2) Minimum front, side and rear yard: 25 feet, subject to the
following:
(a) The provisions of § 190-119A(4) shall be complied with.
(b) Balconies and patios shall be set back at least 20 feet from all
property lines.
(3) Minimum distance between principal buildings: 35 feet.
(4) Maximum bedrooms per gross acre: 36.2.
(5) Maximum density: 22.11 dwelling units per acre.
(6) Maximum unbroken wall length: 185 feet, provided that the visual
effect of long building walls shall be broken with building offsets,
building materials and landscaping.
(7) Minimum lot area multi family district: 44,000 square feet.
131. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), which permitted nonprofit club uses as a
conditional use, was repealed 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3177.
§ 190-109 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-109
175:614
§ 190-110. B-1 Retail Business District.
(8) Maximum total coverage by above-grade structures: 30% of the
land area of the lot, including balconies, fire escapes, canopies and
the like, notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary.
(9) Buffer screen. A dense evergreen screening hedge at least 10 feet
in height as approved by the Planning Board shall be installed
along the property line of any R-7 multifamily development
abutting any R-1, R-2 or R-3 Residential Zone. Said screening
hedge shall be used as a buffer to physically screen the multifamily
from the one- and two-family areas. The buffer screen may be
waived or modified by the Planning Board, in whole or in part, if the
Planning Board concludes that because of topographical or site
conditions the same shall not be necessary to protect the abutting
or facing premises located in any abutting residential zone.
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3579;
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591; 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 3686;
12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3691]
(1) Retail sales and retail services, limited to:
(a) Antique and vintage shops, appliances shops, art studios and
galleries, art supply and hobby shops, barbershops, beauty
parlors, bicycle shops, bookstores, butchers and specialty food
stores, cafes and coffee shops, card and gift shops, cosmetic
shops, dry cleaners and tailors, clothing shops, confectioneries
and ice cream shops, delicatessens, drugstores, electronics
sales and services including for computers and cellular phones,
fitness centers and personal training establishments, physical
therapy offices, florists, home goods and home furnishing
stores, grocery stores, hardware and paint stores, instructional
schools, jewelers, liquor stores, musical instrument sales and
instruction, office equipment and supply stores, opticians, pet
shops and groomers, photography studios, restaurants, retail
bakeries, shoe repair shops, shoe stores, spas and salons,
sporting goods stores, taverns and inns, theaters, toy stores,
and travel agencies.
(2) Financial institutions, limited to banks and savings and loan
institutions and similar institutions, stock brokerage houses and
finance companies.
(3) Professional office and business office uses on other than the
ground floor or basement, except that ground floor areas used for
access to such uses shall be permitted.
(4) Dwelling units above the ground floor, except that ground floor
areas used for access to such uses shall be permitted.
§ 190-109 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-110
175:615
(5) Parking lots and structures.
(6) Child-care centers.
(7) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(8) Institutional uses as defined by § 190-3.
(9) Club, fraternal, recreational, athletic and social uses located above
the ground floor, except that ground floor areas used for access to
such uses shall be permitted.
(10) Recreational uses.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory: [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 2566]
(1) Parking and loading facilities, as regulated in §§ 190-90 and
190-121.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(3) Outdoor cafes either on private property or within the public
sidewalk right-of-way as an accessory use to an eating
establishment, as regulated by Article VIII in Chapter 156.
[Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3323]
(4) Instruction and organized parties.
(5) Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to the above
principal uses.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the B-1 District only if they comply with
the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in § 190-123:
[Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3579]
(1) Public utility buildings and structures.
(2) Cellular telecommunications antennas mounted on an existing
structure at least 40 feet high.
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by this
section are prohibited. In addition, without in any way limiting the
generality and prohibition of this section, the following uses are
specifically prohibited:
(1) Residential construction or conversion unless permitted as
regulated herein.
§ 190-110 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-110
175:616
(2) The sale, delivery and/or serving of prepared food and/or
beverages in a ready-to-consume state from a location within a
building through a door, through a window or over a counter to a
location outside the same building on the same site or within the
adjacent public right-of-way. Such prohibition shall include but not
be limited to the delivery to or receipt of food and/or beverages to
customers in motor vehicles. The foregoing shall not be construed
to prohibit: a) serving and consumption of food and beverages to
and by customers seated at tables within outdoor cafes permitted
by this chapter and licensed and regulated pursuant to Article VIII
of Chapter 156; b) take-out sales of prepared food, where the
customer must enter the building to purchase and/or pick up food
for consumption at an off-site location; and c) the delivery of
prepared foods to customers at an off-site location not located
within the street-right-way. [Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No.
3323; 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 3327]
(3) New or used car lots.
(4) Public garages and gasoline service stations.
(5) Places of amusement, other than theaters, contained in buildings,
such as penny arcades or shooting galleries, or buildings or
structures containing games of chance or other types of carnival
enterprises, such as palmistry, phrenology, astrology and the like.
(6) Drive-in or drive-through uses, including but not limited to drive-in
banks, drive-in pharmacies and drive-in restaurants. [Amended
12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3323]
E. Bulk regulations. The following conditions and requirements shall be
complied with: [Amended 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2891]
(1) Maximum building height: 45 feet, except as provided otherwise
for affordable housing developments in § 190-124R.
(2) Minimum front yard: as established by adjacent buildings and as
regulated by § 190-119A(1)(b). No vault rights shall extend past the
existing curbline or the curbline proposed on the Master Plan or
Official Map of the Village.
(3) Minimum side yard: none required, but if provided, 12 feet. If
adjacent to a residential zone, a minimum twelve-foot side yard is
required.
(4) Minimum rear yard: six inches for each foot of height of the
principal building or 10 feet, whichever is greater.
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: 50%, except as provided otherwise for
affordable housing developments in § 190-124R.
F. Other regulations. In addition to the bulk regulations, the following
shall be complied with:
§ 190-110 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-110
175:617
§ 190-111. B-2 Retail Business District.
(1) The store frontage for each space devoted to a different occupant
on the ground level abutting any street shall be at least 15 feet
wide, exclusive of any entrances for upper floors.
(2) All ground level stores abutting any street shall contain window
areas on any side of at least 10% of an area equal to 10 feet times
the width of the wall abutting the street.
(3) No building shall be permitted which is not supported on a
continuous footing and foundation and enclosed on all sides by an
exterior wall that rests on said footing and foundation.
(4) Except for parking lots, outdoor cafes and sidewalk sales
authorized pursuant to Chapter 239, any use permitted by this
section shall only be conducted within the confines of a building.
[Amended 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. 2639; 12-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 3323]
(5) Any dwelling unit shall contain a minimum habitable floor area of
600 square feet.
(6) The gross floor area devoted to residential use, including hallways
and other common areas accessory to the residential use, shall not
exceed 2/3 of the total gross floor area of the building within which
the residential use is located. [Added 5-12-2004 by Ord. No.
2891]
(7) The maximum permitted density shall not exceed 12 dwelling units
per acre of the lot. [Added 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2891]
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 3197;
2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3579; 11-7-2018 by Ord. No. 3686;
12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3691]
(1) Retail sales and service businesses limited to:
(a) Antique and vintage shops, appliances shops, art studios and
galleries, art supply and hobby shops, barbershops, beauty
parlors, bicycle shops, bookstores, butchers and specialty food
stores, cafes and coffee shops, card and gift shops, Christian
Science reading room, cosmetic shops, dry cleaners and
tailors, clothing shops, confectioneries and ice cream shops,
delicatessens, drugstores, electronics sales and services
including for computers and cellular phones, fitness centers
and personal training establishments, physical therapy offices,
florists, franchised new car dealer showrooms, grocery stores,
hardware and paint stores, home goods and home furnishing
stores, instructional schools, jewelers, laundromats, liquor
stores, musical instrument sales and instruction, office
§ 190-110 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-111
175:618
equipment and supply stores, opticians, pet shops and
groomers, photography studios, restaurants, retail bakeries,
shoe repair shops, shoe stores, spas and salons, sporting goods
stores, taverns and inns, theaters, toy stores, travel agencies,
and undertakers.
(2) Financial institutions, limited to banks and savings and loan
institutions and similar institutions, stock brokerage houses, and
finance companies.
(3) Professional office and business office uses.
(4) Buildings used for club, fraternal, recreational and athletic or
social purposes.
(5) Shops of an electrician, plumber or similar tradesman.
(6) Dwelling units above the ground floor.
(7) Child-care centers.
(8) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(9) Surface parking lots and parking structures.
(10) Institutional uses as defined by § 190-3.
(11) Recreational uses.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory: [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 2566]
(1) Parking and loading facilities, as regulated in §§ 190-90 and
190-121.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(3) Outdoor cafes either on private property or within the public
sidewalk right-of-way as an accessory use to an eating
establishment, as regulated by Article VIII of Chapter 156.
[Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3323]
(4) Used car sales accessory to new car sales, not exceeding one
square foot of area devoted to used car lot use for each square foot
of wall buildings devoted to new car dealer use.
(5) Instruction and organized parties.
(6) Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to the above
principal uses.
§ 190-111 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-111
175:619
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the B-2 District only if they comply with
the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in § 190-123:
[Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3579]
(1) Motor vehicle service stations and public garages.
(2) Public utility buildings and structures.
(3) Drive-in banks.
(4) Cellular telecommunications antennas mounted on an existing
structure at least 40 feet high.
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by this
section are prohibited. In addition, without in any way limiting the
generality and prohibition of this section, wholesale warehousing, with
the exception of the storage of furniture and furnishings accessory to
any permitted furniture mover, and those uses prohibited in the B-1
Zone District, unless otherwise specifically permitted in this article, are
specifically prohibited.
E. Bulk regulations. The following conditions and requirements shall be
complied with: [Amended 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2891]
(1) Maximum building height: 45 feet, except as provided otherwise
for affordable housing developments in § 190-124R.
(2) Minimum front yard: as established by adjacent buildings and as
regulated by § 190-119A(1)(b). No vault rights shall extend past the
existing curbline or the curbline proposed on the Master Plan or
Official Map of the Village.
(3) Minimum side yard: none required, but if provided, 12 feet. If
adjacent to a residential zone, a minimum twelve-foot side yard is
required.
(4) Minimum rear yard: six inches for each foot of height of the
principal building, or 10 feet, whichever is greater.
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: 45%, except as provided otherwise for
affordable housing developments in § 190-124R.
(6) Maximum coverage by improvements: 90% of the lot area.
F. Other regulations. In addition to the bulk regulations, the following
shall be complied with:
(1) The store frontage for each space devoted to a different occupant
on the ground level abutting any street shall be at least 15 feet
wide, exclusive of any entrances for upper floors.
§ 190-111 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-111
175:620
§ 190-112. OB-1 Office Building District. [Amended 6-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 2606]
(2) All ground level stores abutting any street shall contain window
areas on any side of at least 10% of an area equal to 10 feet times
the width of the wall abutting the street.
(3) 132Except for parking lots, outdoor cafes and sidewalk sales
authorized pursuant to Chapter 239, any use permitted by this
section shall only be conducted within the confines of a building.
[Amended 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. 2639; 2-8-2012 by Ord. No.
3327]
(4) Any dwelling unit shall contain a minimum habitable floor area of
600 square feet. [Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3323;
2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 3327]
(5) The gross floor area devoted to residential use, including hallways
and other common areas accessory to the residential use, shall not
exceed 2/3 of the total gross floor area of the building within which
the residential use is located. [Added 5-12-2004 by Ord. No.
2891]
(6) The maximum permitted density shall not exceed 12 dwelling units
per acre of the lot. [Added 5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2891]
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3579]
(1) Financial institutions, including banks and savings and loan
institutions, stock brokerage houses, finance companies and
similar institutions.
(2) Professional, business and administrative office uses.
(3) Child-care centers.
(4) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(5) Institutional uses, as defined by § 190-3.
(6) Instructional schools, as defined by § 190-3. [Added 1-8-2020 by
Ord. No. 3765]
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
132. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(3), regarding enclosure of piers, pillars or columns,
was repealed 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 2583, which ordinance also provided for the
renumbering of the remaining subsections.
§ 190-111 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-112
175:621
(1) Parking and loading facilities, as regulated in §§ 190-90 and
190-121.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(3) Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to the above
principal uses.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the OB-1 District only if they comply
with the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in
§ 190-123: [Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 2-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 3579]
(1) Public utility buildings and structures.
(2) Cellular telecommunications antennas mounted on an existing
structure at least 40 feet high.
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. The following conditions and requirements
shall be complied with:
(1) Maximum building height: 40 feet. Notwithstanding the above,
roof-mounted service equipment structures shall not exceed 45 feet
in height above the ground and shall be subject to the provisions of
Subsection F(1) below.
(2) Minimum front yard: 42 feet from the street center line.
(3) Minimum side yard: one foot for every foot of height of the principal
building, or 12 feet, whichever is greater.
(4) Minimum rear yard: three feet for every foot of height of the
principal building.
(5) Maximum coverage by above-grade structures: 25% of the land
area of the lot.
(6) Maximum floor area ratio: 45%.
(7) Maximum coverage by improvements: 65% of the lot area.
[Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 2670]
(8) Buffer strip. There shall be provided within any OB-1 Zone that
abuts any residentially zoned property a buffer strip, at no point
less than 25 feet in depth from such residential property line, that
must be screened, landscaped and fenced as approved by the
Planning Board pursuant to a required site plan; provided;
however, that in lieu of the required buffer strip, the developer may
install an unpierced masonry wall six feet in height that meets the
following requirements:
§ 190-112 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-112
175:622
§ 190-113. OB-2 Office Building District. [Amended 6-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 2606]
(a) The wall shall be at least 12 inches thick.
(b) The wall shall not be located closer to the property line than 12
inches.
(c) The required area between the wall and any paved area shall
be landscaped as required by the Planning Board.
F. Other regulations. In addition to the bulk and lot regulations, the
following shall be complied with: [Amended 10-8-1996 by Ord. No.
2583; 4-7-2010 by Ord. No. 3242]
(1) Roof-mounted service equipment structures shall be subject to the
following:
(a) They shall be set back at least three feet for every one foot in
height of the service equipment structures, measured from the
perimeter of the roof on which said equipment structure is
located.
(b) They shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area of any
building on which such service equipment structure is located.
(c) They shall be screened by a wall or other visual barrier made of
material compatible with the architectural design of the
building.
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3579]
(1) Financial institutions, including banks and savings and loan
institutions, stock brokerage houses, finance companies and
similar institutions.
(2) Professional, business and administrative office uses.
(3) Veterinary hospitals.
(4) Child-care centers.
(5) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(6) Institutional uses, as defined by § 190-3.
(7) Instructional schools, as defined by § 190-3. [Added 1-8-2020 by
Ord. No. 3765]
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
§ 190-112 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-113
175:623
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Parking and loading facilities, as regulated in §§ 190-90 and
190-121.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(3) Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to the above
principal uses.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the OB-2 District only if they comply
with the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in
§ 190-123: [Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 2-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 3579]
(1) Public utility buildings and structures.
(2) Cellular telecommunications antennas.
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. The following conditions and requirements
shall be complied with:
(1) Maximum building height: 30 feet.
(2) Minimum front yard: 30 feet.
(3) Minimum side yard: one foot for every two feet of height of the
principal building or 12 feet, whichever is greater.
(4) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(5) Minimum setback from residential zone boundary: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
(7) Minimum lot width: 75 feet, measured at the minimum front yard
setback line.
(8) Maximum floor area ratio: 35%.
(9) Maximum coverage by improvements: 70% of the lot area.
[Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 2670]
F. Other regulations. In addition to the bulk and lot regulations, the
following shall be complied with:
§ 190-113 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-113
175:624
§ 190-114. C Commercial District. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No.
2566; 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 2583; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643;
6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 2670; 4-7-2010 by Ord. No. 3242; 12-14-2011
by Ord. No. 3323; 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 3327; 8-13-2014 by Ord. No.
3425; 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3492]
(1) 133Vehicular ingress to and egress from any lot shall only be
permitted on State Highway Route No. 17 and Franklin Turnpike.
A. Intent. The C Zone District is intended to accommodate a variety of
nonresidential uses not permitted elsewhere in the Village, consistent
with its existing land use and development pattern, and to promote an
upgraded form of development in the area.
B. Permitted principal uses and structures. The following principal uses
and structures shall be permitted in the C Zone District, subject,
however, to the use limitations in Subsection C below:
(1) Retail sales uses, such as:
(a) Paint, glass and wallpaper stores, hardware stores.
(b) General merchandise stores, such as department stores,
variety stores, miscellaneous general merchandise stores.
(c) Food stores, such as grocery stores, meat and fish markets,
fruit and vegetables markets, candy, nut and confectionery
stores, dairy products stores, retail bakeries, miscellaneous
food stores.
(d) Auto and home supply stores.
(e) Apparel and accessory stores, such as men's, boys', women's
and family clothing stores, women's accessory and specialty
stores, children's and infants' wear stores, shoe stores and
miscellaneous apparel and accessory stores.
(f) Home furniture, furnishings and equipment stores, such as
home furniture and furnishings stores, household appliance
stores, radio, television and computer stores.
(g) Miscellaneous retail, such as drugstores and proprietary
stores, liquor stores, used merchandise stores, miscellaneous
shopping goods stores.
(2) Eating and drinking places.
(3) Banks and other similar financial institutions.
(4) Personal services, such as:
133. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(1), regarding enclosure of piers, pillars or columns,
was repealed 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 2583, which ordinance also provided for the
renumbering of the remaining subsections.
§ 190-113 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-114
175:625
(a) Laundry, cleaning and garment services.
(b) Portrait photographic studios.
(c) Beauty and barber shops.
(d) Shoe repair.
(5) Business services, such as mailing, reproduction, commercial art
and photography, and stenographic services.
(6) Miscellaneous repair services, such as:
(a) Electrical repair shops.
(b) Watch, clock and jewelry repair.
(7) Amusement and recreation services, such as:
(a) Motion-picture rental.
(b) Dance studios, schools and halls.
(c) Physical fitness facilities.
(8) Business, administrative and professional offices providing the
following services:
(a) Advertising.
(b) Consumer credit reporting, mercantile reporting, adjustment
and collection.
(c) Offices of medical doctors, dentists, osteopathic physicians and
other health practitioners.
(d) Home health care services.
(e) Legal services.
(f) Engineering, architectural and surveying services.
(g) Landscape counseling, planning.
(h) Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services.
(i) Management and public relations services.
(j) Arrangement of passenger transportation (travel agents, etc.).
(9) Museums and art galleries.
(10) Veterinarian hospitals.
(11) Business, professional, labor, civic, social and political associations.
§ 190-114 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-114
175:626
(12) Shops of an electrician, plumber, welder, woodworker or similar
tradesman.
(13) Automotive repair shops.
(14) Storage warehouses.
(15) Wholesale sales business.
(16) Child-care centers.
(17) Municipal buildings and uses.
(18) Surface parking lots.
(19) Institutional uses, as defined by § 190-3. [Added 2-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 3579]
C. Use limitations. The following limitations shall apply to permitted
principal uses in the C Zone District:
(1) Drive-in uses shall be prohibited.
(2) Individual commercial uses shall be limited to those which are
small in scale, similar and consistent with the existing pedestrianoriented
shops and stores in the Central Business District, not
exceeding a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet for each
business establishment.
(3) Uses involving operation between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., except for public uses and except for emergency operations,
shall be prohibited.
(4) Uses of an industrial nature shall be prohibited, including but not
limited to any establishment engaged in the mechanical, physical,
or chemical transformation of materials, substances, or
components into new products, or engaged in the assembling of
component parts of manufactured products.
D. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Parking and loading facilities, as regulated in §§ 190-90 and
190-121.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(3) Instruction and organized parties.
(4) Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to the above
principal uses.
§ 190-114 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-114
175:627
E. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the C District only if they comply with
the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in § 190-123:
(1) Public utility buildings and structures.
(2) Cellular telecommunications antennas mounted on an existing
structure at least 40 feet high.
F. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by this
section are prohibited. Without in any way limiting the generality and
prohibition of this section, nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed to permit commercial incinerations, junkyards, rubbish,
garbage and trash dumps, residential construction or conversion of
structures or residential uses, stockyards, abattoirs, slaughterhouses or
other animal processing operations or any use which will in any manner
create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable
fire, explosive, radioactive or other hazard or noise or vibration or
smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution or heat, cold, dampness,
movement of air, electrical or other similar disturbances, glare or solid
or liquid waste in any manner or amount which shall not conform to the
performance standards set forth in § 190-120G. Also specifically
prohibited shall be drive-in and drive-through uses, including but not
limited to drive-in banks, drive-in pharmacies and drive-in restaurants;
and the sale, delivery and/or serving of prepared food and/or beverages
in a ready-to-consume state from a location within a building through a
door or window or over a counter to a location outside the same
building on the same site or within the adjacent public right-of-way,
including outdoor cafes. Such prohibition shall include but not be
limited to the delivery to or receipt of food and/or beverages to
customers in motor vehicles. The foregoing shall not be construed to
prohibit: a) take-out sales of prepared food, where the customer must
enter the building to purchase and/or pick up food for consumption at
an off-site location; or b) the delivery of prepared foods to customers at
an off-site location not located within the street-right-way.
G. Bulk and lot regulations. The following conditions and requirements
shall be complied with:
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum building height: 45 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard: 15 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard: none required, but if provided, 12 feet. If
adjacent to a residential zone, a minimum twelve-foot side yard is
required.
(5) Minimum rear yard: six inches for each foot of height of the
principal building, or 10 feet, whichever is greater.
§ 190-114 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-114
175:628
(6) Maximum floor area ratio: 45% of the lot area.
(7) Maximum coverage by improvements: 90% of the lot area.
H. Other regulations. In addition to the bulk and lot regulations, the
following requirements shall be complied with:
(1) Any use permitted by this section, unless otherwise specifically
permitted to be conducted outdoors, shall only be conducted within
the confines of a building.
(2) Veterinary hospitals and establishments shall be contained within a
soundproof building.
(3) Any side or rear yard that abuts any residential zone shall be
provided with a fence or special planting, maintained in good
condition, to screen the commercial use from the abutting
residential property.
(4) Architectural design.
(a) Buildings shall be required to incorporate high-quality
architectural features that are characteristic of exemplary
buildings reflecting the traditional architecture in the Central
Business District. The applicant for any development shall
demonstrate such design by providing as part of any site plan
review examples of and comparisons with existing high-quality
buildings in the Central Business District.
(b) Buildings greater than 40 feet in height shall be required to
use architectural features such as pitched roofs, varied
rooflines, decorative cupolas, pediments, varied parapet
heights and similar features designed to provide variety and
reduce the visual impact of the building height. In order to
accommodate such features, the following exceptions to the
height limitation in Subsection G(2) above shall be permitted:
[1] The height of such features shall not exceed the maximum
permitted building height by more than eight feet.
[2] The horizontal area of such features, including the area
enclosed by such features, that exceed the maximum
permitted building height shall not exceed 20% of the
horizontal area of that portion of the building having a
height greater than 40 feet. This limitation shall be
cumulative for all such features. [For example, the
horizontal area of that portion of a sloped roof or roofs at
an elevation greater than the maximum building height
could not exceed 4,000 square feet in the case of a
building with a horizontal area of 20,000 square feet
(20,000 x 0.20 = 4,000).]
§ 190-114 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-114
175:629
§ 190-115. P Professional and Office District.
[3] In the case of linear features for which an area calculation
is not possible, such as a parapet wall, rooftop screen, etc.,
the horizontal length of any such features that exceed the
maximum permitted building height shall not exceed 20%
of the horizontal length of the highest building wall or
walls above which the feature is located and toward which
such feature faces. This limitation shall be cumulative for
all such features. [For example, the length of that portion
of a parapet or parapets at an elevation greater than the
maximum building height could not exceed 20 feet if
located above a wall 100 feet long (100 x 0.20 = 20).]
(c) Buildings having a gross floor area greater than 40,000 square
feet shall be required to use architectural features that provide
variety and reduce the visual impact of the building mass,
through the use of varied facade materials, facade projections
and recesses, judicious use of windows and other openings in
the facade, and other similar features.
(d) If parking or other exterior areas are provided beneath a
building, such areas shall be screened by structural elements
that are compatible with the materials and design of the front
and side building facades. The intent of such screening shall be
to mitigate the effects of headlights, minimize the view of
parked vehicles and pavement, and to provide for a unified
architectural design.
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3579]
(1) Business, professional or administrative offices which are not
engaged in retail or wholesale sale of goods on the premises and
which are not engaged in the repair or servicing of goods on the
premises.
(2) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
(3) Two-family residential uses in a single structure on the same lot.
(4) Business, professional or administrative offices in the same
building as dwelling units as a mixed use.
(5) Parking areas.
(6) Child-care centers.
(7) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
§ 190-114 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-115
175:630
(8) Institutional uses, as defined by § 190-3.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Parking facilities, as regulated in §§ 190-90 and 190-121.
(2) Private garages accessory to a permitted residential use for up to
four motor vehicles, subject to § 190-121G(3).
(3) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
(4) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities accessory to a permitted residential use and designed to
serve the residents on the premises, all as regulated in § 190-124G.
(5) (Reserved)134
(6) The office, contained in a detached single-family residence, of an
ordained clergyman of any faith or Christian Science practitioner.
(7) Family day-care homes accessory to a detached single-family
residence, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(8) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(9) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that residential uses shall not include any activity
commonly conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this
section.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the P District only if they comply with
the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in § 190-123:
[Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3579]
(1) Public utility buildings and structures.
D. Prohibited uses. Any use other than those uses permitted by this section
are prohibited. Without in any way limiting the generality and
prohibition of this section, nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to permit any bank, savings and loan association, finance
company or similar financial institution or company.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. Single-family detached dwellings and twofamily
dwellings shall comply with the bulk and lot regulations in
134. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), pertaining to home professional offices, was
repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
§ 190-115 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-115
175:631
§ 190-116. P-2 Professional and Office District.
§ 190-106E. All other permitted uses shall comply with following
conditions and requirements:
(1) Maximum building height: 30 feet, and two stories.
(2) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(3) Minimum side yard: six feet.
(4) Minimum both side yards: 18 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(6) Minimum lot area: 8,400 square feet.
(7) Minimum lot width: 60 feet, measured at the minimum front yard
setback line.
(8) Minimum average lot width: 60 feet, calculated so that at least
8,400 square feet of lot area shall be provided within 140 feet of the
front lot line.
(9) Maximum total coverage by above-grade structures: 40% of the
land area of the lot, except in the case when a parking area is the
principal use, 10% of the land area of the lot or 40 square feet,
whichever is less.
(10) Maximum floor area ratio: 40%.
(11) Maximum coverage by improvements: 80% of the lot area.
[Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 2670]
F. Other regulations. In addition to the bulk and lot regulations, the
following requirements shall be complied with:
(1) 135Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum habitable floor area
of 600 square feet.
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3579]
(1) Business, professional or administrative offices which are not
engaged in retail or wholesale sale of goods on the premises and
which are not engaged in the repair or servicing of goods on the
premises.
(2) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
135. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(1), regarding enclosure of piers, pillars or columns,
was repealed 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 2583, which ordinance also provided for the
renumbering of the remaining subsections.
§ 190-115 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-116
175:632
(3) Two-family residential uses in a single structure on the same lot.
(4) Business, professional or administrative offices permitted in
Subsection A(1) above in the same building as dwelling units as a
mixed use.
(5) Parking areas.
(6) Child-care centers.
(7) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(8) Institutional uses, as defined by § 190-3.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Parking facilities, as regulated in §§ 190-90 and 190-121.
(2) Private garages accessory to a permitted residential use for up to
four motor vehicles, subject to § 190-121G(3).
(3) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
(4) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities accessory to a permitted residential use and designed to
serve the residents on the premises, all as regulated in § 190-124G.
(5) (Reserved)136
(6) The office, contained in a detached single-family residence, of an
ordained clergyman of any faith or Christian Science practitioner.
(7) Family day-care homes accessory to a detached single-family
residence, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(8) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(9) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that residential uses shall not include any activity
commonly conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this
section.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the P-2 District only if they comply with
the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in § 190-123:
136. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), pertaining to home professional offices, was
repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
§ 190-116 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-116
175:633
[Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3579]
(1) Public utility buildings and structures.
D. Prohibited uses. Any use other than those uses permitted by this section
are prohibited. Without in any way limiting the generality and
prohibition of this section, nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to permit any bank, savings and loan association, finance
company or similar financial institution or company.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. Single-family detached dwellings and twofamily
dwellings shall comply with the bulk and lot regulations in
§ 190-106E. All other permitted uses shall comply with following
conditions and requirements:
(1) Maximum building height: 45 feet, and two stories.
(2) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(3) Minimum side yard: six feet.
(4) Minimum both side yards: 18 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(6) Minimum lot area: 8,400 square feet.
(7) Minimum lot width: 60 feet, measured at the minimum front yard
setback line.
(8) Minimum average lot width: 60 feet, calculated so that at least
8,400 square feet of lot area shall be provided within 140 feet of the
front lot line.
(9) Maximum total coverage by above-grade structures: 40% of the
land area of the lot, except in the case of a parking area as a
principal use, 10% of the land area of the lot or 40 square feet,
whichever is less.
(10) Maximum floor area ratio: 40%.
(11) Maximum coverage by improvements: 80% of the lot area.
[Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 2670]
F. Other regulations. In addition to the bulk and lot regulations, the
following requirements shall be complied with:
(1) 137Every dwelling unit shall contain a minimum habitable floor area
of 600 square feet.
137. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(1), regarding enclosure of piers, pillars or columns,
was repealed 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 2583, which ordinance also provided for the
renumbering of the remaining subsections.
§ 190-116 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-117
175:634
§ 190-117. H Hospital District.
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted:
(1) Hospitals for humans.
(2) Child-care centers.
(3) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Parking facilities, as regulated in §§ 190-90 and 190-121.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(3) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the H District only if they comply with
the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in § 190-123:
[Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3579]
(1) Public utility buildings and structures.
(2) Cellular telecommunications antennas mounted on an existing
structure at least 40 feet high.
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by this
section are prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. The following conditions and requirements
shall be complied with:
(1) Maximum building height: 48 feet, provided that roof-mounted
service equipment structures may exceed such height by a
maximum of 17 feet, subject to Subsection F below.
(2) Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
(3) Minimum side and rear yards: three feet for every one foot of
height of the building.
(4) Maximum coverage by above-grade structures: 16% of the lot area.
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: 65%.
(6) Maximum coverage by improvements: 90% of the lot area.
[Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 2670]
§ 190-117 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-117
175:635
§ 190-118. T Transition District.
(7) Screening of parking areas. Parking areas which directly abut upon
property zoned and used for residential purposes shall have a
continuous wall not less than six feet in height and not more than
eight feet in height along the common property line to separate
such properties. Other area for parking of vehicles shall have a
suitable hedge or other natural planting within the required
setback area.
F. Other regulations. Roof-mounted service equipment structures
permitted by this section shall be subject to the following:
(1) They shall be set back at least one foot for every two feet in height
of the service equipment structures, measured from the perimeter
of the roof on which the structure is located.
(2) They shall not occupy more than 65% of the roof area of any
building on which such service equipment structure is located.
(3) They shall not exceed 25% of the land area covered by buildings on
the property.
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted: [Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3579]
(1) Business and professional offices which are not engaged in retail or
wholesale sale of goods on the premises and which are not engaged
in the repair or servicing of goods on the premises, including
professional and business offices for accountants, architects,
attorneys, dentists, physicians, physical therapists, psychologists,
psychotherapists, ophthalmologists, optometrists, chiropodists,
chiropractors, engineers, professional planners, surveyors,
ministers, real estate appraisers or like professional firms.
(2) Residential uses and structures as permitted and regulated in the
residential zone which is adjacent to the particular T Transition
Zone within which the property is located.
(3) Office and residential uses permitted herein and located in the
same building as a mixed use.
(4) Child-care centers.
(5) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
(6) Institutional uses, as defined by § 190-3.
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
§ 190-117 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118
175:636
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Parking facilities, as regulated in §§ 190-90 and 190-121.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(3) Family day-care homes accessory to a permitted residential use.
(4) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that residential uses shall not include any activity
commonly conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this
section.
(5) In the case of a property located partially in the T District and
partially in an adjacent nonresidential district, surface parking
areas and other improvements, excluding buildings and loading
areas, shall be permitted under the following circumstances:
[Added 7-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2830]
(a) When such areas and improvements are accessory to a
principal use and/or building located on the same lot but in
such adjacent nonresidential district; and
(b) When the principal use and/or building in question is a
permitted principal use or structure in such adjacent
nonresidential district.
C. Conditional uses and structures. The following conditional uses and
structures shall be permitted in the T District only if they comply with
the appropriate regulations for such uses or structures in § 190-123:
[Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2620; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No.
2643; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3579]
(1) Public utility buildings and structures.
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Bulk and lot regulations. Residential uses shall comply with the bulk
and lot regulations for the residential zone which is adjacent to the
particular T Transition Zone within which the property is located. All
other permitted uses, including mixed office and residential use, shall
comply with following conditions and requirements:
(1) Maximum building height: 30 feet, and two stories.
(2) Minimum front yard: as required by the residential zone which is
adjacent to the particular T Transition Zone within which the
property is located.
(3) Minimum side yard: 15 feet on any side abutting a residential zone,
and 12 feet on any side abutting a nonresidential zone.
§ 190-118 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118
175:637
§ 190-118.1. AH-1 Affordable Housing District. [Added 2-24-2010 by
Ord. No. 3240138]
(4) Minimum rear yard: as required by the residential zone which is
adjacent to the particular T Transition Zone within which the
property is located.
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: 40%.
(6) Maximum coverage by improvements: 80% of the lot area.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the circumstances described in
§ 190-118B(5) above, the maximum coverage by improvements
shall be 90% of the lot area. [Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord. No.
2670; 7-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2830]
F. Other regulations. In addition to the bulk and lot regulations, the
following requirements shall be complied with:
(1) Permitted office uses shall be limited to the first two stories of any
structure.
(2) In a mixed use building, residential use shall only be permitted on
other than the ground floor, and each dwelling unit shall contain a
minimum habitable floor area of 600 square feet.
(3) Any building on a transitional lot, whether a new structure or a
converted existing structure, shall be residential in exterior
appearance.
(4) Any conversion from residential to nonresidential use shall require
site plan approval prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy
and shall be required to provide sufficient parking in accordance
with § 190-121. Any change in use from one nonresidential use to
another nonresidential use shall require a certificate of continued
occupancy, and shall be required to provide sufficient parking in
accordance with § 190-121.
A. Principal uses and structures. The following principal uses and
structures shall be permitted:
(1) Single-family residential uses in detached single-family residential
structures.
(2) Community residences and shelters.
(3) Municipal buildings owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood
and used for public purposes.
138. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it shall take effect after execution of a
settlement agreement that resolves West Bergen Mental Healthcare's objection to the
Village's housing element and fair share plan and after COAH's approval of such
agreement.
§ 190-118 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.1
175:638
B. Accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted, provided that they are located on the
same premises as the principal use or structure to which they are
accessory:
(1) Private garages as an accessory use for up to four motor vehicles,
subject to § 190-121G(3).
(2) Private swimming pools as permitted and regulated by § 190-124T.
[Amended 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3730]
(3) Private tennis courts, racquetball courts, paddleball courts,
platform tennis courts, handball courts and similar recreation
facilities designed to serve the residents on the premises, all as
regulated in § 190-124G.
(4) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(5) Family day-care homes, as regulated in § 190-124B.
(6) Accessory uses customarily incident to the above principal uses,
provided that they shall not include any activity commonly
conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this section.
C. Conditional uses and structures. No conditional uses and structures
shall be permitted in the AH-1 District.
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited
E. Bulk and lot regulations. The following conditions and requirements
shall be complied with:
(1) Maximum building height: 33 feet. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the height of principal buildings shall be permitted to be greater
than 33 feet, but not more than 42 feet, when the pitch of the main
roof is at least 8:12 (8 inches vertical for every 12 inches
horizontal).
(2) Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
(3) Minimum side yard: 7 feet.
(4) Minimum both side yards: 33% of the lot width measured at the
minimum front yard setback line.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(6) Minimum lot area 8,400 square feet.
(7) Minimum lot width: 60 feet, measured at the minimum front yard
setback line, and 50 feet at any other point within 140 feet of the
front lot line.
(8) Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.
§ 190-118.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.1
175:639
(9) Maximum total coverage by above-grade structures: 33% of the lot
area.
(10) Maximum coverage by above-grade structures located within 140
feet of the front lot line: 33% of the lot area within 140 feet of the
front lot line.
(11) Maximum improvement coverage: Notwithstanding the provisions
of § 190-119H, the maximum improvement coverage shall be 70%
of the lot area.
(12) Maximum coverage by improvements located within 140 feet of
front lot line: Notwithstanding the provisions of § 190-119H, the
maximum improvement coverage shall be 70% of the lot area
within 140 feet of the front lot line.
(13) Maximum gross building area: Notwithstanding the provisions of
§ 190-119J, the maximum gross building area shall be 45% of the
lot area
(14) Maximum gross building area within 140 feet of the front lot line:
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 190-119H, the maximum gross
building area within 140 feet of the front lot line shall be 85%,
provided that the gross building area restrictions shall be
calculated using only those buildings or portions of buildings, and
only that portion of the lot, located within 140 feet of the front lot
line.
F. Other requirements.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 190-121A, garage parking shall
not be required.
(2) Architectural design.
(a) Buildings shall be designed to maintain a residential
streetscape appearance by designing the building wall facing
the street to be compatible with the front of wall of singlefamily
dwellings typical in the Village. This shall be
accomplished through the use of such features as a doorway,
windows, porch and other typical front wall design features.
(b) For buildings with a gross building area that exceeds 5,000
square feet, the visual impact of the building shall be
minimized by such features as: orienting the building so that
the building wall having the narrower dimension faces the
street, incorporating projections and recesses in the building
walls, including windows and doors in large wall areas, using
more than one building facade material and incorporating
creative landscaping on those sides of the building that are
visible from the street.
§ 190-118.1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.1
175:640
§ 190-118.2. HC Highway Commercial District. [Added 6-13-2012 by
Ord. No. 3343]
(c) The main roof of principal buildings having a height greater
than 33 feet shall have a minimum pitch of 8:12 (eight inches
vertical for every 12 inches horizontal).
A. Purpose and intent. The HC Zone is intended to permit uses that are
compatible with the frontage on and exposure to Route 17 in the zone,
while at the same time being sensitive to the quality of life of nearby
residential areas. Although the zone recognizes the suitability and
compatibility of highway commercial use, the zone regulations are
intended to avoid a "highway strip" appearance by limiting the
permitted uses and the scale and intensity of development, requiring
generous setbacks required for buildings from property lines, and by
imposing architectural, sign and landscaping standards. The zone also
intends to avoid undue impacts to residential properties in the area by
limiting the permitted uses and the intensity of development, by
limiting the height of buildings, by requiring that access be oriented
away from local streets, and by requiring buffers between
nonresidential development and residential zones.
B. Permitted principal uses and structures. The following principal uses
and structures shall be permitted, subject to the prohibitions and
restrictions in § 190-118.2E and elsewhere in this chapter:
(1) Retail sales uses limited to the following:
(a) Paint, glass and wallpaper stores.
(b) Hardware stores.
(c) Department stores, variety stores, miscellaneous general
merchandise stores.
(d) Grocery stores; meat and fish markets; fruit and vegetables
markets; candy, nut and confectionery stores; dairy products
stores; retail bakeries; miscellaneous food stores.
(e) Auto and home supply stores.
(f) Clothing stores, accessory and specialty stores, shoe stores
and miscellaneous apparel and accessory stores.
(g) Home furniture and furnishings stores, household appliance
stores; radio, television and computer stores.
(h) Eating and drinking places, excluding drive-in restaurants.
(i) Drugstores and proprietary stores.
(j) Liquor stores.
(k) Movie and video game sales and rentals.
§ 190-118.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.2
175:641
(2) Banks and savings and loan institutions.
(3) Administrative, business and professional offices.
(4) Personal service establishments limited to the following:
(a) Laundry, cleaning and garment services.
(b) Portrait photographic studios.
(c) Beauty and barber shops.
(d) Shoe repair and shoeshine parlors.
(5) Child-care centers.
(6) Veterinary hospitals.
(7) Single-family detached residential dwellings.
(8) Institutional uses, as defined by § 190-3. [Added 2-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 3579]
C. Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses
and structures shall be permitted, excluding any uses and structures
that are specifically prohibited:
(1) Parking facilities, as regulated in §§ 190-90 and 190-121.
(2) Signs, as regulated in § 190-122.
(3) Uses and structures accessory to single-family detached residential
dwellings as permitted and regulated in all single-family residence
districts.
(4) For all uses other than single-family detached residential dwellings,
accessory uses customarily incident to permitted principal and
conditional uses, subject to the prohibitions and restrictions in
§ 190-118.2E and elsewhere in this chapter.
D. Conditional uses. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, no
conditional uses shall be permitted in the HC Zone District.
E. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those uses permitted by this
section are prohibited. In addition, without in any way limiting the
generality and prohibition of this section, the following uses are
specifically prohibited:
(1) Motor vehicle sales or rental.
(2) Gasoline filling stations, gasoline service stations and motor vehicle
maintenance or repair facilities.
(3) Garden centers and plant nurseries.
(4) Contractor yards and contractor storage buildings and facilities.
§ 190-118.2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.2
175:642
(5) Industrial, assembly and manufacturing uses.
(6) Storage warehouses and other storage buildings and uses, except
as an accessory to a permitted use.
(7) Drive-in restaurants and the sale, delivery and/or serving of
prepared food and/or beverages in a ready-to-consume state from a
location within a building through a door, through a window or over
a counter to a location outside the same building on the same site
or within the adjacent public right-of-way. Such prohibition shall
include but not be limited to the delivery to or receipt of food and/
or beverages to customers in motor vehicles. Excluded from this
prohibition shall be "take-out" sales of prepared food, where the
customer must enter the building to purchase and/or pick up food
for consumption at an off-tract location, and the delivery of
prepared foods to an off-tract location.
(8) Any use that involves the display, sale, provision or storage of
goods, services or materials, or the keeping of animals, outside the
confines of a building, provided that drive-up windows for banks
and pharmacies shall not be prohibited.
(9) Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging establishments.
(10) Any nonresidential uses that operate during the hours when the
sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the premises is
prohibited by § 101-12A. The foregoing prohibition shall apply to all
nonresidential uses in the district, regardless of whether or not
such uses sell alcoholic beverages or are retail sales or service
uses; provided, however, that institutional uses, as well as
automated teller machines for banks and pharmacies that provide
twenty-four-hour service, shall not be prohibited during such
hours. [Amended 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3579]
(11) Notwithstanding the authorization of veterinary hospitals as a
permitted principal use, no such use or any other use shall be
permitted to use areas outside the confines of a building for the
keeping, holding, care, treatment or exercising of animals, or any
similar activity.
F. Development standards. Development for single-family detached
dwellings shall comply with the requirements applicable to such
dwellings in the R-125 Zone District. Nonresidential development shall
comply with the following requirements, unless specifically provided
otherwise by this chapter:
(1) Minimum lot area in highway commercial district: 75,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet on the street from which access is
provided.
(3) Maximum floor area ratio: 25% of the lot area.
§ 190-118.2 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.2
175:643
(4) Maximum building coverage: 25% of the lot area.
(5) Maximum improvement coverage: 70% of the lot area.
(6) Maximum height of principal buildings: two stories, excluding
basement stories, and 35 feet; provided, however, that only that
portion of principal buildings comprised of roofs having a pitch of
not less than 5:12 and gables for such roofs shall be permitted to
exceed a height of 30 feet.
(7) Minimum yard depths, principal buildings:
(a) Seventy feet from the Route 17 right-of-way.
(b) Thirty feet from the Route 17 ramp rights-of-way.
(c) Fifty feet from other street rights-of-way.
(d) Fifty feet from other property lines.
(8) Driveway access to nonresidential uses shall be limited to access
to/from Route 17, except for driveways used solely for emergency
access. A traffic study may be required for major developments or
significant changes of use, in order to ensure that site access will
be safe and designed to minimize congestion on area streets.
(9) Parking areas shall contain landscaped areas distributed within the
parking area(s) so as to visually break up the area(s) of pavement,
with the location and design of such landscaped areas to be
determined through the site plan review and approval process. The
total area of such landscaping areas shall be at least 10 square feet
for each parking space in the parking area(s). Such landscaped
areas shall be considered to be "within the parking area" if they: (a)
are surrounded on at least three sides by the pavement for the
parking area; and/or (b) are surrounded on at least two sides by the
pavement for the parking area and are located between the parking
area and the building. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
landscaped area located within the minimum required setback for
parking areas shall be counted toward the foregoing requirement.
(10) A buffer having a minimum depth of 30 feet shall be provided to
separate nonresidential development in the district and adjacent
residential zone districts. The buffer shall contain dense plantings
and a screening fence or wall. If necessary to mitigate the effects of
noise, lights and other impacts upon adjacent residential
properties, the fence or wall shall be permitted and may be
required to have a height greater than six feet. The visual impact of
fences or walls higher than six feet upon adjacent residential
properties shall be mitigated through the use of increased setbacks
from the property line and by installing plantings between the
fence/wall and property line, as determined through the site plan
approval process. Buffers, screening and other features shall be
§ 190-118.2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.2
175:644
installed and maintained to ensure that noise levels from site
activities comply with the noise control regulations at
§ 190-120G(5) and N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.1 et seq.
(11) When nonresidential development is located across from a
residential zone district on the opposite side of Paramus Road and
Linwood Avenue, plantings, fencing, walls and/or berms shall be
required in the front yard to screen the parking and loading areas
from the view of residential properties and to minimize the
detrimental effects of glare from vehicle headlights, as determined
through the site plan approval process.
(12) Architectural design.
(a) Large, unbroken building masses in walls that face the street
shall be avoided through the use of projections, recesses,
varying materials and other methods. The following
requirements shall apply to any exterior building wall facing a
street, including any ramps to or from Route 17. For purposes
of complying with these requirements, a wall surface shall be
considered within the same vertical plane as another wall
surface unless their vertical planes, or projections thereof, are
separated by a horizontal distance of at least eight inches.
[1] At least 10% of the surface area of walls in the same
vertical plane, including gables and parapets, shall be
comprised of windows and doors. The area of such
windows and doors shall be measured from the inside edge
of any perimeter trim. The glass in such windows and
doors shall not be covered, painted or surfaced so as to
prevent a view into the building from the outdoors;
however, interior curtains and blinds shall be permitted.
[2] The maximum contiguous wall surface area containing the
same or similar material within the same vertical plane
shall not exceed 1,500 square feet. Larger wall surfaces
shall be separated by horizontal and/or vertical features
comprised of a substantially different material and/or shall
be located within a different vertical plane than the
adjacent surfaces. Such separations shall have a minimum
dimension of 12 inches in any direction, except for the
minimum vertical plane separation required above.
(b) Roofs. Buildings may be designed with pitched roofs and/or
with flat (horizontal) roofs that comply with the following:
[1] Pitched roofs shall provide a minimum pitch of 5:12 (five
inches vertical for each 12 inches horizontal).
[2] Pitched roofs shall contain variations in pitch and/or plane
and/or dormers not less than 50 feet apart.
§ 190-118.2 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.2
175:645
§ 190-118.3. AH-2 Affordable Housing District. [Added 3-23-2016 by
Ord. No. 3489]
[3] Flat (horizontal) roofs shall be designed with a cornice
and/or parapet(s). Cornices shall have a vertical dimension
not less than 5% of the height of the building, and the
cornice shall be of a substantially different material or
texture than the exterior wall surface. Parapets shall
provide variation in the roofline not less than 30 feet apart;
such variations shall not be less than eight inches in
vertical dimension.
[4] Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from the
view of adjacent properties and streets by parapets in the
same vertical plane as the exterior walls or by screens
designed to appear the same as a sloped roof. For
purposes of administering this requirement, screening
shall be designed to screen the view from a point six feet
above the ground measured at the property line of
adjacent properties and from the center line of the
adjacent street. In the case of Route 17, the center line
shall be considered the center of the northbound lanes and
the center line of any ramps.
G. Requirements for drive-in uses. In addition to the other requirements
for development within the HC Zone District, drive-in establishments
shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) The drive-in window(s), canopies, drive-up and stacking lanes, and
any above-grade equipment used for the drive-in operation shall be
located at least 50 feet from any residential zone district.
(2) At the time of site plan review, noise from motor vehicles and
speakers, as wells as impacts from vehicular headlights and
exhaust, shall be addressed through setbacks, screen walls,
vegetation and other features, as determined by the Board.
A. Intent. The AH-2 District is intended to promote the development of
multifamily housing, with a portion of such housing restricted to
households of low and moderate income. The standards for the zone are
intended to accommodate a type and density of housing consistent with
its location at the periphery of the Central Business District, and to
provide a compensatory benefit to developers of affordable housing
units.
B. Permitted principal uses and structures. The following principal uses
and structures shall be permitted in the AH-2 Zone District:
(1) Multifamily dwellings, including but not limited to garden
apartments and other apartments.
(2) Single-family attached residential dwelling units.
§ 190-118.2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.3
175:646
(3) Uses and structures which lawfully exist at the time of the adoption
of Ordinance 3489 shall be permitted to continue, provided that
any change of use or redevelopment of properties in the district
shall be limited to the residential uses permitted by this Subsection
B.
C. Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses
and structures shall be permitted in the AH-2 Zone District, provided
that they are located on the same premises as the principal use or
structure to which they are accessory:
(1) Surface parking areas, private garages and parking structures.
(2) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted
principal uses, provided that they shall not include any activity
commonly conducted for gain unless specifically permitted in this
section.
D. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
E. Development standards. Uses and structures which lawfully exist at the
time of the adoption of Ordinance 3489 shall be governed by the
regulations in the B-2 Zone District. Residential uses and structures
shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Minimum tract area in the multifamily district: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) Maximum density.
(a) For developments that contain for-sale affordable units, the
maximum permitted density shall be 30 units per acre.
(b) For developments that provide rental affordable units, the
maximum permitted density shall be 35 units per acre.
(3) Maximum floor area ratio.
(a) For developments that contain for-sale affordable units, the
maximum permitted floor area ratio shall be 130% of the lot
area.
(b) For developments that contain rental affordable units,
excluding developments in Subsection E(3)(c) below, the
maximum permitted floor area ratio shall be 135% of the lot
area.
(c) For developments that contain rental affordable units and at
least 13% of the affordable units are made affordable to verylow-
income households, the maximum permitted floor area
ratio shall be 140% of the lot area.
(4) Maximum improvement coverage.
§ 190-118.3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.3
175:647
(a) For developments that contain for-sale affordable units, the
maximum permitted improvement coverage shall be 80% of
the lot area.
(b) For developments that contain rental affordable units, the
excluding developments in Subsection E(4)(c), below, the
maximum permitted improvement coverage shall be 85% of
the lot area.
(c) For developments that contain rental affordable units and at
least 13% of the affordable units are made affordable to verylow-
income households, the maximum permitted improvement
coverage shall be 90% of the lot area.
(5) Maximum building height: 50 feet, except for limited architectural
features designed in conformance with Subsection E(10)(b) below.
(6) Minimum front yard: 15 feet.
(7) Minimum side yard: 12 feet or 1/2 of the height of the building,
whichever is greater.
(8) Minimum rear yard: 12 feet or 1/2 of the height of the building,
whichever is greater.
(9) Minimum setback of principal buildings from any property
developed for railroad use: 25 feet.
(10) Architectural design.
(a) Buildings shall be required to incorporate high-quality
architectural features that are characteristic of exemplary
buildings reflecting the traditional architecture in the Central
Business District. The applicant for any development shall
demonstrate such design by providing examples of and
comparisons with existing high-quality buildings in the Central
Business District.
(b) Buildings greater than 40 feet in height shall be required to
use architectural features such as pitched roofs, varied
rooflines, decorative cupolas, pediments, varied parapet
heights and similar features designed to provide variety and
reduce the visual impact of the building height. In order to
accommodate such features, the following exceptions to the
height limitation in Subsection E(5) above shall be permitted:
[1] The height of such features shall not exceed the maximum
permitted building height by more than eight feet.
[2] The horizontal area of such features, including the area
enclosed by such features, that exceed the maximum
permitted building height shall not exceed 20% of the
horizontal area of that portion of the building having a
§ 190-118.3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.3
175:648
height greater than 40 feet. This limitation shall be
cumulative for all such features. [For example, the
horizontal area of that portion of a sloped roof or roofs
at an elevation greater than the maximum building height
could not exceed 4,000 square feet in the case of a
building with a horizontal area of 20,000 square feet
(20,000 x 0.20 = 4,000).]
[3] In the case of linear features for which an area calculation
is not possible, such as a parapet wall, rooftop screen, etc.,
the horizontal length of any such features that exceed the
maximum permitted building height shall not exceed 20%
of the horizontal length of the highest building wall or
walls above which the feature is located and toward which
such feature faces. This limitation shall be cumulative for
all such features. [For example, the length of that portion
of a parapet or parapets at an elevation greater than the
maximum building height could not exceed 20 feet if
located above a wall 100 feet long (100 x 0.20 = 20).]
(c) Buildings having a gross floor area greater than 40,000 square
feet shall be required to use architectural features that provide
variety and reduce the visual impact of the building mass,
through the use of varied facade materials, facade projections
and recesses, judicious use of windows and other openings in
the facade, and other similar features.
(d) If parking or other exterior areas are provided beneath a
building, such areas shall be screened by structural elements
that are consistent or compatible with the materials and design
of the front and side building facades. The intent of such
screening shall be to mitigate the effects of headlights,
minimize the view of parked vehicles and pavement, and to
provide for a unified architectural design.
(11) Recreational/social amenities. Developments shall be required to
include both interior and exterior common areas devoted to
recreational, social and similar functions for residents and their
guests, as set forth below:
(a) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
interior common areas, such as but not limited to meeting
rooms, community centers, fitness centers, indoor recreational
areas, lounges, libraries, etc. Areas such as hallways, stairs,
elevators, entrance lobbies, storage, mail areas, mechanical
space or office space and similar areas shall not count towards
meeting this requirement.
(b) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
exterior common areas, such as but not limited to recreational
areas, gardens, courtyards, plazas, decks, patios, etc. Such
§ 190-118.3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.3
175:649
areas may be located at grade level, on building terraces or on
the roof of the building. Lawn or landscaped areas shall not
count towards meeting this requirement unless such areas are
specifically designed to be part of the aforementioned features.
(12) Parking and access regulations.
(a) Minimum number of parking spaces. The minimum number of
parking spaces shall be as required and permitted by the New
Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C.
5:21-1.1 et seq.
(b) Location.
[1] All required parking spaces shall be located on the same
property as the principal building or buildings.
[2] Parking shall be located in the side or rear yards only, and/
or beneath the principal building or buildings.
[3] Parking areas and driveways shall be located at least five
feet from any side lot line or rear lot line.
(c) Other parking and access regulations. Except as provided
otherwise by this section, parking areas and driveways shall be
required to comply with all applicable requirements of this
chapter or the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq., whichever is applicable.
(13) Signs. The regulations for institutional use signs in the residential
zone districts shall apply to signs for permitted residential
development in the AH-2 Zone District.
F. Affordable housing requirements. All residential development shall be
required to include affordable housing as a component. The following
requirements shall apply:
(1) Location. It is anticipated that all affordable units required by this
section shall be provided within the AH-2 Zone District; however,
the developer may propose and the Planning Board may accept the
provision of some or all of the affordable units in another location,
subject to:
(a) Demonstration by the developer of a realistic plan in a known
location for the development of an equal or greater number of
units by the developer;
(b) Completion of such units within the phasing timeframes
required for inclusionary development, unless extended by the
Board for good cause shown;
(c) Conformance with all zoning requirements by the off-site
development;
§ 190-118.3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.3
175:650
§ 190-118.4. B-3-R Business - Residential Zone District. [Added
3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3490]
(d) Determination by the Planning Board that such off-site units
are eligible for credit against the Village's statutorily mandated
affordable housing obligation; and
(e) Execution of an agreement with the developer as a prior
condition to the acceptance of any such proposal, unless
waived by the Planning Board.
(2) Minimum number of affordable units.
(a) For developments that contain for-sale affordable units, 20% of
the total number of housing units in the development shall be
required to be affordable units.
(b) For developments that contain rental affordable units,
excluding developments in Subsection F(2)(c) below, 15% of
the total number of housing units in the development shall be
affordable units.
(c) For developments that contain rental affordable units and at
least 13% of the affordable units are made affordable to verylow-
income households, 12.5% of the total number of housing
units in the development shall be affordable units.
(d) In calculating the required number of affordable units,
fractions of less than one unit shall be addressed by either of
the following, with the option being the developer's: 1)
development of an affordable unit by the developer, or 2)
making a payment in lieu of the fractional unit by the
developer. Any such payment shall be in accordance with the
applicable rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing.
(e) In no case shall a residential development be permitted
without any affordable dwelling units.
(3) Occupancy restrictions. Affordable units shall not be designated as
age-restricted units, supportive housing units or special needs
housing units unless the applicant demonstrates, and the Planning
Board finds, that such units are eligible for credit against the
Village's statutory affordable housing obligation.
(4) The general regulations for inclusionary developments in this
chapter shall apply.
A. Intent. The B-3-R Zone District is intended to promote development that
supports and is consistent with the commercial development pattern in
the Central Business District and to accommodate multifamily housing
§ 190-118.3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.4
175:651
in a location that can address the housing needs and preferences of
certain households and which supports the Central Business District.
B. Permitted principal uses and structures. The following principal uses
and structures shall be permitted in the B-3-R Zone District, subject,
however to the use limitations in Subsection C below:
(1) Retail sales uses, such as:
(a) Paint, glass and wallpaper stores, hardware stores.
(b) General merchandise stores, such as department stores,
variety stores, miscellaneous general merchandise stores.
(c) Food stores, such as grocery stores, meat and fish markets,
fruit and vegetables markets, candy, nut and confectionery
stores, dairy products stores, retail bakeries, miscellaneous
food stores.
(d) Auto and home supply stores.
(e) Apparel and accessory stores, such as men's, boys', women's
and family clothing stores, women's accessory and specialty
stores, children's and infants' wear stores, shoe stores and
miscellaneous apparel and accessory stores.
(f) Home furniture, furnishings and equipment stores, such as
home furniture and furnishings stores, household appliance
stores, radio, television and computer stores.
(g) Miscellaneous retail, such as drugstores and proprietary
stores, liquor stores, used merchandise stores, miscellaneous
shopping goods stores.
(2) Eating and drinking places.
(3) Banks and other similar financial institutions.
(4) Personal services, such as:
(a) Laundry, cleaning and garment services.
(b) Portrait photographic studios.
(c) Beauty and barber shops.
(d) Shoe repair.
(5) Business services, such as mailing, reproduction, commercial art
and photography, and stenographic services.
(6) Miscellaneous repair services, such as:
(a) Electrical repair shops.
(b) Watch, clock and jewelry repair.
§ 190-118.4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.4
175:652
(7) Amusement and recreation services, such as:
(a) Motion-picture rental.
(b) Dance studios, schools and halls.
(c) Physical fitness facilities.
(8) Business, administrative and professional offices, providing the
following services:
(a) Advertising.
(b) Consumer credit reporting, mercantile reporting, adjustment
and collection.
(c) Offices of medical doctors, dentists, osteopathic physicians and
other health practitioners.
(d) Home health care services.
(e) Legal services.
(f) Engineering, architectural and surveying services.
(g) Landscape counseling, planning.
(h) Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services.
(i) Management and public relations services.
(j) Arrangement of passenger transportation (travel agents, etc.).
(9) Child-care centers.
(10) Museums and art galleries.
(11) Business, professional, labor, civic, social and political associations.
(12) Municipal buildings and uses.
(13) United States Postal Service.
(14) Multifamily dwellings, including but not limited to garden
apartments and other apartments.
(15) Single-family attached residential dwelling units.
(16) Mixed-use development containing both permitted residential and
permitted nonresidential uses.
(17) Uses similar to those permitted above.
(18) Institutional uses, as defined by § 190-3. [Added 2-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 3579]
§ 190-118.4 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.4
175:653
C. Use limitations. The following limitations shall apply to permitted
principal uses in the B-3-R Zone District:
(1) In order to ensure the provision of affordable housing, on any
existing or future lot containing one acre or more of land, at least 2/
3 of any new floor area to be developed shall be devoted to
residential use, and shall include an affordable housing component
as set forth in Subsection G below. In any such development,
commercial uses shall be limited to the ground floor and/or
basement in any new floor area to be constructed in the district.
(2) That portion of the ground floor within 150 feet of the Ridgewood
Avenue right-of-way shall be limited to retail sales, eating and
drinking places, banks and personal services permitted in the B-1
Zone District.
(3) Drive-in uses shall be prohibited.
(4) Individual commercial uses shall be limited to those which are
small in scale, similar and consistent with the existing pedestrianoriented
shops and stores in the Central Business District, not
exceeding a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet for each
business establishment.
(5) Commercial uses in a mixed-use development shall be limited to
those that are compatible, and do not conflict, with multifamily
housing.
(6) Residential development or mixed-use development shall not be
permitted on lots containing less than one acre of land.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses
and structures shall be permitted in the B-3-R Zone District, provided
that they are located on the same premises as the principal use or
structure to which they are accessory:
(1) Surface parking areas, private garages and parking structures.
(2) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted
principal uses.
E. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
F. Development standards.
(1) Minimum tract area in the B-R-3 district: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) Maximum density.
(a) For residential or mixed-use developments that contain for-sale
affordable units, the maximum permitted density shall be 30
units per acre.
§ 190-118.4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.4
175:654
(b) For residential or mixed-use developments that contain rental
affordable units, the maximum permitted density shall be 35
units per acre.
(3) Maximum floor area ratio.
(a) For developments that contain for-sale affordable units, the
maximum permitted floor area ratio shall be 140% of the lot
area.
(b) For developments that contain rental affordable units,
excluding developments in Subsection F(3)(c) below, the
maximum permitted floor area ratio shall be 145% of the lot
area.
(c) For developments that contain rental affordable units and at
least 13% of the affordable units are made affordable to verylow-
income households, the maximum permitted floor area
ratio shall be 150% of the lot area.
(d) In mixed-use developments, the maximum permitted floor area
ratio of the nonresidential portion shall be 1/3 of the lot area.
The maximum floor area for the entire development shall be as
provided above.
(e) For nonresidential development on existing nonconforming
lots containing less than one acre, the maximum permitted
floor area ratio shall be 45% of the lot area.
(4) Maximum improvement coverage.
(a) For developments that contain for-sale affordable units, the
maximum permitted improvement coverage shall be 90% of
the lot area.
(b) For developments that contain rental affordable units,
excluding developments in Subsection F(4)(c) below, the
maximum permitted improvement coverage shall be 95% of
the lot area.
(c) For developments that contain rental affordable units and at
least 13% of the affordable units are made affordable to verylow-
income households, the maximum permitted improvement
coverage shall be 100% of the lot area.
(d) For nonresidential development on existing nonconforming
lots containing less than one acre, the maximum permitted
improvement coverage shall be 90% of the lot area.
(5) Maximum building height: 50 feet, except for limited architectural
features designed in conformance with Subsection F(10)(b) below.
(6) Front yard.
§ 190-118.4 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.4
175:655
(a) Maple Avenue and East Ridgewood Avenue: 12 feet minimum
from street curb, 15 feet maximum from front lot line.
(b) Franklin Avenue: no minimum, 15 feet maximum from front lot
line (ground floor nonresidential use only).
(c) Chestnut Street: 15 feet.
(7) Minimum side yard: no minimum side yard is required, but if a side
yard is provided, a minimum yard depth of 12 feet shall apply.
(8) Minimum rear yard: no minimum rear yard is required, but if a rear
yard is provided, a minimum yard depth of 12 feet shall apply.
(9) Minimum setback of principal buildings from any property
developed for railroad use: 25 feet.
(10) Architectural design.
(a) Buildings shall be required to incorporate high-quality
architectural features that are characteristic of exemplary
buildings reflecting the traditional architecture in the Central
Business District. The applicant for any development shall
demonstrate such design by providing as part of any site plan
review examples of and comparisons with existing high-quality
buildings in the Central Business District.
(b) Buildings greater than 40 feet in height shall be required to
use architectural features such as pitched roofs, varied
rooflines, decorative cupolas, pediments, varied parapet
heights and similar features designed to provide variety and
reduce the visual impact of the building height. In order to
accommodate such features, the following exceptions to the
height limitation in Subsection F(5) above shall be permitted:
[1] The height of such features shall not exceed the maximum
permitted building height by more than eight feet.
[2] The horizontal area of such features, including the area
enclosed by such features, that exceed the maximum
permitted building height shall not exceed 20% of the
horizontal area of that portion of the building having a
height greater than 40 feet. This limitation shall be
cumulative for all such features. [For example, the
horizontal area of that portion of a sloped roof or roofs at
an elevation greater than the maximum building height
could not exceed 4,000 square feet in the case of a
building with a horizontal area of 20,000 square feet
(20,000 x 0.20 = 4,000).]
[3] In the case of linear features for which an area calculation
is not possible, such as a parapet wall, rooftop screen, etc.,
the horizontal length of any such features that exceed the
§ 190-118.4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.4
175:656
maximum permitted building height shall not exceed 20%
of the horizontal length of the highest building wall or
walls above which the feature is located and toward which
such feature faces. This limitation shall be cumulative for
all such features. [For example, the length of that portion
of a parapet or parapets at an elevation greater than the
maximum building height could not exceed 20 feet if
located above a wall 100 feet long (100 x 0.20 = 20).]
(c) Buildings having a gross floor area greater than 40,000 square
feet shall be required to use architectural features that provide
variety and reduce the visual impact of the building mass,
through the use of varied facade materials, facade projections
and recesses, judicious use of windows and other openings in
the facade, and other similar features.
(d) If parking or other exterior areas are provided beneath a
building, such areas shall be screened by structural elements
that are compatible with the materials and design of the front
and side building facades. The intent of such screening shall be
to mitigate the effects of headlights, minimize the view of
parked vehicles and pavement, and to provide for a unified
architectural design.
(11) Recreational/social amenities. Residential and mixed-use
developments shall be required to include both interior and
exterior common areas devoted to recreational, social and similar
functions for residents and their guests, as set forth below:
(a) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
interior common areas, such as but not limited to meeting
rooms, community centers, fitness centers, indoor recreational
areas, lounges, libraries, etc. Areas such as hallways, stairs,
elevators, entrance lobbies, storage, mail areas, mechanical
space or office space and similar areas shall not count towards
meeting this requirement.
(b) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
exterior common areas, such as but not limited to recreational
areas, gardens, courtyards, plazas, decks, patios, etc. Such
areas may be located at grade level, on building terraces or on
the roof of the building. Lawn or landscaped areas shall not
count towards meeting this requirement unless such areas are
specifically designed to be part of the aforementioned features.
(12) Parking and access regulations.
(a) Minimum number of parking spaces.
[1] The minimum number of parking spaces for nonresidential
use shall be one parking space for each 250 square feet of
gross floor area, or fraction thereof.
§ 190-118.4 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.4
175:657
[2] The minimum number of parking spaces for residential use
shall be as required and permitted by the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1
et seq.
[3] A shared-parking approach shall be permitted in the case
of mixed-use development. In such cases, the minimum
number of parking spaces shall be determined by the
Board at the time of site plan review, depending upon
various factors, including but not limited to: a) the parking
demand and parking requirements of each of the various
uses, as set forth above, b) the timing of the peak parking
demand of the various uses, c) the location and layout of
the parking in relation to the building entrances to the
various uses, and d) the potential for future changes of use
which would alter the foregoing factors.
(b) Location.
[1] All required parking spaces shall be located on the same
property as the principal building or buildings.
[2] Parking shall be located in the side or rear yards only, and/
or beneath the principal building or buildings.
[3] Surface parking areas not located beneath the building or
in a parking structure, as well as site driveways shall be
located at least five feet from any side lot line or rear lot
line.
(c) Other parking and access regulations. Except as provided
otherwise by this section, parking areas and driveways shall be
required to comply with all applicable requirements of this
chapter or the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq., whichever is applicable.
(13) Signs. The regulations for signs in the B-2 Zone District shall apply
in the B-3-R Zone District.
G. Affordable housing requirements. All residential development shall be
required to include affordable housing as a component. The following
requirements shall apply:
(1) Location. It is anticipated that all affordable units required by this
section shall be provided within the B-3-R Zone District; however,
the developer may propose and the Planning Board may accept the
provision of some or all of the affordable units in another location,
subject to:
(a) Demonstration by the developer of a realistic plan in a known
location for the development of an equal or greater number of
units by the developer;
§ 190-118.4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.4
175:658
(b) Completion of such units within the phasing timeframes
required for inclusionary development, unless extended by the
Board for good cause shown;
(c) Conformance with all zoning requirements by the off-site
development;
(d) Determination by the Planning Board that such off-site units
are eligible for credit against the Village's statutorily mandated
affordable housing obligation; and
(e) Execution of an agreement with the developer as a prior
condition to the acceptance of any such proposal, unless
waived by the Planning Board.
(2) Minimum number of affordable units.
(a) For developments that contain for-sale affordable units, 20% of
the total number of housing units in the development shall be
required to be affordable units.
(b) For developments that contain rental affordable units,
excluding developments in Subsection G(2)(c) below, 15% of
the total number of housing units in the development shall be
affordable units.
(c) For developments that contain rental affordable units and at
least 13% of the affordable units are made affordable to verylow-
income households, 12.5% of the total number of housing
units in the development shall be affordable units.
(d) In calculating the required number of affordable units,
fractions of less than one unit shall be addressed by either of
the following, with the option being the developer's: 1)
development of an affordable unit by the developer, or 2)
making a payment in lieu of the fractional unit by the
developer. Any such payment shall be in accordance with the
applicable rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing, or other governing law.
(e) In no case shall a residential development be permitted
without any affordable dwelling units.
(3) Occupancy restrictions. Affordable units shall not be designated as
age-restricted units, supportive housing units or special needs
housing units unless the applicant demonstrates, and the Planning
Board finds, that such units are eligible for credit against the
Village's statutory affordable housing obligation.
(4) The general regulations for inclusionary developments in this
chapter shall apply.
§ 190-118.4 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.5
175:659
§ 190-118.5. C-R Commercial - Residential Zone District. [Added
3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3491]
A. Intent. The C-R Zone District is intended to promote development that
supports the commercial development pattern in the Central Business
District. The C-R Zone is also intended to accommodate multifamily
housing in a location that can address the housing needs and
preferences of certain households and which supports the Central
Business District.
B. Permitted principal uses and structures. The following principal uses
and structures shall be permitted in the C-R zone district, subject,
however to the use limitations in Subsection C below:
(1) Retail sales uses, such as:
(a) Paint, glass and wallpaper stores, hardware stores.
(b) General merchandise stores, such as department stores,
variety stores, miscellaneous general merchandise stores.
(c) Food stores, such as grocery stores, meat and fish markets,
fruit and vegetables markets, candy, nut and confectionery
stores, dairy products stores, retail bakeries, miscellaneous
food stores.
(d) Auto and home supply stores.
(e) Apparel and accessory stores, such as men's, boys', women's
and family clothing stores, women's accessory and specialty
stores, children's and infants' wear stores, shoe stores and
miscellaneous apparel and accessory stores.
(f) Home furniture, furnishings and equipment stores, such as
home furniture and furnishings stores, household appliance
stores, radio, television and computer stores.
(g) Miscellaneous retail, such as drugstores and proprietary
stores, liquor stores, used merchandise stores, miscellaneous
shopping goods stores.
(2) Eating and drinking places.
(3) Banks and other similar financial institutions.
(4) Personal services, such as:
(a) Laundry, cleaning and garment services.
(b) Portrait photographic studios.
(c) Beauty and barber shops.
(d) Shoe repair.
§ 190-118.5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.5
175:660
(5) Business services, such as mailing, reproduction, commercial art
and photography, and stenographic services.
(6) Miscellaneous repair services, such as:
(a) Electrical repair shops.
(b) Watch, clock and jewelry repair.
(7) Amusement and recreation services, such as:
(a) Motion-picture rental.
(b) Dance studios, schools and halls.
(c) Physical fitness facilities.
(8) Business, administrative and professional offices, providing the
following services:
(a) Advertising.
(b) Consumer credit reporting, mercantile reporting, adjustment
and collection.
(c) Offices of medical doctors, dentists, osteopathic physicians and
other health practitioners.
(d) Home health care services.
(e) Legal services.
(f) Engineering, architectural and surveying services.
(g) Landscape counseling, planning.
(h) Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services.
(i) Management and public relations services.
(j) Arrangement of passenger transportation (travel agents, etc.).
(9) Child-care centers.
(10) Museums and art galleries.
(11) Business, professional, labor, civic, social and political associations.
(12) Municipal buildings and uses.
(13) Multifamily dwellings, including but not limited to garden
apartments and other apartments.
(14) Single-family attached residential dwelling units.
(15) Mixed-use development containing both permitted residential and
permitted nonresidential uses.
§ 190-118.5 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.5
175:661
(16) Uses similar to those permitted above.
C. Use limitations. The following limitations shall apply to permitted
principal uses in the C-R Zone District:
(1) In order to ensure the provision of affordable housing, on any
existing or future lot containing one acre or more of land, at least 2/
3 of any new floor area to be developed shall be devoted to
residential use, and shall include an affordable housing component
as set forth in Subsection G below. In any such development,
commercial uses shall be limited to the ground floor and/or
basement in any new floor area to be constructed in the district.
(2) Drive-in uses shall be prohibited.
(3) Individual commercial uses shall be limited to those which are
small in scale, similar and consistent with the existing pedestrianoriented
shops and stores in the Central Business District, not
exceeding a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet for each
business establishment.
(4) Commercial uses in a mixed-use development shall be limited to
those that are compatible, and do not conflict, with multifamily
housing.
(5) Residential development or mixed-use development shall not be
permitted on lots containing less than one acre of land.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. The following accessory uses
and structures shall be permitted in the C-R Zone District, provided
that they are located on the same premises as the principal use or
structure to which they are accessory:
(1) Surface parking areas, private garages and parking structures.
(2) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted
principal uses.
E. Prohibited uses. Any uses other than those permitted by this section are
prohibited.
F. Development standards.
(1) Minimum tract area in C-R district: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) Maximum density.
(a) For residential or mixed-use developments that contain for-sale
affordable units, the maximum permitted density shall be 30
units per acre.
(b) For residential or mixed-use developments that contain rental
affordable units, the maximum permitted density shall be 35
units per acre.
§ 190-118.5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.5
175:662
(3) Maximum floor area ratio.
(a) For developments that contain for-sale affordable units, the
maximum permitted floor area ratio shall be 140% of the lot
area.
(b) For developments that contain rental affordable units,
excluding developments in Subsection F(3)(c) below, the
maximum permitted floor area ratio shall be 145% of the lot
area.
(c) For developments that contain rental affordable units and at
least 13% of the affordable units are made affordable to verylow-
income households, the maximum permitted floor area
ratio shall be 150% of the lot area.
(d) In mixed-use developments, the maximum permitted floor area
ratio of the nonresidential portion shall be 1/3 of the lot area.
The maximum floor area for the entire development shall be as
provided above.
(4) Maximum improvement coverage.
(a) For developments that contain for-sale affordable units, the
maximum permitted improvement coverage shall be 90% of
the lot area.
(b) For developments that contain rental affordable units,
excluding developments in Subsection F(4)(c) below, the
maximum permitted improvement coverage shall be 92.5% of
the lot area.
(c) For developments that contain rental affordable units and at
least 13% of the affordable units are made affordable to verylow-
income households, the maximum permitted improvement
coverage shall be 95% of the lot area.
(5) Maximum building height: 50 feet, except for limited architectural
features designed in conformance with Subsection F(10)(b) below.
(6) Minimum front yard: 15 feet.
(7) Minimum side yard: no minimum side yard is required, but if a side
yard is provided, a minimum yard depth of 12 feet shall apply.
(8) Minimum rear yard: no minimum rear yard is required, but if a rear
yard is provided, a minimum yard depth of 12 feet shall apply.
(9) Minimum setback of principal buildings from any property
developed for railroad use: 25 feet.
(10) Architectural design.
§ 190-118.5 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.5
175:663
(a) Buildings shall be required to incorporate high-quality
architectural features that are characteristic of exemplary
buildings reflecting the traditional architecture in the Central
Business District. The applicant for any development shall
demonstrate such design by providing as part of any site plan
review examples of and comparisons with existing high-quality
buildings in the Central Business District.
(b) Buildings greater than 40 feet in height shall be required to
use architectural features such as pitched roofs, varied
rooflines, decorative cupolas, pediments, varied parapet
heights and similar features designed to provide variety and
reduce the visual impact of the building height. In order to
accommodate such features, the following exceptions to the
height limitation in Subsection F(5) above shall be permitted:
[1] The height of such features shall not exceed the maximum
permitted building height by more than eight feet.
[2] The horizontal area of such features, including the area
enclosed by such features, that exceed the maximum
permitted building height shall not exceed 20% of the
horizontal area of that portion of the building having a
height greater than 40 feet. This limitation shall be
cumulative for all such features. [For example, the
horizontal area of that portion of a sloped roof or roofs at
an elevation greater than the maximum building height
could not exceed 4,000 square feet in the case of a
building with a horizontal area of 20,000 square feet
(20,000 x 0.20 = 4,000).]
[3] In the case of linear features for which an area calculation
is not possible, such as a parapet wall, rooftop screen, etc.,
the horizontal length of any such features that exceed the
maximum permitted building height shall not exceed 20%
of the horizontal length of the highest building wall or
walls above which the feature is located and toward which
such feature faces. This limitation shall be cumulative for
all such features. [For example, the length of that portion
of a parapet or parapets at an elevation greater than the
maximum building height could not exceed 20 feet if
located above a wall 100 feet long (100 x 0.20 = 20).]
(c) Buildings having a gross floor area greater than 40,000 square
feet shall be required to use architectural features that provide
variety and reduce the visual impact of the building mass,
through the use of varied facade materials, facade projections
and recesses, judicious use of windows and other openings in
the facade, and other similar features.
§ 190-118.5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.5
175:664
(d) If parking or other exterior areas are provided beneath a
building, such areas shall be screened by structural elements
that are compatible with the materials and design of the front
and side building facades. The intent of such screening shall be
to mitigate the effects of headlights, minimize the view of
parked vehicles and pavement, and to provide for a unified
architectural design.
(11) Recreational/social amenities. Residential and mixed-use
developments shall be required to include both interior and
exterior common areas devoted to recreational, social and similar
functions for residents and their guests, as set forth below:
(a) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
interior common areas, such as but not limited to meeting
rooms, community centers, fitness centers, indoor recreational
areas, lounges, libraries, etc. Areas such as hallways, stairs,
elevators, entrance lobbies, storage, mail areas, mechanical
space or office space and similar areas shall not count towards
meeting this requirement.
(b) At least 40 square feet per dwelling unit shall be devoted to
exterior common areas, such as but not limited to recreational
areas, gardens, courtyards, plazas, decks, patios, etc. Such
areas may be located at grade level, on building terraces or on
the roof of the building. Lawn or landscaped areas shall not
count towards meeting this requirement unless such areas are
specifically designed to be part of the aforementioned features.
(12) Parking and access regulations.
(a) Minimum number of parking spaces.
[1] The minimum number of parking spaces for nonresidential
use shall be one parking space for each 250 square feet of
gross floor area, or fraction thereof.
[2] The minimum number of parking spaces for residential use
shall be as required and permitted by the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1
et seq.
[3] A shared-parking approach shall be permitted in the case
of mixed-use development. In such cases, the minimum
number of parking spaces shall be determined by the
Board at the time of site plan review, depending upon
various factors, including but not limited to: a) the parking
demand and parking requirements of each of the various
uses, as set forth above, b) the timing of the peak parking
demand of the various uses, c) the location and layout of
the parking in relation to the building entrances to the
§ 190-118.5 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-118.5
175:665
various uses, and d) the potential for future changes of use
which would alter the foregoing factors.
(b) Location.
[1] All required parking spaces shall be located on the same
property as the principal building or buildings.
[2] Parking shall be located in the side or rear yards only, and/
or beneath the principal building or buildings.
[3] Surface parking areas not located beneath the building or
in a parking structure, as well as site driveways shall be
located at least five feet from any side lot line or rear lot
line.
(c) Other parking and access regulations. Except as provided
otherwise by this section, parking areas and driveways shall be
required to comply with all applicable requirements of this
chapter or the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq., whichever is applicable.
(13) Signs. The regulations for signs in the B-2 Zone District shall apply
in the C-R Zone District.
G. Affordable housing requirements. All residential development shall be
required to include affordable housing as a component. The following
requirements shall apply:
(1) Location. It is anticipated that all affordable units required by this
section shall be provided within the C-R Zone District; however, the
developer may propose and the Planning Board may accept the
provision of some or all of the affordable units in another location,
subject to:
(a) Demonstration by the developer of a realistic plan in a known
location for the development of an equal or greater number of
units by the developer;
(b) Completion of such units within the phasing timeframes
required for inclusionary development, unless extended by the
Board for good cause shown;
(c) Conformance with all zoning requirements by the off-site
development;
(d) Determination by the Planning Board that such off-site units
are eligible for credit against the Village's statutorily mandated
affordable housing obligation; and
(e) Execution of an agreement with the developer as a prior
condition to the acceptance of any such proposal, unless
waived by the Planning Board.
§ 190-118.5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-118.5
175:666
§ 190-119. General provisions.
(2) Minimum number of affordable units.
(a) For developments that contain for-sale affordable units, 20% of
the total number of housing units in the development shall be
required to be affordable units.
(b) For developments that contain rental affordable units,
excluding developments in Subsection G(2)(c) below, 15% of
the total number of housing units in the development shall be
affordable units.
(c) For developments that contain rental affordable units and at
least 13% of the affordable units are made affordable to verylow-
income households, 12.5% of the total number of housing
units in the development shall be affordable units.
(d) In calculating the required number of affordable units,
fractions of less than one unit shall be addressed by either of
the following, with the option being the developer's: 1)
development of an affordable unit by the developer, or 2)
making a payment in lieu of the fractional unit by the
developer. Any such payment shall be in accordance with the
applicable rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing, or other governing law.
(e) In no case shall a residential development be permitted
without any affordable dwelling units.
(3) Occupancy restrictions. Affordable units shall not be designated as
age-restricted units, supportive housing units or special needs
housing units unless the applicant demonstrates, and the Planning
Board finds, that such units are eligible for credit against the
Village's statutory affordable housing obligation.
(4) The general regulations for inclusionary developments in this
chapter shall apply.
A. Yards. There shall be provided for every lot front, rear and side yards as
required in the zone district in which such lot is located. No open space
which has been counted or included as a part of a side yard, rear yard,
front yard, court or other open space as required by this chapter for one
building may, by reason of change of ownership or for any other reason,
be counted or included in order to comply with the yard, court or other
open space requirement of any other building. In addition, the following
general regulations shall apply:
(1) Front yards.
(a) All front yards must face upon a dedicated public street and
shall be of the size required for the particular zone district in
§ 190-118.5 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-119
175:667
which the lot is located, provided that, on streets less than
50 feet in width, the required front yard shall be increased
by 1/2 the difference between the width of the street and 50
feet, and provided further that any lot which abuts a street
with a proposed right-of-way greater than 50 feet in width as
shown on the master plan for streets of the Village shall have
a front yard setback measured from the nearest line of the
proposed building or structure to the proposed right-of-way
line shown on such master plan. In the event a street, or part
thereof, is located within an easement, or is proposed to be
widened within an easement, rather than within a dedicated
right-of-way, the front yard setback shall be measured from the
easement line. [Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
(b) In the B-1 and B-2 Zone Districts, all new buildings and
additions to existing buildings shall conform to the existing
established front yard setback line of the buildings located on
each side of the subject property. In the event that the front
yard setback on each side of the subject property is not the
same distance from the center line of the abutting street in
question, then the Planning Board, as part of site plan review,
shall determine the required setback line for the subject
property which shall not be less than the setback of the
abutting property that is closest to the street right-of-way line
nor greater than the setback of the abutting property that is
farthest from the street right-of-way line.
(c) In the B-1 and B-2 Zone Districts, where there are no adjacent
buildings that are located in the business districts to determine
the required front yard setback, the following minimum
dimensions shall apply: [Added 9-12-2018 by Ord. No.
3669]
[1] B-1 interior lots shall have a minimum front yard setback
of zero feet.
[2] B-1 corner lots shall have a minimum front yard setback of
five feet.
[3] B-2 interior lots shall have a minimum front yard setback
of five feet.
[4] B-2 corner lots shall have a minimum front yard setback of
10 feet.
(2) Yards on corner lots. All yards on corner lots abutting any street
shall be construed as front yards and shall be subject to the front
yard setback requirement of the zone in which said lot falls.
(3) Yards abutting railroads and state highways. Unless specifically
provided otherwise by the regulations for individual zone districts,
the yard requirement for any residentially zoned lot that abuts a
§ 190-119 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-119
175:668
state highway or active railroad shall increase the yard
requirement for that yard that abuts said highway or railroad by
50%. [Amended 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3493]
(4) Projections and encroachments. Except as hereinafter specified,
yards and courts required under this chapter shall be entirely free
of principal buildings or parts thereof: [Amended 2-11-2004 by
Ord. No. 2862; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(a) Cornices and eaves may project not to exceed two feet over any
required yard or court.
(b) Sills, leaders, belt courses and similar ornamental or structural
features may project six inches into any required yard or court.
(c) An open fire balcony or fire escape may project into a required
yard not more than four feet.
(d) Ground-story bay windows or oriels may project not more than
three feet into any required yard in the R-125, R-110, R-1,
R-1A, R-2 and R-3 Zone Districts.
(e) Chimneys with or without fireplaces may also project not more
than 18 inches into any required yard in the R-125, R-110, R-1,
R-1A, R-2 and R-3 Zone Districts. The total area of such
encroachment shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(f) No canopy or marquee shall extend past any setback line
affecting the building to which it is affixed. This prohibition
shall not apply to awnings. In addition, canopies shall be
subject to the provisions of § 190-124L, and awnings shall be
subject to the provisions of § 190-124K.
(g) No steps or stairs shall extend into any street right-of-way in
any zone district. Unenclosed stairs may extend not more than
60 inches into any required front yard. Unenclosed steps may
extend not more than 45 inches into any required rear yard.
[Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3668]
(h) Window-mounted air-conditioning units, fans and similar
window-mounted equipment designed to provide heating,
ventilating or air conditioning through such window may
project into a required yard not more than three feet.
(5) Lot line and yard determinations for uncommon or atypical lots. In
the event that the definitions of lot lines and yards in § 190-3 do not
allow for a clear or reasonable determination of front, rear and side
lot lines or yards, as for example in the case of flag lots or landlocked
parcels which may be nonconforming or created by
variance, the determination of such lot lines and yards shall be
made by the Zoning Officer. Any such determination may be
appealed following the procedures set forth in § 190-29, and a
§ 190-119 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-119
175:669
formal interpretation of the applicable lot lines and yards may
be obtained following the procedures set forth in § 190-30. In
making such determination, deciding such appeals and in making
such interpretations, the following guidelines shall apply: [Added
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(a) Generally, the common boundaries between lots are to be
defined the same. Thus, if the common boundary is a rear lot
line for one lot, it is to be considered a rear lot line for all lots
that share that boundary. The same case applies when a
common boundary is a side lot line. There are exceptions to
this principle, however, such as when a rear lot line on a corner
lot is also the side lot line of the property sharing the same
boundary.
(b) Generally, rear lot lines intersect side lot lines or other rear lot
lines, but not front lot lines. There are exceptions to this
principle, however, such as when a rear lot line on a corner lot
intersects one or more of the front lot lines.
(c) Generally, side lot lines intersect front lot lines and/or rear lot
lines. Side lot lines also form a portion of the limits of front,
side and rear yards.
(d) Generally, rear lot lines and rear yards are located to the rear
of the principal building, and side yards are located to the side
of the principal building. There are exceptions to this principle,
however, such as when the principal building is at a severe
angle to the lot line(s), or the lot line(s) curve or angle along
more than one wall of the building, the lot is unusually shaped,
the building is unusually shaped, etc.
(e) Generally, front yards are located in front of the principal
building, across the full width of a lot. There are exceptions to
this principle, however, such as in the case of flag lots and landlocked
parcels not having frontage on an approved street. In
such cases, the front yard may be more limited in extent or
there may be no front yard at all, as with a land-locked parcel.
(f) In cases where the application of these guidelines conflict with
or contradict one another or the lot line and yard definitions in
§ 190-3, the determination of front, side and rear lot lines and
yards shall be made by the Zoning Officer based upon the facts
in each situation.
B. Principal buildings. [Amended 8-9-2006 by Ord. No. 3015;
6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 3343; 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3493;
2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3579]
(1) No lot shall contain more than one principal building, except:
§ 190-119 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-119
175:670
(a) Garden apartments, multifamily dwellings and single-family
attached residential dwelling units permitted and regulated in
the various zone districts;
(b) Shopping centers located in the HC zone district; and
(c) Institutional uses as defined and permitted by this chapter.
(2) No building to be used as a dwelling shall be constructed, altered
or moved on, to or in the rear of any building situated on the same
lot, except as permitted by Subsection B(1) above.
C. Accessory buildings and structures. No accessory building or structure
shall be built on any lot on which there is not a principal building or
structure, except when specifically permitted otherwise by this chapter.
The following general provisions shall apply to accessory structures:
(1) Accessory structures in residential zones. The following
requirements shall be met in all residential zones:
(a) No accessory building or above-grade structure shall have a
ground area greater than the ground area of the principal
building or structure on the same lot.
(b) No freestanding accessory building or structure shall exceed
15 feet in height, except as may be specifically provided
otherwise by this chapter, such height shall be measured as set
forth in § 190-119D. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the height
of accessory buildings shall be permitted to be greater than 15
feet, but not more than 18 feet, when all of the following
requirements are met: [Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No.
2643; 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120]
[1] The coverage by the accessory building is at least 400
square feet;
[2] The accessory building complies with the required setback
requirements in Subsection C(1)(f) below; and
[3] The pitch of any roof greater than 15 feet high is at least
8:12 (eight inches vertical for every 12 inches horizontal).
(c) No accessory building shall be permitted in any front yard.
Swimming pools, tennis courts, decks, patios, and similar play
structures shall be prohibited in any front yard; provided,
however, that basketball equipment which utilizes a permitted
driveway on the lot as the play surface is exempt from this
prohibition. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 2565]
(d) All accessory buildings shall be located at least 12 feet from
any principal building situated on the same lot.
§ 190-119 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-119
175:671
(e) Accessory buildings may be built within any side yard if the
distance from any accessory building to the side lot line is
equal to or greater than the required side yard setback for the
principal building on such lot.
(f) Accessory buildings built in any rear yard shall not be closer
than five feet from any side or rear property line of the lot;
provided, however, that when an accessory building is attached
to a principal building by a breezeway, roof, wall or the like, or
is separated from the principal building by a distance less than
required by § 190-119C(1)(d), such accessory building shall be
subject to the same minimum side and rear yard setback
requirements as the principal building. [Amended 2-11-2004
by Ord. No. 2862]
(g) Notwithstanding the above, freestanding flagpoles shall be
limited to a height of 20 feet when accessory to a residential
use and 30 feet when accessory to a nonresidential use, and
shall be set back from any property line a distance equal to or
greater than the height of such flagpole. Flagpoles mounted on
a building shall be limited to the maximum permitted height of
the building, provided that any such poles located on or which
project above the roof of a building shall be subject to the
regulations for rooftop equipment in § 190-119D(3), and
further provided that such poles shall be exempt from the
setback requirements applicable to the building or to
freestanding flagpoles. [Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No.
2643; 12-11-2013 by Ord. No. 3400]
(2) Accessory structures in nonresidential zones. The following
requirements shall be met in all nonresidential zones:
(a) No accessory building shall have a ground area greater than
the ground area of the principal building on the same lot.
(b) No freestanding accessory building or structure shall exceed
20 feet in height, except as may be specifically provided
otherwise by this chapter. [Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 2643]
(c) No accessory building shall be permitted in any front yard.
(d) No accessory building shall be closer to the principal building
on the lot on which it is located than 10 feet or the height of
such accessory building, whichever is greater.
(e) Accessory buildings may be built within any side yard if the
distance from such accessory building to the side line of the lot
is equal to or greater than the required side yard setback for
the principal building on such lot.
§ 190-119 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-119
175:672
(f) Accessory buildings built in any rear yard shall comply with the
following requirements; provided, however, that when an
accessory building is attached to a principal building by a
breezeway, roof, wall or the like, or is separated from the
principal building by a distance less than required by
§ 190-119C(2)(d), such accessory building shall be subject to
the same minimum side and rear yard setback requirements as
the principal building. [Added 2-11-2004 by Ord. No. 2862]
[1] Accessory buildings and roofed accessory structures
having a floor area of less than or equal to 500 square feet
shall be located at least five feet from the side or rear lot
line.
[2] Except as provided in Subsection A above, accessory
buildings and roofed accessory structures having a floor
area of more than 500 square feet shall comply with the
minimum yard requirements for principal buildings.
(g) Notwithstanding the above, freestanding flagpoles shall be
limited to a height of 30 feet and shall be set back from any
property line a distance equal to or greater than the height of
such flagpole. Flagpoles mounted on a building shall be limited
to the maximum permitted height of the building, provided that
any such poles located on or which project above the roof of a
building shall be subject to the regulations for rooftop
equipment in § 190-119D(3), and further provided that such
poles shall be exempt from the setback requirements
applicable to the building or to freestanding flagpoles. [Added
12-11-2013 by Ord. No. 3400]
D. Height of buildings and other structures. [Amended 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 2643; 4-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2780; 2-11-2004 by Ord.
No. 2862; 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120]
(1) The height limitations required in each zone district shall not apply
to steeples for houses of worship; provided, however, that the
height of such steeples shall not exceed 75 feet in height.
(2) Houses of worship, school buildings and structures, and any
Village-owned, -leased or -operated building, structure or use shall
not exceed 45 feet in height. [Amended 12-11-2013 by Ord. No.
3400]
(3) The height limitations for buildings shall not apply to rooftop
appurtenances, including but not limited to decorative
architectural elements such as cupolas and weathervanes; heating,
ventilating and air-conditioning equipment; chimneys, vent pipes,
etc., but only if such appurtenances comply with the following
limitations:
§ 190-119 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-119
175:673
(a) The height of the appurtenances, and any structures that
screen the appurtenances from view, must not exceed eight
feet above the highest point of the roof or eight feet above the
maximum permitted building height, whichever is less.
(b) The horizontal dimension of any such appurtenances, and any
structures that screen such appurtenances from view, must not
exceed 20% of the horizontal dimension of the building wall or
side toward which such appurtenance or screening structure
faces. For example, a chimney located on or facing the side of a
building having a horizontal dimension of 40 feet is exempt
from the building height requirements only if the horizontal
dimension of the chimney facing that side of the building is
eight feet or less.
(4) The height limitations for buildings shall not apply to roof-mounted
antennas, provided that roof-mounted antennas shall be required to
comply with the applicable regulations for such antennas set forth
in this chapter.
(5) The height of buildings and other roofed structures shall be
calculated as the vertical distance between the highest point of
such building or structure and the average finished ground level as
set forth herein. The following shall apply:
(a) "Highest point of the building" shall include but not be limited
to any roof, parapet wall, pediment or other vertical facade
element that projects above the roof, and any appurtenance
thereto, but excluding any features that are exempted by this
chapter from building height requirements.
(b) The "average finished ground level" shall be calculated using
an average of a representative sample of the various finished
ground levels located within the following distances from the
base of the building or roofed structure, provided that only
ground levels located on the subject property shall be used in
the calculation:
[1] Principal buildings or roofed structures: 15 feet.
[2] Accessory buildings or roofed structures: six feet.
(c) In the event that retaining walls are present within the area
used for calculating the average finished ground level, both the
top and bottom elevations of the retaining wall in the same
location shall be used in calculating the average finished grade
elevation.
(6) The height of other structures besides buildings and other roofed
structures regulated by Subsection D(5) above shall be calculated
as set forth in the specific section of this chapter regulating such
structures. Where such sections do not specify a method of
§ 190-119 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-119
175:674
calculation, the height of such structures shall be calculated as the
vertical distance between:
(a) The highest point of the structure; and
(b) The average finished ground level at the base of the structure,
except that when the finished ground level at the base of the
structure is elevated above the surrounding ground (such as
when the structure is located on a berm or wall), the ground
level at the base of the structure shall be disregarded and the
average ground level of the surrounding ground shall be used
to determine the height of the structure.
(7) When the finished ground levels include levels that are sunken
below the surrounding ground level, such as but not including
sunken driveways, sunken stairs or stairwells, window wells,
ventilation shafts, etc., such levels shall be disregarded in height
calculations.
E. Physical or visual obstructions.
(1) On any corner lot, no fence, structure, planting or shrubbery over
30 inches in height above the level of the pavement at the center of
the street opposite the point in question shall be erected or
maintained within 25 feet of the intersection formed by the
projections of the two street side lines at the corner.
(2) No hedge, shrubbery or planting on any lot in any residential zone
shall be permitted within three feet from any street side line. The
branches of all trees projecting beyond any such street side line
must be trimmed at all times to ensure unobstructed vision and
clearance eight feet above ground or sidewalk level.
F. Lighting. [Amended 6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 3343]
(1) No artificial source of light shall be constructed or utilized within
the Village of Ridgewood so as to create a nuisance across property
lot lines.
(2) All light fixtures in any zone district shall be designed and located
so that the illumination of any kind therefrom, whether from
interior or exterior sources, shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle at any
point at ground level along any property lot line in the residential
zones of the Village of a property being used or capable of being
used for residential purposes. For purposes of administering this
requirement, properties within a residential zone district not
capable of being used for residential purposes shall include, but not
be limited to, streets, utility rights-of-way, streams and other water
bodies, parklands and other preserved open space, and properties
already developed and anticipated to remain developed for
nonresidential use.
§ 190-119 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-119
175:675
G. Cantilevered structures and buildings raised on columns. The following
provisions shall apply to the cantilevered structures and buildings
raised on columns: [Amended 10-8-1996 by Ord. No. 2583]
(1) No building shall be permitted which is supported by above-grade
piers, columns, pylons or similar structures, and unless such
building is supported on a continuous footing and foundation and
enclosed on all sides by an exterior wall that rests on said footing
and foundation. Notwithstanding the above, the following
construction is exempt from the foregoing prohibition: [Amended
3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3493]
(a) Cantilevered portions of buildings which are completely open
beneath said portion;
(b) Carports and similar roofed canopies supported by piers or
columns, provided that such structures shall not be permitted
to contain any floor area above any ceiling of said structures;
(c) Balconies, fire escapes, stairwells, bay windows and similar
projecting structures; and
(d) Parking areas located beneath buildings where specifically
permitted in the individual zone districts.
(2) For purposes of administering this chapter, calculations of
setbacks, coverage by above-grade structures and coverage by
improvements shall be made from the furthest projecting wall of
cantilevered structures. [Amended 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 2670]
H. Coverage by improvements for single-family and two-family dwellings.
In the R-125, R-110, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-7 Zone
Districts, single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings,
community residences and shelters and any other uses which are
subject to the same requirements as the foregoing shall comply with the
following schedules of maximum coverage by improvements: [Added
6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 2670]
(1) Maximum improvement coverage of total lot.
Total Lot Area
(square feet)
Maximum Coverage by
Improvements
(percent of total lot area)
0 to 13,999 45%, but not above 5,600 square feet
14,000 to 24,999 40%, but not above 8,750 square feet
25,000 and over 35%
(2) Maximum improvement coverage of lot area within specified
distance of front lot line. In addition to the schedule in Subsection
H(1) above, the coverage by improvements located within the
§ 190-119 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-119
175:676
following specified distances of the front lot line shall comply with
the following schedule:
Lot Area Within
Specified Distance of
Front Lot Line*
(square feet)
Maximum Coverage by
Improvements Located Within
Specified Distance of Front Lot
Line*
(percent of total lot area)
0 to 13,999 45%, but not above 5,600 square feet
14,000 to 24,999 40%, but not above 8,750 square feet
25,000 and over 35%
* NOTE: The specified distances from the front lot line are as
follows:
Zone District
Distance from Front Lot Line
(feet)
R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-2A and R-3 140
R-110 175
R-125 200
I. Street easements. In the event a street or any portion of a street, or any
proposed widening of a street is located within an easement rather than
within a dedicated right-of-way, the required lot area, lot width, lot
frontage, lot depth and all required setbacks shall be increased above
that which would otherwise be required for the use in the respective
zone district, the same as if the easement were to be entirely a
dedicated right-of-way. Furthermore, in such situation, the maximum
permitted floor area ratio, density, coverage by above-grade structures
and coverage by improvements shall be reduced by a percentage equal
to the percentage of the lot area occupied by the easement, the same as
if the easement were to be entirely a dedicated right-of-way. [Added
7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
J. Maximum gross building area for single-family detached dwellings,
two-family dwellings and duplexes. In all zone districts, single-family
detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, duplexes, community
residences and shelters and any other lawfully permitted uses which
are subject to the same requirements as the foregoing shall comply with
the following schedule of maximum gross building area (see definition
in § 190-3):
(1) Single-family detached dwellings and community residences and
shelters.
§ 190-119 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-119
175:677
Maximum Gross Building Area
Detached
Lot Area
(square feet)
Principal Building1
(lesser of % lot
area or square
feet)
Detached Accessory
Buildings1 (lesser
of % lot area or
square feet)2
0 to 8,399 35%, 2,856 7.5%, 588
8,400 to 10,499 34%, 3,360 7.0%, 682
10,500 to 13,999 32%, 4,060 6.5%, 840
14,000 to 19,249 29%, 4,620 6.0%, 962
19,250 to 24,999 24%, 5,000 5.0%, 1,000
25,000 and over 20% 4.0%
(2) Two-family dwellings and duplexes.
Maximum Gross Building Area
Detached
Lot Area
(square feet)
Principal Building1
(lesser of % lot
area or square
feet)
Detached Accessory
Buildings1 (lesser
of % lot area or
square feet)2
0 to 8,399 40%, 3,276 7.5%, 588
8,400 to 10,499 39%, 3,675 7.0%, 682
10,500 to 13,999 35%, 4,060 6.5%, 840
14,000 to 19,249 29%, 4,620 6.0%, 962
19,250 to 24,999 24%, 5,000 5.0%, 1,000
25,000 and over 20% 4.0%
NOTES:
1 In cases where there is more than one principal building and/or
more than one accessory building, the maximum areas specified
in the above schedules apply to the total gross building area of all
such principal and accessory buildings, as applicable, not to
individual buildings.
2 The additional gross building area ratio for detached accessory
buildings shall only be permitted for such buildings that are
separated from the principal building or buildings by the distance
specified in § 190-119C(1)(d).
K. Limited exemptions for barrier-free access. Notwithstanding the
definitions of "floor area ratio," "gross floor area" and "habitable floor
area" in § 190-3, up to 100 square feet of floor area in any principal
building, excluding single-family and two-family dwellings, shall be
§ 190-119 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-119
175:678
§ 190-120. Environmental provisions.
All development within the Village of Ridgewood shall be designed to
prevent any adverse impact to the man-made or natural environments, and
if prevention is not reasonably possible, development shall be designed
to mitigate such impacts. The development of lands having environmental
constraints is permitted as regulated herein; however, development of
environmentally constrained land is not to be encouraged but is permitted
if each application for development complies with the following standards,
notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter.
exempted from the limitations of this chapter concerning floor area
ratio, gross floor area and the minimum number of parking spaces
in proportion to floor area, if such floor area meets the following
requirements: [Added 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 3174]
(1) The floor area to be exempted must be devoted to providing
barrier-free access for the disabled. The applicant shall have the
burden of proof, and must demonstrate that the floor area in
question is: necessary to provide barrier-free access for the
disabled, and that no reasonable alternative to such exemption
exists. To satisfy this requirement, the applicant shall demonstrate
that the floor area in question provides space in the building for
elevators, lifts, ramps, enlarged doorways or turning areas or other
comparable facilities designed in accordance with all applicable
barrier-free code requirements and that such exemption is
reasonably necessary to provide for barrier-free access to the
building. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit the use of
such floor area for access to buildings by persons that are not
disabled.
(2) Only one such exemption shall apply to any principal building.
(3) The exempted floor area must meet all other applicable
requirements of this chapter.
(4) The Zoning Officer shall make the final determination concerning
whether such floor area qualifies for the exemption set forth in this
subsection.
L. Trademark or prototypical designs. The use of trademarks and/or
prototypical designs of roofs, facades, windows, doors, awnings, signs,
lights and other improvements shall be permitted after approval in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that
the use of such marks and designs shall not, by itself, be accepted as
satisfaction of the requirements for relief from any provision of this
chapter. [Added 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3323]
A. Stormwater runoff. [Amended 3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2983;
1-17-2007 by Ord. No. 3035]
§ 190-119 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-120
175:679
(1) All development shall comply with the applicable requirements of §
190-83.
(2) For those developments that do not require site plan or subdivision
approval, a permit shall be required for any development or work
involving a new building, an addition to an existing building,
swimming pools or any other site improvements resulting in an
increase of at least 200 square feet of impervious surface area per
lot. The following shall apply:
(a) The applicant shall be required to submit a site grading and
stormwater control plan to the Village of Ridgewood
Department of Public Works, Engineering Division, with the
application form available from the Engineering Division.
(b) The information required by § 190-67N shall be provided on
the plan.
(c) The plan submitted for the permit shall be prepared by a
licensed New Jersey professional engineer, with appropriate
signature and seal; provided, however, that the Village
Engineer may waive this requirement if in his/her judgment
the services of a professional engineer are unnecessary to
adequately address the drainage impacts from the
development.
B. Soil erosion and sedimentation control. All developments in all zones
shall protect streams, lakes and ponds from sedimentation damage and
shall prepare a soil erosion and sediment control plan if required by
N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
C. Flood hazard areas. There is hereby created within the Village special
flood hazard areas as identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance
Study, Bergen County, New Jersey," revised and to be effective
September 30, 2005, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
Said maps are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of
this chapter. Said maps are available in the Village offices. The Flood
Insurance Study is on file with the Director of the Department of Public
Works. The following provisions shall apply to such areas: [Amended
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2649; 7-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2945]
(1) The uses permitted within any flood hazard area are those uses
permitted and regulated by this article of the zone district in which
the area may be located, as such zone districts are set forth and
delineated on the Zone Map.
(2) No part of the floodway, as indicated by the Flood Insurance Rate
Maps, shall be located within the usable area of the lot, as defined
by this chapter. [Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
§ 190-120 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-120
175:680
(3) The required minimum lot area shall be increased above that which
would otherwise be required for the use in the respective zone
district by 50% of the area of the special flood hazard area located
within the usable area of the lot, as defined by this chapter.
[Amended 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
D. Wetlands. No more than 10% of the usable area of a lot, as defined by
this chapter, shall be occupied by wetlands or wetland transition areas,
as such wetlands or transition areas are indicated by a Letter of
Interpretation or presence/absence letter from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and as adjusted through the
grant of various permits and approvals by said department. [Amended
7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2744]
E. Steep slopes. The purpose of this subsection is to regulate the intensity
of use in areas of steeply sloping terrain in order to limit soil loss,
erosion, excessive stormwater runoff, the degradation of surface water
and to maintain the natural topography and drainage patterns of land.
Disturbance of steep slopes results in accelerated erosion processes
from stormwater runoff and the subsequent sedimentation of water
bodies with the associated degradation of water quality and loss of
aquatic life support. Related effects include soil loss, changes in natural
topography and drainage patterns, increased flooding potential, further
fragmentation of forest and habitat areas, and compromised aesthetic
values. The following requirements shall apply: [Amended 7-18-2001
by Ord. No. 2744; 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3225]
(1) Disturbance of steep slopes prohibited. In accordance with the
State of New Jersey’s Water Quality Management Planning Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:15, no disturbance of steep slopes shall be permitted,
except as permitted herein. The following provisions shall apply:
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of interpreting and administering
the disturbance restrictions in this Subsection E, the following
definitions shall apply:
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the
exposure or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing,
cutting, or removing of vegetation.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or
improvement that reduces or prevents absorption of
stormwater into land, and includes porous paving, paver
blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks, patios, elevated
structures, and other similar structures, surfaces, or
improvements.
REDEVELOPMENT — The construction of structures or
improvements on areas which previously contained structures
or other improvements.
STEEP SLOPE — Any slope equal to or greater than 20% as
measured over any minimum run of 10 feet. Steep slopes are
§ 190-120 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-120
175:681
determined based on contour intervals of two feet or less. The
percent of slope (rise in feet per horizontal distance in feet)
shall be established by measurement of distance perpendicular
to the contour of the slope. The percent of slope shall be
calculated for each two-foot contour interval. For example, any
location on the site where there is a one-foot rise over a tenfoot
horizontal run constitutes a ten-percent slope; a 1.5-foot
rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a fifteen-percent
slope; a two-foot rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes
a twenty-percent slope.
(b) Exceptions. The disturbance of steep slopes shall only be
permitted for the following activities. Determination of the
following exceptions shall be made by the reviewing agency,
with the applicant having the burden of proof.
[1] Redevelopment within the limits of impervious surfaces
existing on the effective date of Ordinance No. 3225
(amending this Subsection E);
[2] New disturbance necessary to protect the public health,
safety or welfare, such as but not limited to necessary
linear development for access or utilities when no feasible
alternative exists to such disturbance;
[3] New disturbance necessary to provide an environmental
benefit, such as but not limited to remediation of a
contaminated site;
[4] New disturbance necessary to prevent extraordinary
hardship on the property owner peculiar to the property;
or
[5] New disturbance necessary to prevent extraordinary
hardship, provided that the hardship was not created by
the property owner. For purposes of interpreting and
administering this provision, "extraordinary hardship"
shall be construed to mean that the steep slope
disturbance is necessary to provide a minimal,
economically viable use of the property based upon
reasonable investment.
(2) Usable area limitations. The amount of steep slopes located within
the usable area of a lot, as defined by this chapter, shall be limited
as follows:
(a) No more than 50% of the usable area of a lot, as defined by this
chapter, shall have ten-percent slopes or greater.
(b) No more than 35% of the usable area of a lot, as defined by this
chapter, shall have fifteen-percent slopes or greater.
§ 190-120 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-120
175:682
(c) No more than 20% of the usable area of a lot, as defined by this
chapter, shall have twenty-five-percent slopes or greater.
F. Groundwater protection.
(1) No building or structure shall be erected in any zone district of the
Village within 50 feet of any well, infiltration gallery, spring or
similar source of groundwater now or hereafter developed for a
public water supply system, as such system is defined by this
chapter.
(2) No sewer or line carrying sanitary or industrial wastes located
within 100 feet of any well, infiltration gallery, spring or similar
source of groundwater now or hereafter developed for a public
water supply system may be installed in any zone district of the
Village unless the same shall be of steel, reinforced concrete, cast
iron or other suitable material, properly protected and of
completely watertight construction and otherwise constructed in
accordance with Rules and Regulations for the Preparation and
Submission of Plans for Public Water Supply Systems and Water
Treatment Plants, now or hereafter issued by the State Department
of Health.
(3) No manholes or connections on a sanitary sewer system shall be
permitted within 100 feet of any well now or hereafter developed
for a public water supply system in any zone district of the Village.
G. Performance standards. The following conditions and requirements
shall be complied with:
(1) All activities shall be carried on only in structures which conform to
the minimum safety standards of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters or the Village building code or fire ordinance
governing the permitted use, whichever may be more restrictive.
All operations shall be carried on and explosive materials, fuels,
liquids and finished products shall be stored in accordance with the
standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
(2) Any use permitted by this article shall only be permitted if it shall
comply with all applicable federal and state safety laws, rules and
regulations.
(3) No uses permitted by this article shall result in the dissemination of
smoke, fumes, gas, dust, odors or any other atmospheric pollutant
beyond the boundary lines of the lot occupied by such use.
(4) There shall be no vibration beyond the boundary lines of the lot on
which is conducted any use permitted by this article.
(5) Noise. All uses shall comply with the applicable provisions of the
State of New Jersey’s Noise Control Regulations at N.J.A.C. 7:29.
[Amended 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3225]
§ 190-120 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-120
175:683
(6) Anything in this article to the contrary not withstanding, no use
shall be permitted which shall discharge an industrial waste into
any municipal sanitary sewer system without written approval of
the Department of Public Works, and no such waste shall be treated
on any premises.
H. Riparian zones. In accordance with the State of New Jersey’s Water
Quality Management Planning Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:15, this subsection
designates riparian zones and regulates land use and development
within such zones. The following provisions shall apply: [Added
11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3225]
(1) Purposes. The specific purposes and intent of this subsection are
to:
(a) Restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological
integrity of the water resources of the Village of Ridgewood;
(b) Prevent excessive nutrients, sediment, and organic matter, as
well as biocides and other pollutants, from reaching surface
waters by optimizing opportunities for filtration, deposition,
absorption, adsorption, plant uptake, biodegradation, and
denitrification, which occur when stormwater runoff is
conveyed through vegetated buffers as stable, distributed flow
prior to reaching receiving waters;
(c) Provide for shading of the aquatic environment so as to
moderate temperatures, retain more dissolved oxygen, and
support a healthy assemblage of aquatic flora and fauna;
(d) Provide for the availability of natural organic matter (leaves
and twigs) and large woody debris (trees and limbs) that
provide food and habitat for aquatic organisms (insects,
amphibians, crustaceans, and small fish), which are essential
to maintain the food chain;
(e) Increase stream bank stability and maintain natural fluvial
geomorphology of the stream system, thereby reducing stream
bank erosion and sedimentation and protecting habitat for
aquatic organisms;
(f) Maintain base flows in streams and moisture in wetlands;
(g) Control downstream flooding; and
(h) Conserve the natural features important to land and water
resources, e.g., headwater areas, groundwater recharge zones,
floodways, floodplains, springs, streams, wetlands, woodlands,
and prime wildlife habitats.
(2) Definitions. For the purposes of interpreting and administering the
riparian zone provisions in this Subsection H, the following
definitions shall apply:
§ 190-120 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-120
175:684
ACID-PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of
iron sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed
to oxygen from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce
sulfuric acid. Acid-producing soils, upon excavation, generally have
a pH of 4.0 or lower. After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally
have a pH of 3.0 or lower. Information regarding the location of
acid-producing soils in New Jersey can be obtained from local Soil
Conservation District offices.
CATEGORY ONE WATER(s) — Waters designated as "C1 waters" in
the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the
exposure or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting,
or removing of vegetation.
HUC-14 WATERSHED — An area within which water drains to
a particular receiving surface water body, also known as a
"subwatershed," which is identified by a fourteen-digit hydrologic
unit boundary designation, delineated within New Jersey by the
United States Geological Survey.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement
that reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, and
includes porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks,
patios, elevated structures, and other similar structures, surfaces,
or improvements.
REDEVELOPMENT — The construction of structures or
improvements on areas which previously contained structures or
other improvements.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly
adjacent to all surface waters, including, but not limited to, lakes,
ponds, reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up to and
including their point of origin, such as seeps and springs, as shown
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection’s GIS
hydrography coverages.
STEEP SLOPES — Any slope equal to or greater than 20% as
measured over any minimum run of 10 feet.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — Species designated
as "threatened" or "endangered" on the list defining the status of
indigenous nongame wildlife species of New Jersey, promulgated
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation
Act, N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., at N.J.A.C. 7:25-4.17. "Endangered
species" also includes any species or subspecies of wildlife
appearing on any federal endangered species list pursuant to the
Endangered Species Act of 1973, 16 U.S.C. § 1531 et seq.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated
as trout maintenance in the New Jersey Department of
§ 190-120 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-120
175:685
Environmental Protection’s Surface Water Quality Standards at
N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — A section of water identified as
trout production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection’s Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
(3) Delineation of riparian buffer zones. The riparian zones and their
widths within the Village of Ridgewood shall be as follows:
(a) The riparian zone is 300 feet wide along both sides of any
Category One water, and all upstream tributaries situated
within the same HUC-14 watershed;
(b) The riparian zone is 150 feet wide along both sides of the
following waters not identified in Subsection H(3)(a) above:
[1] Any trout production water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries);
[2] Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as measured
along the length of the regulated water;
[3] Any segment of a water flowing through an area that
contains documented habitat for a threatened or
endangered species of plant or animal, which is critically
dependent on the regulated water for survival, and all
upstream waters (including tributaries) within one linear
mile as measured along the length of the regulated water;
and
[4] Any segment of a water flowing through an area that
contains acid-producing soils.
(c) The riparian zone is 50 feet wide along both sides of all waters
not subject to Subsection H(3)(a) or (b) above.
(d) The portion of the riparian zone that lies outside of a surface
water is measured landward from the top of bank. If a
discernible bank is not present along a surface water, the
portion of the riparian zone outside the surface water is
measured landward as follows:
[1] Along a linear fluvial water, such as a stream or swale, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the feature’s center
line;
[2] Along a nonlinear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the normal water
surface limit;
[3] Along an amorphously shaped feature, such as a wetland
complex, through which a water flows but which lacks a
§ 190-120 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-120
175:686
definable channel, the riparian zone is measured landward
of the feature’s center line.
(e) For areas adjacent to surface water bodies for which the
floodway has been delineated per the Flood Hazard Area
Control Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-3 or the state’s adopted
floodway delineations, the riparian zone shall cover the entire
floodway area or the area described in Subsection H(3)(a) or
(b) above, whichever area has the greatest extent.
(f) The applicant shall be responsible for the initial determination
of the presence and extent of a riparian zone on a site and for
identifying the area on any plan submitted to the Village of
Ridgewood. The applicant’s initial determination shall be
subject to review and approval by the Village Engineer,
Construction Official, Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or
Village Council, as applicable, or their appointed
representatives, and, where required, by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
(4) Applicability. A riparian zone is an overlay to the existing zoning
districts. The provisions of the underlying district shall remain in
full force except where the provisions of the riparian zone differ
from the provisions of the underlying district, in which case the
provision that is more restrictive shall apply. These provisions
apply to land disturbances resulting from or related to any activity
or use requiring a construction permit, zoning permit, soil
movement permit, retaining wall permit, site plan, subdivision or
variance or to any disturbance within or adjacent to a riparian
zone. Compliance with the requirements of this subsection shall not
relieve any person from the requirement to obtain any and all other
approvals that may be required from other governmental agencies,
including but not limited to the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(5) Regulated activities. No new construction, development, use,
activity, encroachment, or structure shall take place in a riparian
zone, and riparian zones shall be protected from avoidable
disturbance, except as otherwise permitted below or as may be
excepted in Subsection H(6) below, except as specifically
authorized in this section.
(a) Uses permitted in riparian zones. Riparian zone areas shall
remain in a natural condition or, if in a disturbed condition,
including agricultural activities, at the time of adoption of
these riparian zone regulations, may be restored to a natural
condition. There shall be no clearing or cutting of trees and
brush, except for removal of dead vegetation and pruning for
reasons of public safety or for the replacement of invasive
species with indigenous species. There shall be no altering of
watercourses, dumping of trash, soil, dirt, fill, vegetative or
§ 190-120 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-120
175:687
other debris, regrading or construction. The following uses are
permitted either by right or after review and approval by the
Village and/or other governmental entities in riparian zones, as
set forth elsewhere in this chapter or as otherwise required by
law:
[1] Open space uses that are primarily passive in character
shall be permitted by right to extend into a riparian zone,
provided that near stream vegetation is preserved. Such
uses include wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest
preserves and similar uses operated for the protection and
propagation of wildlife, but excluding structures. Such
uses also include passive recreation areas of public and
private parklands, including unpaved hiking, bicycle and
bridle trails, provided that said trail have been stabilized
with pervious materials.
[2] Fences, for which a permit has been issued by the
Construction Code Official, to the extent required by
applicable law, rule or regulation.
[3] Crossings by recreational trails, roads, railroads,
stormwater lines, sanitary sewer lines, water lines and
public utility transmission lines, provided that the land
disturbance is the minimum required to accomplish the
permitted use, subject to approval by the Zoning Officer,
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as applicable,
Village Council and/or other governmental agency having
jurisdiction, provided that any applicable state permits are
acquired, and provided that the area of the crossing is
stabilized against significant erosion due to its use as a
crossing.
[4] Stream bank stabilization or riparian reforestation or
wetlands mitigation projects that have been approved by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(b) Performance standards for riparian zones. The following
conditions shall apply:
[1] All development shall be designed to provide sufficient
areas outside of the riparian zone to accommodate
primary structures, any normal accessory uses
appurtenant thereto, as well as all planned lawn areas.
[2] All stormwater shall be discharged outside of but may flow
through a riparian zone and shall comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq. (see N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3). If stormwater
discharged outside of and flowing through a riparian zone
§ 190-120 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-120
175:688
cannot comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability,
then the proposed stabilization measures must meet the
requirements of the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:13-10.2 et seq. and have an approved flood
hazard area permit.
[3] When disturbance is permitted within a riparian zone,
such disturbance shall be restored with the planting of
vegetation. The restoration plantings shall be comprised of
native and noninvasive tree and plant species to the
maximum extent practicable.
(c) Nonconforming structures and uses in riparian zones.
Nonconforming structures and uses of land within the riparian
zone are subject to the following requirements:
[1] Legally existing nonconforming structures or uses may be
continued, unless such uses or structures have been
abandoned.
[2] Encroachment within the riparian zone shall only be
allowed where previous development or disturbance has
occurred and shall be in conformance with the Stormwater
Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and the Flood Hazard
Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
[3] Existing impervious cover shall not be increased within the
riparian zone as a result of encroachments where previous
development or disturbances have occurred.
(d) Uses prohibited in riparian zones. Any use or activity not
specifically authorized by this Subsection H shall be prohibited
within the riparian zone. By way of example, the following
activities and facilities are prohibited:
[1] Removal or clear-cutting of trees and other vegetation or
soil disturbance such as grading, except for selective
vegetation removal for the purpose of stream or riparian
area stabilization or restoration projects that require
vegetation removal or grading prior to implementation.
[2] Storage of any hazardous or noxious materials.
[3] Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other
chemicals not in compliance with Chapter 187 of the
Village Code, in excess of prescribed industry standards or
contrary to the recommendations of the Soil Conservation
District.
[4] Roads or driveways, except where permitted in
compliance with this Subsection H.
§ 190-120 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-120
175:689
§ 190-121. Off-street parking, loading and circulation.
All parking areas required by this section shall be devoted exclusively to
parking of motor vehicles so long as the principal building or use which
requires such parking areas continues in existence. No commercial repair
or sales, including the sale or rental of new or used motor vehicles by a
new or used car dealer or motor vehicle rental agency, nor any storage
in connection with the same, shall be permitted within a required parking
area. The following provisions shall apply:
[5] Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area, except as
permitted by this Subsection H.
[6] Parking lots.
[7] Any type of permanent structure, except structures
needed for a use permitted by this Subsection H.
[8] New subsurface sewage disposal system areas. The
expansion and replacement of existing subsurface sewage
disposal system areas for existing uses is permitted.
[9] Residential grounds or lawns, except as otherwise
permitted pursuant to this Subsection H.
(6) Exceptions. The disturbance of riparian buffer zones shall only be
permitted for the following activities. Determination of the
following exceptions shall be made by the reviewing agency, with
the applicant having the burden of proof.
(a) Redevelopment within the limits of impervious surfaces
existing on the effective date of Ordinance No. 3225 (adopting
this Subsection H);
(b) New disturbance necessary to protect the public health, safety
or welfare, such as but not limited to necessary linear
development for access or utilities when no feasible alternative
exists to such disturbance;
(c) New disturbance necessary to provide an environmental
benefit, such as but not limited to remediation of a
contaminated site;
(d) New disturbance necessary to prevent extraordinary hardship
on the property owner peculiar to the property; or
(e) New disturbance necessary to prevent extraordinary hardship,
provided that the hardship was not created by the property
owner. For purposes of interpreting and administering this
provision, "extraordinary hardship" shall be construed to mean
that the steep slope disturbance is necessary to provide a
minimal economically viable use of the property based upon
reasonable investment.
§ 190-120 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-121
175:690
A. Number of parking spaces. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall
be provided for all uses in accordance with the following standards.
Calculations of fractional spaces for residential uses shall be rounded
off to the next-highest whole number if the fraction is greater than 0.5
space and to the next-lowest whole number if the fraction is less.
Calculations of any fractional spaces for nonresidential uses shall be
rounded off to the next-highest whole number. On any properties
containing more than one building or use, the calculation of required
parking shall be made separately and cumulatively, except as may be
provided otherwise by this chapter or other applicable law. [Amended
6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 3343]
(1) The minimum number of parking spaces for single-family or twofamily
dwellings shall be as required by the New Jersey Residential
Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq., summarized
below (please refer to the standards for the full text):
Bedrooms in Unit
Minimum Number of Parking
Spaces Per Unit
2 1.5
3 2.0
4 2.5
5 3.0
NOTE: Of the required number of spaces in the above table, there
shall be a minimum of one garage space for each dwelling unit.
Such garages shall be a minimum of 20 feet in depth.
(2) The minimum number of parking spaces for single-family attached
dwelling units or multifamily dwelling units shall be as required by
the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C.
5:21-1.1 et seq., summarized below (please refer to the standards
for the full text):
Housing Unit Type –
Bedrooms in Unit
Minimum Number of Parking
Spaces Per Unit
Garden apartment or mid-rise
apartment
1 1.8
2 2.0
3 2.1
Single-family attached
(townhouse)
1 1.8
2 2.3
3 2.4
§ 190-121 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-121
175:691
NOTE: Of the required number of spaces in the above table, at
least one of every three required spaces shall be located within a
garage, and at least one of every three required spaces shall be
located outside of any building.
(3) Nonresidential uses shall provide the minimum number of off-street
parking spaces as set forth in the following table: [Amended
2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3579139]
(a) Houses of worship in any zone: one off-street parking space for
every five seats of capacity available for use at the same time,
or one space per 75 square feet of gross floor area available for
use at the same time, whichever is greater. In instances where
pews, bleachers, benches or similar group seating that does
not consist of individual seats is employed, each 24 inches of
seating platform length shall be considered a "seat" for
purposes of determining the minimum number of parking
spaces.
(b) Schools providing academic instruction for children between
the grades kindergarten through 12 in any zone: one off-street
parking space for every four students in attendance at one
time, based upon the maximum licensed capacity of the school.
(c) Public utility facilities permitted by this chapter: one off-street
parking space for each employee or staff person present at the
normal peak staffing period of the facility.
(d) Other nonresidential uses:
Zone District(s) Minimum Parking Spaces
T 1 per each 200 square feet of
gross floor area
B-2, O-B2 1 per each 200 square feet of
gross floor area, or 1 per each
250 square feet of gross floor
area when parking is shared
by two or more abutting uses
C, H, HC, P, P-2 and in
residential zone districts
1 per each 250 square feet of
gross floor area
139. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A(4) through (8), which
immediately followed this subsection.
§ 190-121 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-121
175:692
Zone District(s) Minimum Parking Spaces
OB-1 1 per each 250 square feet of
gross floor area for buildings
having a gross floor area up
to 50,000 square feet, and 1
per each 300 square feet of
gross floor area for buildings
having a gross floor area
greater than 50,000 square
feet
B-1, NWSR 1 per each 300 square feet of
gross floor area
B. Parking for disabled persons. In any parking lot designed to
accommodate the public, a minimum number of designated parking
spaces accessible to disabled persons shall be required as follows:
Total Parking Spaces in
Lot
Required Number of Accessible
Spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 2% of total
501 to 1,000 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
C. Shared parking. In the B-1, B-2, OB-1, OB-2, C, HC, P and P2 Districts,
the required parking provisions of this section may be met by
participating in a joint parking program involving two or more
nonresidential uses; provided, however, that plans for such a joint
program shall have been approved by the Board or the Site Plan
Exemption Committee, as applicable, and subject to the following:
[Amended 4-7-2010 by Ord. No. 3242; 6-13-2012 by Ord. No.
3343]
(1) The area for the parking facilities shall equal the collective parking
area requirements of the participating properties to be served.
(2) The provisions of § 190-121F(1) shall be complied with.
(3) The parking areas shall be devoted exclusively to parking and no
other use so long as the principal building or use which makes such
parking areas necessary shall continue in existence.
§ 190-121 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-121
175:693
D. Number of loading spaces. For any nonresidential use involving
manufacturing, storage, display of goods, retail or wholesale sales or
warehousing, market, hospital for humans, laundry, dry cleaning
establishment or other use similarly requiring the receipt or
distribution of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and
maintained on the same premises with such use at least one off-street
loading space.
E. Exemptions; reserve parking and loading. If any applicant can clearly
demonstrate to the Board that, because of the nature of his operation or
use, the parking requirements of Subsection A above are unnecessary
or excessive, the Board shall have the power to approve a site plan
showing less paved parking area than is required by this section;
provided, however, that a landscaped area of sufficient size to meet the
deficiency shall be set aside and reserved for the purposes of meeting
future off-street parking and loading requirements in the event that a
change of use of the premises shall make such additional off-street
parking or loading spaces necessary.
F. Location of parking and loading areas.
(1) For residential uses, all off-street parking facilities shall be located
on the same lot with the building they are serving. For
nonresidential uses, all off-street parking facilities shall be located
on the same lot with the building they are serving or on other
property owned, leased or shared by the applicant, provided that
the following are complied with:
(a) At least 50% of the required parking spaces shall be on
property located within 500 feet of any customary entrance
way to the principal building or use.
(b) No required parking spaces shall be located further than 1,000
feet from any customary entranceway to the principal building
or use.
(2) The required yard locations and setbacks for off-street parking and
loading areas are set forth below, provided that where shared
parking arrangements are permitted by this chapter, no minimum
setback for parking areas shall be required where shared parking
areas abut one another at the property line.
(a) In all R-125, R-110, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts and in other
districts, vehicle parking for single-family detached and twofamily
dwelling units shall be permitted in any yard, but shall
be prohibited in the front yard area except on the driveway.
(b) In the R-1A and R-2A Districts, parking areas serving singlefamily
attached or multifamily residences permitted as a
conditional use may be located in any yard pursuant to a plan
approved by the Board.
§ 190-121 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-121
175:694
(c) In the R-4 and R-5 Districts, parking areas may be located in
the side or rear yard. [Amended 4-7-2010 by Ord. No.
3242]
(d) In the R-7 District, parking areas may be located in any yard.
Parking areas located in the front yard shall be set back at
least 25 feet from the front lot line.
(e) In the B-1, B-2, C, P and P-2 Zone Districts, parking areas are
permitted in the front, side or rear yards. Parking areas in the
front yard shall be set back from the front lot line at least 1/2 of
the minimum required front yard setback. In the B-1, B-2, P
and P-2 Zones, all parking areas in any yard shall be set back at
least five feet from all other lot lines, except where such
parking areas are connected with other parking areas as part
of a shared parking facility as permitted by this section.
(f) In the OB-1 Zone District, parking areas permitted in the front,
side and rear yards. Parking areas in the front yard shall be set
back from the front lot line at least 12 feet, or 14 feet where
vehicle overhangs are provided along the periphery of a
parking area. Parking areas in the side yard shall be set back at
least five feet from any building. Parking areas in the rear yard
shall be set back at least 25 feet from any abutting residential
zone district boundary line, provided that where a solid
unpierced masonry wall is constructed as permitted by this
chapter, the parking area need only be set back from the wall
at least five feet, or seven feet where vehicles overhang the
periphery of the parking area.
(g) In the OB-2 Zone District, parking areas are permitted in the
side or rear yards and shall be set back at least five feet from
the side and rear lot lines.
(h) In the H Zone District, parking areas shall be permitted in the
front, side and rear yards, and shall be set back at least 15 feet
from all lot lines, except when adjacent to a residential zone as
otherwise provided in the H District regulations.
(i) In the T Zone District, parking areas shall be permitted in the
front and side yards. Parking areas shall be set back at least 20
feet from the front lot line, and at least five feet from all other
lot lines; provided, however, in the circumstances described in
§ 190-118B(5) above, parking areas shall be set back at least
10 feet from a front lot line that is located on the opposite side
of the street from a property used for residential purposes, at
least two feet from a front lot line that is located on the
opposite side of the street from a property used for
nonresidential purposes, and at least 24 feet from all other lot
lines. [Amended 7-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2830]
§ 190-121 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-121
175:695
(j) Loading areas shall be located on the same property as the use
to which they are accessory and shall be located in the side or
rear yard. Loading spaces shall be set back at least five feet
from any side or rear lot line or shall comply with the required
setback for parking areas, whichever is more restrictive. A
loading space may be located in a parking area in the side or
rear yard, provided that the loading and parking movements
and operations do not interfere with each other. [Amended
6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 2606; 6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 3343]
(k) In the HC Zone District, parking areas shall be permitted in
any yard but shall be located at least the following distances
from lot lines and street rights-of-way: [Added 6-13-2012 by
Ord. No. 3343]
[1] Ten feet from the Route 17 right-of-way, including ramp
rights-of-way.
[2] Forty feet from Linwood Avenue.
[3] Fifty feet from Paramus Road.
[4] Thirty feet from a residential zone boundary.
[5] Ten feet from other property lines.
G. Driveways.
(1) No driveway shall be permitted to serve any use other than the
permitted use on the lot upon which such driveway is located,
except when such driveway is part of a joint parking facility
permitted by § 190-121C or such driveway is located in the T Zone
District and services a lot in an abutting nonresidential district.
Driveways serving garden apartments in the R-4 Zone shall be
located in the same R-4 Zone. [Amended 4-7-2010 by Ord. No.
3242]
(2) Entrances to and exits from parking and loading areas and other
driveways for nonresidential uses shall be located no closer than 10
feet from any property located in a residential zone, or such greater
setback required for parking areas or by buffer requirements,
whichever is most restrictive, measured from the property line to
the curb face or edge of pavement of the driveway, excluding curb
returns at entrances. [Amended 6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 3343]
(3) In all R-125, R-110, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zone Districts and in any
district where a lot is used for a single-family detached or twofamily
dwelling, no driveway shall have a width exceeding 1/5 of
the width of such lot, up to a maximum width of 25 feet; provided,
however, that where otherwise lawful, no driveway shall be
required to be fewer than 10 feet wide. On corner lots, the lot width
used for making the above calculation shall be that side of the lot
§ 190-121 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-121
175:696
§ 190-122. Signs.
through which the driveway provides access to the street.
[Amended 6-10-1997 by Ord. No. 2606]
(4) All developments shall comply with the standards of the state
highway access management code adopted by the Commissioner of
the Transportation in the case of a state highway, with the
standards of any access management code adopted by the county
in the case of a county road or highway, and with the standards of
any Village access management code adopted in the case of a
Village street or highway.
A. Required permits and approvals. No sign shall be constructed or
displayed unless a sign permit shall have been issued in accordance
with the provisions of § 190-97C. No permanent freestanding sign shall
be permitted until a site plan for the sign is approved by the Planning
Board. Notwithstanding the above, the following signs are exempt from
the requirement to obtain permits or site plan approval, but such signs
shall comply with the regulations in Subsection H below:
(1) Signs for residential uses permitted by § 190-122C(1).
(2) Professional nameplates affixed to the door or adjacent wall of
premises so used.
(3) Memorial signs or tablets or signs indicating the name of a building
or the date of its erection when cut into any masonry surface or
when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material.
(4) The following signs, customary and necessary to the operation of
filling and service stations:
(a) Lettering on buildings displayed over individual entrance
doors consisting of the words "washing," "lubrication,"
"repairing" or words of similar import.
(b) Lettering or other insignia which are a structural part of a
gasoline pump, consisting only of a brand name, lead warning
sign and other signs as required by law.
(c) Credit card signs.
(d) A sign attached to each gas pump, with the price of the
product, as required by law.
(e) Movable freestanding signs specifically advertising the price of
fuel.
(5) Signs for public convenience and welfare erected by or on behalf of
the United States, the state, the county and the Village, traffic signs
in private ways and parking lots, legal notices, railroad crossing
signs or other similar signs as required by law.
§ 190-121 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-122
175:697
(6) Temporary signs, necessary in connection with the erection of
buildings or other construction work.
(7) The interior contents of lawfully permitted signs specifically
designed to be changed from time to time, such as church
announcement boards, theater marquees, restaurant menus and
the like, whether freestanding or attached to a building wall.
(8) Temporary, nonilluminated, political signs advancing the candidacy
for elective office of any candidate or group of candidates or a
cause subject to political judgment. [Added 9-7-2016 by Ord. No.
3540]
B. General sign regulations.
(1) General prohibitions. Without limiting the generality of this
section, the following are prohibited:
(a) Billboard or billboard signs, except display signs ordinarily or
customarily erected on the premises of a railroad station or on
the railroad right-of-way in the vicinity of such station. No sign
otherwise lawful under this section shall be prohibited because
of this provision.
(b) Signs placed or located or displayed upon or within any
traveled way, pedestrian or vehicular, public or private, unless
affixed to the wall of a building and located above the traveled
way; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to
temporary portable signs permitted by and conforming with
§ 190-122H(9). No sign otherwise lawful under this section
shall be prohibited because of this provision. [Amended
12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3562]
(c) Roof signs, known also as a "sky sign."
(d) Signs projecting on or over a sidewalk, except signs commonly
known as "barber poles," ordinarily and customarily used in
connection with barbershops.
(e) Freestanding signs or similar devices except as otherwise
specifically permitted in this section.
(f) Signs erected or painted or composed of fluorescent or
phosphorescent or similar material.
(g) Signs in whole or part moving, mobile or revolving, except for
signs commonly known as "barber poles," ordinarily and
customarily used in connection with barbershops.
(h) Strings or streamers of flags, pennants, spinners or other
similar devices strung across, upon, over or along any
premises or building, whether as a part of any sign or not,
except those which shall be specifically permitted by
§ 190-122 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-122
175:698
§ 190-122E(2)(d)[2] or unless such prohibition has been
superseded by the provisions of § 190-122H.
(i) Signs which are unsafe, insecure or a menace to the public.
(j) All temporary signs, including political signs, shall not be
permitted to be placed on any publicly owned property,
including, but not limited to, municipally owned property,
library property, parks, rights-of-way trees, telephone poles,
lighting stations, street or traffic signs, tree wells or planters,
water utility property, and/or any other such publicly owned
property within the Village. [Added 9-7-2016 by Ord. No.
3540]
(2) Signs which falsely advertise or identify premises; removal of signs
for change of occupancy.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, locate, relocate or
maintain any sign which falsely identifies the premises or
occupant of any premises or building or which falsely
advertises for sale on any premises or in any building any
product or service not available therein.
(b) Whenever there is a change in occupancy of a building or
premises, including any vacancy of such building or premises,
the message of any sign or signs which identify or advertise an
individual, business, service, product or other item that is no
longer present or available in the building or on the premises
shall be removed.
(c) The provisions of Subsection B(2)(a) and (b) above shall not be
construed to require the removal of any sign structure, except
as required by Subsection B(2)(d)[4] or (3)(f) below.
(d) The manner of removal of sign messages shall include but are
not limited to the following:
[1] In the case of a sign with a painted message, the sign
message shall be painted over to match the background.
[2] In the case of a sign with projecting or movable letters or
symbols, the letters and/or symbols shall be removed.
[3] In the case of a sign where the message is contained on a
panel that is inserted into the sign frame or structure, the
message panel shall be replaced with a blank panel.
[4] In the case of a sign where the message can not be
removed without also removing the sign structure, the
structure shall be removed unless the owner demonstrates
that the sign message could reasonably apply to the next
occupant of the building or premises. If the sign message
does not accurately identify or advertise the next occupant
§ 190-122 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-122
175:699
of the building or premises or any product, service or other
item available at the premises, the sign structure shall be
removed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
for said occupant.
(3) Nonconforming signs. The following provisions shall apply to any
sign which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the requirements of
this chapter by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
[Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3115]
(a) Routine maintenance. Routine maintenance for any
nonconforming sign shall be permitted, provided that such
maintenance shall comply with the provisions of Subsection
B(3)(d) below. The term “routine maintenance” is intended to
include such activities as cleaning, replacement of light bulbs,
removal of rust and corrosion and repainting. Specifically
prohibited is the replacement of the sign structure or message,
in whole or in part, except for light bulbs and minor parts such
as fasteners, etc.
(b) Restoration or repair of partial destruction. Any
nonconforming sign existing at the time of the passage of this
chapter or any amendment thereto may be continued upon the
lot so occupied, and any such sign may be restored or repaired
in the event of partial destruction thereof, provided that such
restoration or repair shall comply with the provisions of
Subsection B(3)(d) below.
(c) (Reserved)
(d) Alterations. The following provisions shall regulate alterations
of nonconforming signs:
[1] Alteration of nonconforming sign use. Any sign which is
nonconforming because of use shall not be enlarged,
extended, relocated or altered in any manner.
[2] Alteration of nonconforming sign structure or sign
message. A nonconforming sign structure or sign message
may not be altered unless the alteration will result in the
sign structure and/or the message, as applicable based
upon which feature is altered, conforming in all respects
with the provisions of this chapter. Alterations covered by
the above provision include but are not limited to
alteration of sign area, dimension, height or location;
alteration of sign letters, logos, symbols or other design or
construction; alteration of any aspect of sign illumination;
and alteration of sign material or color.
(e) Reversion to nonconforming sign prohibited. A sign which is a
nonconforming use and which is changed to a conforming use
§ 190-122 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-122
175:700
may not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
A nonconforming sign structure and/or message which is
changed to a conforming structure and/or message may not
thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming structure and/
or message.
(f) (Reserved)
(g) Subdivisions involving same. No lot containing a
nonconforming sign structure shall be subdivided so as to
increase the degree or extent of the nonconforming sign
condition.
(4) Lighting and illumination. Any sign permitted by the provisions of
this chapter or allowed pursuant to a sign exemption granted under
§ 190-122A may be nonilluminated or nonflashing illuminated,
except that real estate signs shall be nonilluminated. Illuminated
signs may be directly or indirectly lighted, provided that they
comply with the following standards. For the purpose of
administering this section, "directly lighted signs" shall be defined
as a sign that is illuminated by a light source that shines through
the letters or logos from the back of the sign. "Indirectly lighted
signs" shall be defined as a sign that is illuminated by a light source
that shines directly on the surface of a sign, which light source is
designed specifically to illuminate only the sign.
(a) Directly lighted signs.
[1] Illumination of any sign shall be of the diffused lighting
type, and only the letters or logos in the sign shall be
illuminated.
[2] No sign shall be lighted by means of flashing or
intermittent illumination.
[3] Neon signs, when the neon tube is visible, as well as LED
(light-emitting diode) signs and similar signs, when the
light source or illumination device is visible, are prohibited
unless specifically permitted by this chapter. [Amended
2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 3327]
(b) Indirectly lighted signs.
[1] Indirectly lighted signs shall only be permitted where the
sources of illumination are shielded in such a manner that
the same are not visible from the street or adjoining
property.
[2] No sign shall be lighted by means of flashing or
intermittent illumination.
[3] Floodlights or spotlights used for the illumination of signs,
whether or not such lights are attached to or separate
§ 190-122 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-122
175:701
from the building, shall not project light beyond the sign.
Gooseneck reflectors and lights shall be permitted;
provided, however, that the reflectors shall be provided
with proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination
upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the
street or adjacent property.
(c) In no instance shall the light intensity of any illuminated sign
exceed 75 footcandles measured with a standard light meter
measured at any point in front of the sign at a distance that is
no greater than the smallest horizontal or vertical dimension of
said sign. There shall be no electric conduit located on the
exterior facade of a building used to provide electric power to
any sign.
(d) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
appropriate, shall review all signs to be installed that are
accessory to any site plan processed by the Board, and the
Board shall review and approve the intensity of light of all such
signs.
(5) Sign height. The height of a sign shall be computed as set forth in
§ 190-119D(6). [Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120]
C. Signs in the residential zone districts. In all residential zones, the
following signs shall be permitted, except as may be provided otherwise
by this chapter: [Amended 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933; 2-8-2012
by Ord. No. 3327; 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3493]
(1) On premises used for residential purposes, a sign or signs
identifying the residence, the resident or residents or the street
address, or any combination there of. No such sign shall have an
area of more than two square feet, nor shall the aggregate square
footage of such signs, if there is more than one, exceed three
square feet in area.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) On premises used for a permitted institutional use, a sign or signs
identifying the use and activities conducted on the premises, which
shall comply with the following:
(a) One freestanding sign and one sign affixed to each principal or
accessory building shall be permitted.
(b) The maximum area of any sign shall be 30 square feet.
(c) Freestanding signs shall be located at least five feet from any
property line and shall be located so as to not interfere with
safe sight distance at intersections of roadways and driveways.
(d) Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of 10 feet.
§ 190-122 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-122
175:702
D. Signs in the P, P-2 and T Zone Districts. In the P, P-2 and T Zone
Districts, the following signs shall be permitted:
(1) A professional office sign affixed to the building and parallel
thereto and not extending more than 12 inches therefrom, setting
forth the name of the occupant or occupants in the premises and
the activities carried on therein, which shall not exceed six square
feet in area.
(2) On premises used for a permitted institutional use, a sign or signs
identifying the use and activities conducted on the premises, which
shall comply with the following: [Amended 2-8-2012 by Ord. No.
3327]
(a) One freestanding sign and one sign affixed to each principal or
accessory building shall be permitted.
(b) The maximum area of any sign shall be 30 square feet.
(c) Freestanding signs shall be located at least five feet from any
property line and shall be located so as to not interfere with
safe sight distance at intersections of roadways and driveways.
(d) Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of 10 feet.
E. Signs in the B-1, B-2 and C districts. Within the B-1, B-2 and C Zone
Districts, the following signs shall be permitted:
(1) Content. The only signs permitted shall be a sign or signs
advertising the premises upon which it is located or displayed or
the identity of the occupant thereof or a service rendered therein or
a product or item available therein or a permitted trade, business
or profession carried on therein as hereinafter regulated.
(2) Signs for retail sales and service uses. Retail sales and service uses
shall be permitted to have signs in accordance with the following
provisions, except in the case of retail uses with a common
entrance, which are regulated in Subsection E(3) below.
(a) Number of principal signs. There shall be no more than one
principal sign for each retail establishment or permitted use
therein except where the following conditions are met:
[1] Any permitted use within a building having an exterior
wall facing an off-street parking area or railroad station
platform may have a second principal sign on said wall if
that wall contains a pedestrian entrance to said permitted
use.
[2] Any permitted use within a building on a corner lot may
have a second principal sign. One sign shall be located on
one street and a second sign shall be located on the second
or side street. Nothing contained herein shall be construed
§ 190-122 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-122
175:703
to permit more than two principal signs on a building
located on a corner lot.
(b) Attached principal signs. All principal signs attached to a
building shall comply with the following provisions, except
signs on an awning as regulated in § 190-122E(2)(f) shall be
exempt from the following: [Amended 6-10-1997 by Ord.
No. 2606; 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3115; 4-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 3591]
[1] They shall be installed parallel to the face of the wall to
which they are attached.
[2] They shall not extend more than six inches from the
structural face of the building wall, provided that directly
lighted signs shall be prohibited unless the electrical and
illumination components, and any box or frame enclosing
such components, do not extend from the building.
[3] They shall not be less than seven feet from the elevation of
the ground under the sign and shall be rigidly and securely
attached to the wall.
[4] The maximum distance from the top edge to the bottom
edge of any attached sign shall not exceed 24 inches;
provided, however, that the maximum distance from the
top edge of the message on said sign to the bottom edge of
the message shall not exceed 16 inches. A sign consisting
of a message only shall not contain any message that
exceeds 16 inches from the top edge of the message to the
bottom edge of the message. The message for a sign
consisting of more than one row of letters or logos shall
not exceed a vertical dimension of 16 inches, measured
from the top of the entire message to the bottom of the
entire message. [Amended 3-11-2020 by Ord. No.
3778]
[a] Signs conforming to the maximum sign size top-tobottom
edge distance of 24 inches and the maximum
message size top-to-bottom edge distance of 16 inches
shall be permitted an exemption for letters that extend
below the baseline of a font, known in typography as a
descender, loop, or tail. The below baseline portion of
a sign's lettering shall be exempted from the sixteeninch
message size top-to-bottom measurement
provided the below baseline portion does not extend
more than four inches beyond the bottom edge of the
aforementioned sixteen-inch message measurement.
[5] The maximum width of any attached sign shall not exceed
75% of the store front or wall of that portion of the
§ 190-122 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-122
175:704
building occupied by said store, except that where such
store front width is less than 15 feet, the maximum width
of any attached sign shall not exceed 90% of said store
front width.
[6] Where there shall be more than one occupant of the
building and where each occupant has a separate ground
floor entrance, the total area of all signs permitted as
hereinafter regulated, taken in the aggregate, shall not
exceed the maximum requirements above set forth for
each wall upon which any sign is permitted to be erected.
[7] The only signs permitted above the first floor shall be a
single sign for each business establishment, and said sign
shall be painted on a single window in gold leaf, black or
white. Each such sign shall be limited to two lines, and
each line shall be limited to six inches in height. There
shall be a maximum distance of separation between the
two lines permitted by this provision of four inches.
[8] No signs shall be permitted to be located on a canopy.
(c) Freestanding principal signs. In the case of premises on which
the structure is set back at least 40 feet from the front
curbline, a freestanding sign is permitted, which shall comply
with the following standards. This provision shall not be
construed to prohibit freestanding signs accessory to motor
vehicle refueling stations as provided in § 190-122H(3).
[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
[1] The area shall not exceed 12 square feet.
[2] The top of said sign shall not be more than 10 feet above
the level of the ground.
[3] No part of the sign shall be located closer than five feet to
the property line. Any freestanding sign shall be placed on
the premises so as not to result in a traffic safety problem
due to inadequate sight angles.
(d) Nonilluminated interior window signs. Nonilluminated signs
painted on or placed or hung within 48 inches from the inside
window glass or door glass of any building shall not be
considered principal signs. Such signs shall comply with the
following: [Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591;
9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3741]
[1] They shall be limited to 20% of the area of said glass, but
in no event shall they exceed a total of 50 square feet;
whichever is less is permitted for each window unit.
§ 190-122 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-122
175:705
[2] Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, unlettered
and undecorated balloons, pennants, flags, banners and
the like shall be permitted for grand openings of a new
permitted use and shall be displayed for a period not to
exceed seven days.
[3] Signs other than principal signs that fail to comply with all
provisions of this section shall be removed no later than 60
days after the effective date of this chapter.
[4] One tenant shall be permitted up to two window signs, per
window unit, as long as the combined dimensions do not
exceed the maximum area permitted.
[5] Signs shall not be iridescent or of reflective materials.
(e) Illuminated interior signs. Directly illuminated interior signs
located within six feet of the window glass or door glass of a
building shall be considered a principal sign and shall meet all
applicable requirements for exterior principal signs, including
but not limited to the number of principal signs and the area
permitted for principal signs. Indirectly illuminated interior
signs located within two feet of the window glass or door glass
of a building shall also be considered a principal sign and shall
meet all applicable requirements for exterior principal signs,
including but not limited to the number of principal signs and
the area permitted for principal signs.
(f) Awning signs. In the B-1 and B-2 Districts only, signs running in
a horizontal direction are permitted on the flap or vertical
plane of any permitted awning, provided that the following
standards shall apply. Such signs shall not be considered
principal signs. No signs shall be permitted on a canopy.
[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
[1] Said signs shall not exceed a height of eight inches.
[2] No horizontal sign shall be permitted which exceeds 1/3 of
the length of the flap which runs parallel to the street.
[3] No other signs besides those permitted above are
permitted on the awning.
(3) Signs for retail uses with a common entrance and other uses. Signs
for permitted uses in the B-1, B-2 and C Zone Districts for other
than retail sales and service stores and shops and signs for retail
sales and service stores and shops which share a common entrance
shall be limited to tenant identification or directory signs which
shall comply with the following: [Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 3115]
(a) Said signs shall be unlighted.
§ 190-122 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-122
175:706
(b) They shall be limited to one sign per tenant.
(c) They shall be uniform in appearance and shall be made of the
same materials with the same background and contain the
same letter type, style and materials as all other similar signs
used by tenants in the building.
(d) Said signs shall not exceed an area of two square feet per sign
nor a vertical height of eight inches.
(e) Where there is more than one tenant in the building, all of said
signs shall be abutting one another and not indiscriminately
placed on the exterior walls of the building.
(4) Signs for movie theaters. In the B-1 and B-2 Districts only, movie
theaters shall be permitted to maintain a permanent marquee
constructed as an integral part of said theater building, which may
contain a sign on three sides of the marquee advertising the
current event or coming attractions within the movie theater. Also
permitted within the window area of said theater are temporary
poster signs advertising the current event or coming attractions
within the movie theater.
(5) License or permit signs. In addition to any sign or signs permitted
pursuant to this section, a sign or signs limited to those purposes
set forth in § 190-122E(1) and as may be required by any federal,
state, county or municipal law to be displayed as a license or permit
may be attached to a store window or windows.
(6) On premises used for a permitted institutional use, a sign or signs
identifying the use and activities conducted on the premises, which
shall comply with the following: [Added 2-8-2012 by Ord. No.
3327]
(a) One freestanding sign and one sign affixed to each principal or
accessory building shall be permitted.
(b) The maximum area of any sign shall be 30 square feet.
(c) Freestanding signs shall be located at least five feet from any
property line and shall be located so as to not interfere with
safe sight distance at intersections of roadways and driveways.
(d) Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of 10 feet.
(7) Window displays. [Added 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3741]
(a) The occupant of each separate retail or commercial enterprise
or establishment shall be permitted one window display per
window unit that can be viewed through a window or other
viewing area on the facade of the separate enterprise or
establishment;
§ 190-122 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-122
175:707
(b) Window display may only be located on the ground level of a
building;
(c) The display shall not use wording or language that is defined in
§ 190-3 such as to constitute the display to be construed as a
"sign";
(d) Such window display must be set back inside the establishment
no closer than one foot from the exterior window or viewing
location;
(e) Such window display may not occupy more than 75% of the
window unit in aggregate even with multitenants;
(f) When such window display is combined with nonilluminated
window signs the aggregate shall not exceed 80% of the total
window area.
(g) Such window display may be illuminated from its interior,
directly or indirectly; however, the light source must be
concealed from public view;
(h) Such displays may include a video or recorded display of
information that meets all criteria stated above and compliant
with § 190-3.
F. Signs in the OB-1 and OB-2 Districts. Except for institutional uses,
which shall be subject to the sign regulations set forth in § 190-122E(6),
any principal structure in the OB-1 and OB-2 Office Building Zone
Districts shall be permitted one exterior sign which may be
freestanding or attached to the principal structure and which shall
comply with each of the following requirements: [Amended 2-8-2012
by Ord. No. 3327]
(1) Content. Any permitted exterior sign shall display only the name or
logo, the activities carried on and the address of the principal
occupant of the principal structure.
(2) Dimensional proportions. The greater dimension of any permitted
exterior sign shall not exceed twice that of the lesser dimension,
and such dimensions shall exclude any supporting structure.
(3) Freestanding signs. In the case of any permitted exterior
freestanding sign, the following shall apply:
(a) The sign shall be located in the front yard but shall not extend
over any property line.
(b) The sign shall be of an area not to exceed 30 square feet in
area on each side or 60 square feet in aggregate area if both
sides shall have signs thereon.
§ 190-122 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-122
175:708
(c) The top of any such sign shall be no more than 15 feet above
ground level.
(4) Attached signs. In the case of any permitted exterior sign attached
to the building, the following shall apply:
(a) The sign shall be located on the facade of the principal
structure facing on the front yard.
(b) The sign shall be of an area not to exceed one square foot for
every foot of front yard setback.
(c) The top of any such sign shall not exceed roof level.
(5) Illumination. Any sign permitted in the OB-1 and OB-2 Office
Building Zone Districts may be illuminated, provided that the
sources of illumination shall be nonflashing and shielded in such a
manner that the same are not visible from the street or adjoining
property.
G. Signs in the H District. Hospital use shall be permitted one sign which
shall not exceed 30 square feet in area, whether affixed to a structure
or freestanding. Also permitted are directional and emergency signs
which may be freestanding, provided that said signs shall not exceed
eight square feet in area.
H. Special regulations for certain types of signs. The following provisions
and regulations shall apply to the following signs, which regulations
shall supersede the provisions in each zone district otherwise
applicable to such signs.
(1) Professional nameplates. Nameplates shall be permitted as an
accessory to professional office use. Such signs shall be affixed to
the door or adjacent wall of the premises so used, and the
nameplate dimensions shall not exceed eight inches in height or 20
inches in width per nameplate.
(2) Building memorial signs. Memorial signs or tablets or signs
indicating the name of a building or the date of its erection shall be
permitted when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed
of bronze or other incombustible material.
(3) Gasoline service station signs. Signs which are accessory to filling
and service stations shall be permitted and limited to the following:
(a) Lettering on buildings may be displayed over individual
entrance doors consisting of the words "washing,"
"lubrication," "repairing" or words of similar import. There
shall be not more than one such sign over each entrance and
the letters shall not exceed 10 inches in height.
(b) Lettering or other insignia which are a structural part of a
gasoline pump shall consist only of a brand name, lead warning
§ 190-122 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-122
175:709
sign and other signs as required by law, provided that signs
indicating full attendant services are provided at pumps as
required by state law shall also be permitted. [Amended
5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3115]
(c) One credit card sign is permitted which shall not exceed two
square feet in area. Such sign shall be affixed to the building or
to a permanent freestanding identification sign.
(d) One identification sign accessory to a motor vehicle refueling
station open to the general public, bearing the brand or trade
name of the station, shall be permitted in accordance with the
following: [Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
[1] The sign shall be permanently affixed to the building or its
own metal substructure.
[2] The sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area on each
side or 60 square feet in aggregate area if both sides shall
have signs thereon.
[3] The sign, if on its own metal substructure, shall be rigidly
and securely attached to the ground surface so as to create
no danger to life or limb.
[4] The sign, whether affixed to a building or on its own
substructure, shall not exceed 18 feet in height.
(e) One sign may be attached to each gas pump, with the price of
the product, as required by law.
(f) One movable freestanding sign specifically advertising the
price of fuel shall be permitted, provided that said sign does
not exceed 10 square feet in area and said sign shall not be
closer than 10 feet to any property line.
(4) Signs for public welfare; traffic directional signs. Public signs for
public convenience and welfare erected by or on behalf of the
United States, the state, the county and the Village, traffic controls
in private ways and parking lots, legal notices, railroad crossing
signs or other signs as required by law shall be permitted in all
zone districts. No sign other than entrance, exit, identification and
conditions of use signs shall be maintained in any parking area.
Such signs in parking areas shall not have an area that exceeds two
square feet.
(5) Temporary construction signs. One temporary sign, necessary in
connection with the erection of buildings or other construction
work, shall be permitted for each construction project. Such sign
may be freestanding or attached to the premises but shall not
exceed nine square feet in area and shall be removed at the
§ 190-122 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-122
175:710
completion of construction. Such sign may be freestanding or
attached to a building wall.
(6) Political signs. Temporary, nonilluminated, political signs, as
described in Subsection (A)(8) above of this chapter and section,
shall be permitted in all zones. Signs for candidates shall be
removed no later than 20 days after date of the election in which
the candidate was considered for vote. In the case of primary
elections, the signs of all candidates who fail to remain as
candidates in the ensuing general election shall be removed no
later than 10 days after the date of the primary election. Such signs
may be freestanding or attached to the wall or facade of a building
or structure. Such signs may only be placed on the property with
the permission of the property owners or person in authority to
provide such permission. [Amended 9-7-2016 by Ord. No. 3540]
(7) Real estate signs. Real estate signs which are signs customary and
necessary in the offering of real estate for sale or to let by the
owner thereof or by his real estate agent or broker are permitted to
be erected in the Village, provided that the following requirements
are complied with:
(a) In all zones, one real estate sign is permitted for each principal
use.
(b) No real estate sign shall exceed a total area of 650 square
inches.
(c) No real estate sign shall exceed a vertical or horizontal
dimension of 36 inches.
(d) All real estate signs shall be nonilluminated.
(e) Real estate signs may be freestanding or attached to the
building which is for sale or let.
(f) Signs permitted hereby shall pertain only to the sale or lease of
the lot or premises upon which the sign is placed.
(g) Signs customarily used to indicate that the real estate offered
for sale or to let has been sold or leased by the owner, real
estate agent or broker concerned are prohibited. Permitted
real estate signs shall be removed within seven days of the day
that a contract of sale or lease of the premises has been
executed by both parties to the document.
(h) In the event that the owner, broker or real estate agent
conducts an open house at the premises, in addition to the for
sale sign, a sign stating "Open House" may be added on the
premises, in addition to the on-premises sign, on condition that
said sign does not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches and is posted
§ 190-122 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-122
175:711
for a period not to exceed five days in total during the term of
the sign permit. [Amended 8-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3731]
(8) Signs for drive-in uses. Permitted drive-in or drive-through uses,
exclusive of motor vehicle/gasoline service stations and public
garages, shall be permitted the following signs, in addition to any
other signs that may be permitted for the use: [Added 6-13-2012
by Ord. No. 3343]
(a) One sign for each drive-in lane, mounted on the drive-in canopy
over each lane, indicating the nature and operational status of
such lane. Such signs shall not exceed an area of four square
feet.
(b) One sign, or one group of signs, for each mechanical device
serving the drive-in user, mounted on the equipment or on the
building or canopy near the equipment, indicating the nature
of the device and providing operational information. The area
of such sign or group of signs shall not exceed four square feet.
(9) Temporary portable signs. Temporary portable signs shall be
permitted in the B-1, B-2 and B-3-R Zones in the Village's Central
Business District, subject to the following requirements: [Added
12-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3562; amended 9-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 3667]
(a) Uses to which such signs/displays must be accessory. Such
signs/displays shall be accessory to retail sales and retail
service uses open to the general public and permitted in the
B-1, B-2 and B-3-R Zones located in and operating from the
building.
(b) Central Business District location required. Such signs/
displays shall be permitted in the Central Business District,
which for the purposes of this provision shall be defined to
include the area located: 1) within the B-1, B-2 and B-3-R
Zones, and 2) within 1/2 mile of the intersection of the center
lines of North Broad Street and Franklin Avenue.
(c) General location. Such signs/displays shall be permitted in the
front yard of the storefront of the business to which the sign is
accessory and/or within the public street right-of-way in front
of said business; provided that when located within the street
right-of-way, such signs/displays shall be located between the
right-of-way line and the street curb or, in the event that no
street curb exists, between the right-of-way line and the edge
of the street pavement. Such signs/displays shall not be
permitted to be placed in the vehicular traveled way or within
any parking area located within the street right-of-way.
(d) Maximum quantity. Not more than one sign or display shall be
permitted for each business establishment. For purposes of
§ 190-122 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-122
175:712
administering this provision, a business establishment shall be
construed to be a commercial operation and all accessory or
subsidiary operations at a single location.
(e) Orientation. The faces of the A-frame sign containing the sign
message shall be oriented to be perpendicular to the direction
of travel on the street.
(f) Obstructions prohibited.
[1] Such signs/displays shall not obstruct ingress or egress to/
from buildings, driveways, access aisles, parking spaces,
fire lanes or other locations that require access by vehicles
or pedestrians.
[2] For the purpose of ensuring adequate pedestrian
movements, such signs/displays shall be required to be
located so as to maintain a minimum clear traveled way
width of 52 inches.
(g) Placement restrictions.
[1] Such signs/displays shall not be permanently affixed, and
shall be capable of being removed on a daily basis.
[2] Such signs/displays shall not be chained, cabled, tied or
otherwise attached or connected to any tree, pole,
hydrant, planter, container, chair, bench, table or other
item, but shall be wholly self-supporting.
[3] Such signs/displays shall be internally ballasted/weighted
in such manner so as not to create or present a hazard to
pedestrian safety and to be secure in windy conditions and
to prevent accidental relocation by other means.
(h) Hours of display. Such signs/displays shall be permitted to be
displayed during the hours when the business to which the sign
is accessory is open to the public. Such signs/displays shall be
removed when the business is closed to the general public.
(i) Removal during weather events. Such signs/displays shall be
removed in the event of a weather forecast for high winds,
snow or ice. The signs/displays may be returned to their
approved location after the weather event has passed and, in
the case of snow, once snow removal from the street, sidewalks
and other paved areas in the immediate vicinity are complete.
(j) Prohibited content and design. The following content and
features shall be prohibited:
[1] Any type of artificial illumination of such signs/displays
shall be prohibited.
§ 190-122 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-122
175:713
[2] Highly reflective or refractive materials.
[3] Fluorescent or luminescent materials.
[4] Multiple items of merchandise in accordance with
Subsection H(9)(k)(2) below.
[5] Water-soluble materials.
[6] Balloons, pennants, flags, streamers, banners and similar
items.
[7] Offensive language.
[8] Illumination.
[9] Environmentally activated.
(k) Temporary portable signs/displays are permitted in accordance
with the following requirements.
[1] Sign panel.
[a] Height. All signs shall have a minimum height of 36
inches and a maximum height of 42 inches, with the
height measured vertically from the sidewalk or other
surface located beneath the base of the sign. If the
point of height measurement is at a different level
than the surface of the traveled way, the height shall
be measured from the public level of the traveled way.
[b] Width. The maximum width of the sign shall be 24
inches.
[c] Depth at base of sign. The maximum depth of the sign
and any supporting structure shall be 30 inches.
§ 190-122 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-122
175:714
The following diagrams illustrate the maximum sign
dimensions:
[2] Displays.
[a] Area. The maximum area of a display is five square
feet.
[b] Height. If not affixed to the building it may be a
maximum of 42 inches. If affixed (only temporarily) to
the building it may be a maximum of 72 inches.
[c] Content. May include a sample/example of the
merchandise sold from the associated retailer;
however, may not include a display rack holding
multiple items for sale such as racks of clothing or
shelves of items.
(l) Permit required. Prior to the placement of any such sign/
display, a permit shall be applied for and obtained in
accordance with § 190-97C. The permit shall be approved by
the Zoning Official, Assistant Zoning Officer, Code
Enforcement Officer and Village Planner.
(m) Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced
by the Village Construction Official and/or their designee, the
Village Sanitarian, the Village's designated Code Enforcement
Officer, the Village's Director of the Department of Public
Works and/or their designee, the Fire Code Official and/or their
designee, as well as the Police Department and Fire
Department of the Village in accordance with the provisions
set forth.
§ 190-122 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-122
175:715
(10) Blade signs shall be permitted in the B-1 and B-2 Zone Districts in
accordance with the following conditions: [Added 6-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 3647]
(a) SPEC committee must approve all blade signs unless a
variance is required.
(b) Blade signs are permitted in addition to other permitted signs
as set forth in this chapter.
(c) Each business is permitted one blade sign, unless it is a corner
building which may install a corner bracket or have two
perpendicular signs. Corner buildings include those which
front on parking areas as well as two public rights-of-way.
(d) All signs that encroach into the public right-of-way require an
encroachment agreement with the Village.
(e) Blade signs shall only be located on the first floor and must be
affixed to the building facade.
(f) Blade signs cannot exceed two square feet and shall not
intrude more than two feet into the right-of-way.
(g) All blade signs shall not exceed a thickness of six inches.
(h) The bottom of the blade sign shall be a minimum of eight feet
above adjacent ground level.
(i) Blade signs must be double-sided.
(j) Signs can be externally illuminated; however, all lighting shall
be reviewed by the SPEC committee to determine conformance
with the lighting ordinance.140 If the proposed lighting does not
meet the Village lighting ordinance or is distracting to
motorist, the SPEC committee has a right to deny the proposed
lighting.
(k) Blade signs shall be mounted to a separate architectural
bracket with some visual interest.
(l) Blade signs shall have a consistent design with the main sign.
I. Violations and enforcement.
(1) This section shall be administered and enforced by the
Construction Official as deputy of the Zoning Officer.
(2) If any person shall have been convicted of a violation of this section
and the sign or signs shall continue as violations despite such
conviction, then, upon the expiration of the time for appeal, as
provided by law, if no appeal has been taken or upon conviction by
140. Editor's Note: See Ch. 194, Lighting.
§ 190-122 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-122
175:716
the county court if an appeal has been taken, the Construction
Official may serve an additional 10 days' notice upon the person so
convicted to require him to remove the sign or signs in violation.
If such sign or signs shall not have been so removed upon the
expiration of such ten-day period, the Construction Official shall
have the power to remove the sign or signs or cause the same to
be removed without further notice, but at the sole expense of the
owner of the premises.
(3) If the Construction Official shall find that any sign is unsafe or
insecure or is a menace to the public, he shall give written notice
thereof to the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of
the premises upon which such sign may be erected. If such owner,
agent or person shall fail to remove or alter the sign so as to comply
with the standards herein set forth within 10 days after such notice,
such sign or other advertising structure may be removed or altered
to comply by the Construction Official at the expense of the owner,
agent or person having the beneficial use of the premises upon
which such sign may be erected. The Construction Official may
cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an
immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily
and without notice.
J. Signs in the HC District. Signs in the HC Zone District shall be subject
to the following requirements, in addition to all other applicable
requirements of this chapter: [Added 6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 3343]
(1) Signs for single-family detached dwellings shall be permitted as
regulated by § 190-122C.
(2) Signs for nonresidential uses shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Type and number of signs. One wall sign per use, plus one
freestanding sign per lot, shall be permitted, regulated as
follows:
[1] If access is provided to the property solely from Route 17,
except for emergency access, the following requirements
shall apply:
[a] The area of freestanding signs shall not exceed 75
square feet, and the height shall not exceed 20 feet.
[b] The area of wall-mounted signs shall not exceed two
square feet for each horizontal foot of store frontage
of the wall upon which the sign is located, or 50
square feet, whichever is less. The height of wall signs
shall not exceed 20 feet.
§ 190-122 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-122
175:717
§ 190-123. Conditional uses. [Amended 2-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2620;
10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643; 4-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2780;
5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120; 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3177; 7-8-2009
by Ord. No. 3196; 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3323; 2-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 3579]
Recognizing that certain uses, activities and structures may be necessary
to serve the needs and convenience of the Village of Ridgewood and its
residents, and at the same time recognizing that such uses may be or
become adverse to the public health, safety and general welfare if located
and operated without proper consideration being given to existing
conditions and the character of the surrounding area, such uses are hereby
designated as conditional uses. The conditional uses indicated in this
section shall be permitted only upon a showing that such use in a specified
location will comply with the conditions and standards for the location
or operation of such use as contained in this article, and only upon the
issuance of an authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use application shall
include any required site plan review, and the procedure for obtaining
conditional use approval shall be in accordance with the procedures in
Article VII for processing and review of site plan applications, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise or unless contrary to other law.
In the event that any conditional use standard conflicts with any other
zoning regulation, the conditional use standard shall apply, unless the
context indicates otherwise.
If any requirement of this chapter does not conflict with the conditional use
requirements in this section, said requirement shall apply to the conditional
use, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. A violation of any such
requirement shall not be considered to be a violation of a conditional use
standard.
[2] If access is provided from or to the property from streets
other than Route 17 (e.g., by variance or nonconforming
condition), the following requirements shall apply:
[a] The area of freestanding signs shall not exceed 30
square feet, and the height shall not exceed 10 feet.
[b] The area of wall-mounted signs shall not exceed one
square foot for each horizontal foot of store frontage
of the wall upon which the sign is located, or 25
square feet, whichever is less. The height of wall signs
shall not exceed 15 feet.
(b) Other signs. Within the HC Zone, interior signs and awning
signs shall be permitted as regulated by § 190-122E(2)(d), (e)
and (f), and license or permit signs shall be permitted as
regulated by § 190-122E(5).
§ 190-122 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-123
175:718
A. Motor vehicle service stations and public garages. A public garage or
motor vehicle service station shall only be permitted in the B-2 and C
Districts after the following requirements are met:
(1) A site plan shall be submitted and approved as required in Article
VII, and said plan shall show, in addition to all information required
by Article VIII, the street entrances and exits or driveways and the
precise location of all tanks, pumps, lifts and other machinery and
equipment appurtenant thereto, as well as the location, nature of
construction and present use of all buildings within 300 feet of the
lot lines of the premises for which the application has been filed.
(2) The nearest lot line of the lot or parcel of land to be used as a public
garage or gasoline service station shall be at least 300 feet,
measured in a straight line, from the nearest lot line of any lot upon
which is located any building used as a theater, auditorium or other
place of public assembly capable of seating over 100 persons or
used as a church, hospital for humans, college, school, public
library or institution for dependents or children or any public
playground or athletic field.
(3) No part of any public garage or gasoline service station nor any
driveway entrance or exit to or from the same shall be located
within 300 feet of any lot line of any lot upon which is located any
other public garage or gasoline service station.
(4) No part of any public garage or gasoline service station, wherever
located, shall be used for any other purpose; provided, however,
that car rental sales shall be permitted as an accessory use if all the
following requirements are complied with:
(a) The parking area of rental vehicles shall meet the same
setback, lighting, paving, drainage and screening standards as
those required for the minimum off-street parking
requirements.
(b) The parking area of rental vehicles shall be in addition to the
minimum required off-street parking area for all structures
located on the premises.
(5) The minimum lot size for any lot upon which any public garage or
gasoline service station is located shall be 14,000 square feet, and
the minimum street frontage of such lot shall be 100 feet. If a
public garage or gasoline service station is located on a corner lot,
the minimum street frontage on each street shall be 100 feet.
(6) Entrance and exit driveways to and from any lot upon which is
located a public garage or gasoline service station shall have an
unrestricted width of not less than 16 feet nor more than 24 feet,
shall be located not nearer than 10 feet from any lot line and shall
be so laid out as to avoid the necessity of any vehicle leaving the
§ 190-123 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-123
175:719
property by backing out across any public sidewalk, street,
highway, right-of-way or portion thereof.
(7) The area of all driveways and other areas over which motor
vehicles are intended to be driven or parked on any lot upon which
is located a public garage or gasoline service station shall be paved
with bituminous or concrete surface sufficient to meet the Village
paving specifications applicable to streets and roadways.
(8) On any premises upon which a public garage or gasoline service
station is located, all services or repairs to or for motor vehicles,
other than such minor items as the changing and filling of tires or
the sale of gasoline or oil, shall be conducted within the confines of
a building capable of being wholly enclosed. Any vehicles stored
outside overnight shall be so stored as to meet the provisions of
§ 190-124E.
(9) No part of any building used as a public garage or gasoline service
station and no filling pump or other service appliance, whether for
gasoline, oil or any other combustible liquid or material, shall be
erected within 10 feet of any side or rear lot line, and the ten-foot
free area required hereunder shall be at all times kept free, open
and unobstructed for the purposes of ready access by emergency
fire and police vehicles.
(10) Storage facilities for gasoline, oil or other flammable materials in
bulk shall be located wholly underground and no nearer than 35
feet from any lot line other than any street side line. No gasoline or
oil pumps, oil or greasing mechanism or other service appliance
installed for use at such premises shall be within 10 feet of any
street side line, and no gasoline pump shall be located or permitted
within any enclosed or semi-enclosed building.
(11) A canopy is permitted over the pump islands, provided that said
canopy complies with all of the following requirements:
(a) The vertical projection of said canopy is no closer to any street
right-of-way line than two feet.
(b) The vertical projection of said canopy is no closer to any side or
rear lot line than 10 feet.
(c) The thickness of said canopy or the dimension measured from
the topside to the underside of the canopy shall not be greater
than 18 inches.
(d) The height of said canopy shall not exceed 10 feet to the
bottom of the canopy.
(e) The vertical projection of the perimeter of the canopy,
commonly referred to as the "footprint," shall not be larger
than 5% of the lot area.
§ 190-123 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-123
175:720
(f) The stanchions or posts holding up the canopy shall be no
closer than 1/2 the setback required for a principal building.
(12)No part of any building or structure used in whole or in part as a
public garage or gasoline service station shall be located within
100 feet of any boundary line of any residential zone district
created by this chapter.
(13)No permit for the alteration or expansion of any existing public
garage or gasoline service station shall be issued except upon
compliance by the applicant with all the provisions of this article.
(14) The foregoing provisions shall not apply to any municipally owned
or operated parking garage.
B. Institutional uses in the residential zone districts. Institutional uses as
defined by § 190-3 are permitted in the R-125, R-110, R-1, R-1A, R-2,
R-2A, R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-7 Zone Districts as a conditional use. The
following conditional use standards shall apply:
(1) More than one institutional use on a lot. More than one institutional
use shall be permitted on a lot or as part of the same development,
such as but not limited to a house of worship and school as part of
the same development.
(2) Accessory uses. Uses that are customarily incidental and
subordinate to the primary institutional use and part of the same
development as the primary use shall be permitted.
(3) Residences for institutional use staff. Residences for the staff of
institutional uses, such as but not limited to parsonages, rectories,
convents, manses and vicarages, used solely or primarily as
housing shall be permitted on the same lot or on lots separate from
the institutional use, subject to the following:
(a) When such a residence is located on a separate lot from the
institutional use, it shall not be considered a conditional use,
but shall be subject to all of the provisions applicable to
residences in the zone district within which it is located.
(b) When such a residence is located on the same lot as the
institutional use, and it is located within a separate building
and its yard areas, its accessory uses and its accessory
structures are generally distinct and separate from the
institutional use, then it shall not be considered a conditional
use, but shall be subject to all of the provisions applicable to
residences in the zone district within which it is located, with
that portion of the lot devoted to the residence considered its
"lot" for purposes of complying with such requirements.
Furthermore, the residential portion shall be excluded from
the institutional use lot for the institutional use for purposes of
§ 190-123 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-123
175:721
complying with the requirements for the institutional use in
this subsection.
(c) When such a residence is located within the same building as
the institutional use, or is located in a separate building but its
yard areas, its accessory uses and its accessory structures are
not distinct and separate from the institutional use, such
residence shall be considered part of the institutional use and
shall be subject to all of the requirements applicable to the
institutional use.
(4) Minimum lot area: one acre (43,560 square feet) net developable
area, which shall be defined as the gross lot area minus wetlands,
wetland transition areas and any other areas within which
development is prohibited, subject to the following:
(a) In cases where multiple contiguous lots or noncontiguous lots
located within 200 feet of each other are devoted to the same
institutional use, the cumulative area of the lots devoted to the
use shall be used in determining compliance with this
requirement. For example, if a house of worship or school owns
and uses a parking area on an adjacent lot or on a lot located
across the street, the area of both lots shall count towards the
minimum lot area.
(b) The area of noncontiguous lots that are not located within 200
feet of each other and the area of contiguous or noncontiguous
lots that are not used for the same development shall not be
counted together for purposes of the complying with the
minimum lot area. For example, if a religious school is located
on a separate lot than the house of worship with which it is
affiliated and the two uses are generally developed and operate
in an independent manner, then each use shall be considered a
separate institutional use and each lot must comply with the
minimum lot area requirement.
(c) The area of lots used by residences for institutional use staff
are regulated by § 190-123B(3) above.
(5) Minimum lot width: 150 feet for lots devoted to the principal
building and use. Lots devoted solely to accessory parking shall
have a minimum width of 100 feet for interior lots and 120 feet for
corner lots.
(6) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(7) Maximum floor area ratio: 15% of the lot area.
(8) Maximum coverage by above-grade structures: 20% of the lot area.
(9) Maximum improvement coverage: 65% of the lot area.
(10) Maximum building height: 45 feet.
§ 190-123 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-123
175:722
(11) Minimum yard setbacks for principal buildings and accessory
buildings having a floor area greater than 750 square feet:
(a) Front yards: as required in the zone for dwellings. For the
purpose of administering this yard setback requirement, the
height of the building shall be calculated using the height of
any steeple, tower, minaret or similar structure
(b) Side yards: the height of the building or 40 feet, whichever is
greater.
(c) Rear yard: the height of the building or 50 feet, whichever is
greater.
(d) Steeples, towers, minarets, and similar structures: the height
of such structure or as otherwise required for the principal or
accessory building, whichever is greater.
(12) Minimum yard setbacks for accessory buildings having a floor area
up to 750 square feet:
(a) Front yards: the same as required for principal buildings.
(b) Side yards: the height of the building or 15 feet, whichever is
greater, unless the buffer requirements of Subsection B(15)
below impose a greater requirement.
(c) Rear yards: the height of building or 15 feet, whichever is
greater, unless the buffer requirements of Subsection B(15)
below impose a greater requirement.
(13) Minimum yard setbacks for parking areas and driveways:
(a) Front yards: the same as required for principal buildings.
(b) Side yards: 15 feet, unless the buffer requirements of
Subsection B(15) below impose a greater requirement.
(c) Rear yards: 15 feet, unless the buffer requirements of
Subsection B(15) below impose a greater requirement.
(14) Minimum yard setbacks for outdoor use areas such as playgrounds,
sports fields, courts, etc.:
(a) Front yards: the same as required for principal buildings.
(b) Side yards: 25 feet, unless the buffer requirements of
Subsection B(15) below impose a greater requirement.
(c) Rear yards: 25 feet, unless the buffer requirements of
Subsection B(15) below impose a greater requirement.
(15) A buffer area shall be provided along the common boundary of the
institutional use with any adjacent property in a residential zone
district that is developed for residential use or is vacant and able to
§ 190-123 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-123
175:723
be developed for residential use in conformance with the zone
regulations. Such buffer area shall be planted with screening
vegetation and a solid fence, as approved by the Planning Board.
In the front yard, the design of the buffer area may be modified,
or the buffer may be eliminated entirely, as determined by the
Board, in order to provide adequate sight distance for driveways
or to maintain the residential streetscape in the neighborhood,
while still providing an adequate buffer for adjacent residential
properties. The minimum depth of the buffer, measured
perpendicular to the property line, shall be as set forth below:
Net developable area of
property Minimum buffer depth
Up to 50,000 square feet 10 feet
Over 50,000 square feet 10 feet, plus one foot of
additional depth for each
additional 5,000 square feet of
additional net developable area,
or fraction thereof, greater than
50,000 square feet; provided,
however, that no buffer shall be
required to have a depth
greater than 30 feet.
(a) For purposes of this requirement, "net developable area" shall
be defined as the gross area of the property minus wetlands,
wetland transition areas and any other areas within which
development is prohibited.
C. (Reserved)
D. Single-family attached residential units. Single-family attached
residential units shall be permitted in the R-1A District only after the
following requirements are met:
(1) A site plan shall be submitted and approved as required in Article
VII, and said plan shall show, in addition to all information required
by Article VIII, that all standards established herein for singlefamily
attached units as a conditional use will be complied with.
(2) Height. No structure containing a single-family attached unit shall
exceed a height of 30 feet.
(3) Setbacks. No building or structure shall be located closer than:
(a) Fifty feet to any public street or highway.
(b) Twenty feet to the curbline or edge of pavement of any internal
private road.
§ 190-123 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-123
175:724
(c) Ten feet to the pavement edge of a driveway where said
driveway traverses the setbacks between buildings as
hereinafter regulated in § 190-123D(7).
(d) Forty feet to any other property line.
(4) Buffer areas. Those setbacks required in § 190-123D(3) above shall
be landscaped areas and shall not contain any building structure.
Off-street parking is not permitted within the 40 foot setback
required in § 190-123D(3)(d) above.
(5) Density. The gross density for any development in the R-1A Zone
shall not exceed 3.5 single-family attached dwelling units per acre.
The maximum number of dwelling units permitted for any project
shall be determined by multiplying the total area of the tract in
acres, exclusive of any abutting public streets, by 3.5. Any
fractional number of units shall be treated as one unit.
(6) Minimum tract size. Single-family attached units will only be
permitted on a tract having a minimum area of eight acres.
(7) Distance between buildings. No structure containing a singlefamily
attached dwelling unit shall be permitted closer to another
structure containing a single-family attached dwelling unit than a
distance which equals 75% of the sum of heights of the two said
structures or 30 feet, whichever results in the greater distance.
(8) Landscaping. A landscaping plan shall be submitted and be subject
to review and approval by the Planning Board at the same time as
the site plan. The landscaping plan will show in detail the location,
size and type of all plantings, including lawns, to be used on the
site. All areas not used for buildings or off- street parking shall be
included in the landscaped plan. All parking and service areas shall
be screened so that said areas are shielded from residential areas
adjacent to the site.
(9) Lighting. Yard lighting shall be provided during the hours of
darkness to provide illumination for the premises and all interior
sidewalks, walkways and parking areas thereon. All wiring shall be
laid underground, and all lighting fixtures shall be arranged so that
the direct source of light is not visible from any residential areas
adjacent to the site.
(10) Architecture and construction.
(a) From a design and construction standpoint, a single-family
attached residence structure has two basic options, as follows:
[1] It shall be designed and constructed to resemble a large
single-family residence; or
[2] It shall be designed and constructed with appropriately
different single-family attached residence setbacks and
§ 190-123 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-123
175:725
rooflines so as to reflect the combination of more than one
but not more than four single-family attached residences.
(b) The architecture employed shall be esthetically in keeping with
the surrounding area and shall be subject to approval by the
Planning Board. All buildings shall be constructed in
accordance with the building code and shall comply with the
following requirements:
[1] The exterior of each building wall of single-family attached
residences shall be of wood, brick or stone facing, solid
brick or stone or some other acceptable durable material.
Asbestos shingle and cinder or concrete block as exterior
finishes are prohibited. The applicant shall submit to the
Planning Board for review and approval, in addition to any
and all other documents required by any other ordinance
concerning site plan review, floor plans, elevation
drawings, color rendering and detailed finish schedules.
[2] The exterior of any accessory structures shall harmonize
architecturally with and be constructed of materials of a
like character to those used in principal structures.
[3] There shall be between single-family attached residences
a soundproof fire wall constructed according to the
specifications approved by the Village Engineer. Such
noncombustible wall shall have a sound transmission
classification (STC) of not less than 52 based on the
laboratory test procedure specified in the ASTM
(American Society of Testing Materials) recommended
practice E-90-66T.
(11) Utilities. Every single-family attached residential unit must be
connected to the public sanitary sewer and water systems as
approved by the Village Engineer.
(12) Roads. All roads within the project shall be private roads at least 24
feet wide, constructed and maintained by the developer pursuant
to specifications prepared by the Village Engineer and subject to
approval by the Planning Board.
(13) Master deed. The developer shall furnish to the Village as a
condition of site plan approval such guaranties, covenants, master
deed or builder's agreement which shall satisfy the requirements of
the Planning Board for the construction and maintenance of
common areas, landscaping, recreational areas, public
improvements and buildings.
(14) Units per structure. No structure shall contain more than four
single-family attached dwelling units.
§ 190-123 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-123
175:726
(15) Impact statement. An environmental impact statement shall be
prepared and submitted which will include an assessment,
supported by engineering data, of the environmental impact of the
project relating to vehicular traffic, noise, storm drainage, sanitary
sewer facilities.
(16) The Planning Board shall require entrances and exits to the site at
locations and widths that will minimize traffic congestion and result
in the best vehicular and pedestrian circulation pattern both on and
abutting the site. The Planning Board may require the applicant to
submit a traffic engineering study prepared by a licensed
professional traffic engineer which will indicate the impact that the
development of the site will have on surrounding roads. This traffic
study shall include an analysis of estimated peak hourly traffic to be
generated by the proposal and an assignment of estimated peak
hourly traffic by percentage and volume to surrounding streets. If
the results of the study indicate necessary off-site improvements to
existing Village streets, the applicant shall contribute a prorated
share of such improvements as determined by the Planning Board.
(17) Building coverage. Not more than 20% of the total tract area shall
be covered by any above-grade buildings or structures.
(18) Total impervious coverage. Not more than 35% of the total tract
area shall be covered by any impervious material, including but not
limited to buildings, structures, driveways, parking areas, patios,
walkways, game areas such as tennis courts, swimming pools and
the like.
(19)Common open space. The developer of single-family attached
residential units as a conditional use shall make provision for the
establishment of an open space organization which shall own and
maintain all common open space for the benefit of owners or
residents of the development, in accordance with § 190-48.
E. Cellular telecommunications antennas. Cellular telecommunications
antennas are permitted in the OB-2 Zone District as a freestanding
structure and are permitted in the B-1, B-2, OB-1, OB-2, C and H Zone
Districts if attached at or near the top of an existing tall structure, only
if all of the following requirements are complied with:
(1) Intent. The provisions of this chapter are intended to:
(a) Reasonably accommodate cellular telecommunications as may
be required by the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996
and by the Federal Communications commission.
(b) Minimize the number of towers or monopoles in the Village and
to encourage as an alternative the installation of cellular
telecommunications antennas at or near the top of existing tall
structures.
§ 190-123 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-123
175:727
(c) Encourage the collocation of cellular telecommunications
antennas on as few structures as necessary, rather than
locating such antennas each on separate structures.
(d) Mitigate the visual impacts from cellular telecommunications
antennas in all areas through proper location and through the
use of creative and compatible design.
(e) Protect residential areas from encroachment by incompatible
uses, specifically cellular telecommunications antennas, and to
provide for the appropriate separation of residential uses and
cellular telecommunications antennas.
(f) Avoid the potential damage to adjacent properties from tower
or antenna failure or from falling ice from such structures
through stringent engineering and siting of tower structures.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Requirements for freestanding antennas. In addition to any other
applicable requirements of this chapter, the following requirements
shall apply to freestanding cellular telecommunications antennas:
(a) Freestanding cellular telecommunications antennas shall be
permitted only in the OB-2 Zone District, and only if the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board that the
purposes set forth in § 190-123E(1)(a) through (f) are satisfied
by the application, and in particular that no other space is
reasonably available on any other existing or pending
structure, within or outside the Village, that would conform
with the provisions of this Subsection § 190-123E and that
would provide adequate communication pursuant to the
Telecommunications Act of 1996. In order to demonstrate the
foregoing, the applicant shall submit an inventory of all
existing antenna towers, building-mounted antennas and sites
approved or pending approval, as well as all other tall
buildings, water towers, utility towers and similar structures
within the area being served by the proposed freestanding
antenna.
(b) No freestanding tower or antenna structure shall exceed a
height of 120 feet. Any buildings or equipment accessory to or
servicing the cellular telecommunications tower or antenna
shall conform with the height requirements otherwise
applicable in the zone district. The height of such structures
shall be measured as set forth in § 190-119D(6).
(c) Any freestanding tower or antenna structure shall be set back
from any property line a distance equal to or greater than the
height of the tower and antenna. Any buildings or equipment
accessory to or servicing the cellular telecommunications
§ 190-123 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-123
175:728
tower or antenna shall conform with the setback requirements
otherwise applicable in the zone district.
(d) Any proposed cellular telecommunications antenna and related
structures shall be designed, structurally, electrically and in all
respects, to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and
additional antennas that may be installed in the future by the
applicant or other telecommunications service providers as
required below, unless the applicant demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Board that such collocation is not feasible or
necessary to minimize the number or visible impact of future
antennas.
[1] The antenna shall provide space for the antennas and
related structures of at least two additional users if the
antenna is over 100 feet in height.
[2] The antenna shall provide space for the antennas and
related structures of at least one additional user if the
antenna is over 60 feet and equal to or less than 100 feet in
height.
[3] The antennas and related structures shall be designed for
future rearrangement of antennas and to accept antennas
mounted at varying heights.
[4] The applicant shall provide a letter of commitment,
submitted prior to any approval by the Board, to lease
excess space on the facility to other potential users at
reasonable rental rates and on reasonable terms. The
letter shall commit the owner of the antenna and related
structures and equipment, as well as any successors in
interest.
[5] If the foregoing design for collocation requires additional
antenna height or structures beyond that necessary for a
single-user installation or beyond that permitted above,
the Board, in determining the acceptable design, shall
balance the benefits and probability of collocation against
any detriments resulting from such additional antenna
height or structures and may waive such collocation
requirement if the detriments to the public welfare
outweigh the benefits.
(e) The base of any freestanding antenna support structure and
any structures accessory to or servicing the tower and antenna
structure, except for buildings, shall be screened from the
street and adjacent properties by a solid wood fence six feet
high and by a planted buffer. The depth of the buffer shall be
sufficient to accommodate the future growth of the plantings in
the buffer, depending upon the specific plant(s) used, but not
less than 10 feet in depth. The fence shall be located further
§ 190-123 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-123
175:729
from the street and adjacent properties than the plantings. The
plantings shall be evergreen and shall be at least six feet high
at the time of planting. The plantings shall be spaced in such a
manner that, depending upon the specific plant used, they can
be expected to form a single mass without any apparent breaks
or gaps in the screen within five years of planting.
(f) The antenna and supporting tower shall be designed to
simulate the appearance of any of the following:
[1] A flagpole;
[2] An evergreen tree; or
[3] A brick-faced clock or bell tower.
(g) No freestanding antenna over 75 feet in height shall be located
closer to any other freestanding antenna over 75 feet in height
than 15 times the height of the higher antenna. No
freestanding antenna less than or equal to 75 feet in height
shall be closer to any other freestanding antenna than two
times the height of the higher antenna.
(h) One off-street parking space shall be provided for every three
cellular telecommunications service providers having facilities
on the site, in addition to any other parking that is required on
the property for other uses. Fractional space requirements
shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number.
(4) Requirements for antennas mounted on an existing structure. In
addition to any other applicable requirements of this chapter, the
following requirements shall apply to cellular telecommunications
antennas mounted on an existing structure:
(a) The existing structure shall be at least 40 feet in height.
(b) The antenna(s) shall be located at or near the top of the
existing structure.
(c) The height of such antenna and related structures above the
ground shall not exceed the height above the ground of the
existing structure in the location of the antenna by more than
15 feet.
(d) The antenna and related structures shall be set back from the
building facade a distance equal to or greater than the height
of such antenna and related structures above the elevation of
the building where the antenna and related structures are
mounted.
(e) When visible from any abutting street or property, the antenna
and related structures shall be screened, as much as possible
without interfering with antenna transmission and reception,
§ 190-123 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-123
175:730
by materials that have the same color and finish as the building
facade, or when mounted on the roof of a building with a
sloped roof, have the same color and finish as the roofing
material. If complete screening is not provided, the applicant
shall have the burden of proving that the same is not possible
without interfering with antenna reception and transmission.
(f) One off-street parking space shall be provided for every three
cellular telecommunications service providers having facilities
on the site, in addition to any other parking that is required on
the property for other uses. Fractional space requirements
shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number.
F. Renovation and conversion of a single existing structure so as to
contain dwelling units as a conditional use. The renovation and
conversion of a single existing structure so as to contain dwelling units
shall only be permitted in the R-2A Residence District if all of the
following requirements are met:
(1) Required site plan. A site plan shall be submitted and approved by
the Planning Board as required in Article VII, and said plan shall
show, in addition to all information required by Article VIII, that all
standards established herein for the renovation and conversion of a
single existing structure so as to contain dwelling units as a
conditional use shall be complied with.
(2) New residential buildings prohibited. New buildings or additions to
existing buildings which will contain dwelling units shall not be
permitted within said R-2A Residence District; new buildings or
additions in said district shall only be permitted for a use permitted
in the R-2 District, and only after demolition of the existing single
structure.
(3) Conversion of existing structure. Any existing structure within said
R-2A Residence District may be renovated and converted so as to
contain dwelling units, provided that there shall be no physical
enlargement beyond the exterior walls of said existing structure,
and further provided that all conditions as set forth in this
subsection are complied with.
(4) Open spaces. All areas within the site which are not used for
structures or off-street parking or recreational amenities, as
approved by the Planning Board, shall be landscaped pursuant to a
plan approved by the Planning Board, which plan shall show in
detail the location, size and type of all plantings, including lawns, to
be used on the site. All parking and service areas shall be screened
so that said areas are shielded from residential areas adjacent to
the site.
(5) Number of dwelling units permitted in existing structure. The
number of dwelling units in an existing structure shall be limited to
the quotient obtained by dividing the total gross floor area of the
§ 190-123 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-123
175:731
existing structure, expressed in square feet, by 1,135 square feet;
any fraction in the quotient resulting from this calculation will be
disregarded.
(6) Lighting. Yard lighting shall be provided during the hours of
darkness to provide illumination for the premises and all interior
sidewalks, walkways and parking areas thereon. All wiring shall be
laid underground, and all lighting fixtures shall be arranged so that
the direct source of light is not visible from any residential areas
adjacent to the site.
(7) Architecture and construction. The architecture employed shall be
esthetically in keeping with the existing structure and shall be
subject to approval by the Planning Board. All structures shall be
constructed in accordance with the building code.
(8) Renovation plans. The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board
for review and approval, in addition to any and all other documents
required by any other ordinance concerning site plan review, floor
plans, elevations, drawings, color rendering and detailed finish
schedules.
(9) Accessory structures. The exterior of any accessory structure shall
harmonize architecturally with and be constructed of materials of a
like character to those used in principal structures.
(10) Utilities. Each dwelling unit shall be connected to the public
sanitary sewer and water systems as approved by the Village
Engineer.
(11) Construction and maintenance of common facilities. The developer
shall submit to the Planning Board, as a condition of site plan
approval, such a master deed, declaration of restrictions, builder's
agreement or other legal instrument which shall satisfy the
requirements of the Planning Board with respect to the proper
construction and maintenance of common facilities, common areas,
landscaping, recreational areas and common improvements to be
installed for the benefit of owners or residents of said dwelling
units located in the single existing structure.
(12) Environmental impact statement. An environmental impact
statement shall be prepared by a qualified expert acceptable to the
Planning Board and submitted to the Planning Board for its
approval, which statement will include an assessment, supported
by competent engineering data, of the environmental impact
relating to vehicular traffic, noise, storm drainage and sanitary
sewer facilities.
(13) The Planning Board shall require entrances and exits to the site at
locations and widths that will minimize traffic congestion and result
in the best vehicular and pedestrian circulation pattern both on and
abutting the site. The Planning Board may require the applicant to
§ 190-123 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-123
175:732
submit a traffic engineering study prepared by a licensed
professional traffic engineer which will indicate the impact which
the development of the site will have on surrounding roads. This
traffic study shall include an analysis of estimated peak hourly
traffic to be generated by the proposal and an assignment of
estimated peak hourly traffic by percentage and volume to
surrounding streets. If the results of the study indicate necessary
off-site improvements of existing Village or county streets, the
applicant shall contribute a prorated share of such improvements
as determined by the Planning Board.
(14) Total impervious coverage of tract. Not more than 35% of the total
tract area shall be covered by any impervious material, including
but not limited to buildings, structures, driveways, parking areas,
patios, walkways, game areas such as tennis courts, swimming
pools and the like.
G. (Reserved)
H. Drive-in banks. Drive-in banks shall only be permitted in the B-2 Zone
after the following requirements are met:
(1) A site plan shall be submitted and approved as required in Article
VII, and said plan shall show, in addition to all information required
by Article VIII, that all standards established herein for drive-in
banks as a conditional use will be complied with.
(2) The nearest lot line of the lot or parcel of land shall be at least 300
feet, measured in a straight line, from the nearest lot line of any lot
upon which is located any other drive-in bank.
(3) The minimum lot size shall be 18,000 square feet, and the minimum
street frontage of such lot shall be 120 feet. If a drive-in bank is
located on a corner lot, the minimum street frontage on each street
shall be 120 feet.
(4) Entrance and exit driveways shall have an unrestricted width of not
less than 20 feet nor more than 30 feet, shall be located not nearer
than five feet from any lot line and shall be so designed as to avoid
the necessity of any vehicle leaving the property by backing out
across any public sidewalk, street or portion thereof.
(5) No part of any building or structure shall be located within 100 feet
of any residential zone district boundary line.
(6) The minimum distance between driveways shall be 50 feet
measured from the two closest driveway curbs.
(7) The minimum distance a driveway into the site shall be from a
street intersection shall be 100 feet measured from the intersection
of the street right-of-way to the nearest end of the curb radius.
§ 190-123 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-123
175:733
(8) All drive-in banks shall provide suitable storage of trash areas
which are so designed and constructed as to allow no view of the
trash storage from the street, to prevent waste from blowing
around the site or onto adjacent properties or public rights-of-way
and to permit safe easy removal of trash by truck or hand.
(9) All drive-in banks shall provide off-street parking at a ratio of at
least one off-street parking space for every 150 square feet of gross
floor area.
(10) A traffic impact statement shall be submitted by the applicant
which will include an assessment, supported by engineering data,
of the impact the proposed drive-in bank will have on the
surrounding streets. This traffic study shall include, among other
things:
(a) The estimated peak hourly traffic to be generated by the
proposed drive-in bank.
(b) The assignment of estimated peak hourly traffic by percentage
and volume to surrounding streets.
(c) The estimated peak hourly turning movements for all right and
left turns into and leaving the banking facility.
(d) What impact the peak hourly traffic and turning movements
would have on the abutting streets serving the banking facility.
(e) Any proposed solutions to the traffic problems that may be
created or increased as a result of the construction or
expansion or renovation of the drive-in bank.
(11) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, any existing
bank establishment in the B-1 Zone that operates a drive-in
banking facility on site shall be construed as having a
nonconforming use for only that part of said establishment devoted
to the drive-in banking facility.
I. Membership-based outdoor recreational club uses. "Membership-based
outdoor recreational club" shall be defined as an organization, and its
associated facilities, which is created for and designed to provide onsite
outdoor recreational opportunities such as tennis, platform tennis,
paddle tennis, racquetball, handball, squash, swimming and similar
recreational activities primarily to the members of the organization and
their guests. Such clubs shall be permitted in the R-125 Zone District
only if all of the following requirements are complied with:
(1) The site shall contain a minimum of 10 acres.
(2) Any clubhouse or other similar principal building or structure shall
have a gross floor area on the ground floor of no more than 10,000
square feet.
§ 190-123 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-123
175:734
(3) Any clubhouse or other similar principal buildings or structures
shall be limited to two stories and shall not exceed 30 feet in
height.
(4) All buildings, roofed structures, shade shelters, parking areas and
outdoor play areas shall be located at least 100 feet from an
abutting property used for residential purposes. Buildings, shade
shelters, and roofed structures shall meet the setbacks from other
property lines as set forth in the zone regulations.
(5) The total land area to be devoted to outdoor games, courts and play
areas shall not exceed 30% of the total area of the site.
(6) All outdoor activities to be conducted on the site shall be limited to
the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(7) The illumination of courts shall be permitted during the hours
within which outdoor activities are permitted pursuant to
Subsection I(6) above. Notwithstanding the height limitation for
lighting in § 190-85D, such fixtures shall not exceed a height of 30
feet. Such lighting shall not be required to face downward but shall
be oriented and shielded in such a manner as to avoid undue
illumination of and directing glare onto adjacent properties, as
determined by the Planning Board. All other lighting shall also
conform to the requirements of § 190-85.
(8) A one-hundred-foot buffer strip shall be provided adjacent to any
abutting residential zones. Such buffer shall be landscaped,
retained in a natural wooded condition, or both, as required by the
Planning Board, and maintained in good condition. No above-grade
structures shall be permitted within this buffer strip except a
driveway and related improvements providing access to the
property and any structures, such as fences, designed to enhance
or supplement the function of the buffer area. All buildings, parking
areas and outdoor play areas shall be effectively screened by a
fence, wall or hedge, maintained in good condition, as approved by
the Planning Board, on any side of the site which adjoins or faces
premises situated in any residential zone, but such fence, wall or
hedge may be waived by the Planning Board if, in its judgment,
because of topographic or other conditions, such fence, wall or
hedge shall not be necessary to screen adjoining or facing
residential property.
(9) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the height of
any fence enclosing an outdoor play area shall not exceed 12 feet.
J. Public utility facilities. Public utility facilities, as defined by this chapter
and for which proof is furnished that the proposed installation in the
specific location is necessary for the proper functioning of the public
utility system and is designed primarily to serve the neighborhood in
which the facility is to be located and/or the Village of Ridgewood, shall
comply with the following requirements; provided, however, that this
§ 190-123 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-123
175:735
subsection shall not apply to public utilities exempted by § 190-2C and
D:
(1) Prohibited facilities. The facility shall not include any of the
following uses or structures:
(a) Terminal, parking facility, storage or maintenance facility for
buses or railways.
(b) Electric substation.
(c) Natural gas transmission pumping facility or pressure
reduction facility.
(d) Any facility relating to the collection, transfer, processing,
storage or disposal of solid waste or vehicles engaged in the
collection of solid waste.
(e) A hazardous waste site or any facility relating to the storage,
transfer processing or disposal of hazardous waste.
(f) Cellular telecommunications antennas and related structures
and equipment, which structures and equipment are regulated
by § 190-123E.
(g) In residential zone districts, any facility that would typically
generate more than 10 trips per day. For purposes of this
requirement, a "trip" shall be considered each movement of a
motor vehicle to the site or from the site via area streets.
(2) Height, bulk and intensity of use regulations. If public utility
facilities are located in any residential zone, the following
requirements shall apply:
(a) Maximum floor area ratio: 20% of the lot area.
(b) Maximum coverage by above-grade structures: 20% of the lot
area.
(c) Maximum improvement coverage: 50% of the lot area.
(d) Maximum height of structures. The height of buildings and
other roofed structures shall not exceed 25 feet.
(e) Minimum front yard setback: as required in the zone for
dwellings.
(f) Minimum side yard: the height of the building and other roofed
structure or 20 feet, whichever is greater.
(g) Minimum rear yard: the height of the building and other roofed
structure or 20 feet, whichever is greater.
§ 190-123 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-123
175:736
§ 190-124. Special regulations for certain uses and structures.
In addition to all other applicable requirements of this chapter, the following
requirements shall apply to the uses and structures specified below. The
following uses and structures shall be permitted when so indicated in
the specific zone regulations, and the following requirements shall not be
construed to be conditional use requirements.
(h) Minimum setbacks for other above-ground structures or
equipment: the same as required for buildings and roofed
structures.
(i) Minimum setbacks for driveways, parking areas and other
vehicular use areas. Driveways, parking areas and other
vehicular use areas shall be located at least 15 feet from the
side and rear lot lines. Parking areas and other vehicular use
areas shall be located at least 25 feet from front lot lines.
(j) The foregoing setback requirements shall not apply to any
pipes, structures or equipment located beneath the surface of
the ground.
(3) Exterior appearance of structures. The exterior appearance of any
building or structure required for such use shall be compatible with
the character of buildings or structures in the area in which the site
is located, as determined by the Board.
(4) Buffer requirements. A buffer area having a depth of at least 10
feet shall be provided along the common boundary of the public
utility facility and any adjacent residential property. Such buffer
area shall be planted with screening vegetation and a solid fence,
as approved by the Planning Board. In the front yard, the design of
the buffer area may be modified, or the buffer may be eliminated
entirely, as determined by the Board, in order to provide adequate
sight distance for driveways or to maintain the residential
streetscape in the neighborhood, while still providing an adequate
buffer for adjacent residential properties.
A. Residential cluster. Residential cluster may be permitted by the
Planning Board in accordance with this chapter, provided that the
following requirements shall supersede the requirements for
conventional developments above. Where a different standard is not set
forth below, the standards for conventional development shall apply.
(1) The provisions of § 190-48 shall be complied with.
(2) Every lot shall contain a minimum lot area of 12,600 square feet.
(3) Every lot shall contain a minimum lot width, measured at the
minimum front yard setback line, of 90 feet; provided, however,
that no lot shall measure less than 75 feet in width at any point
within 140 feet of the front lot line.
§ 190-123 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-124
175:737
(4) Every lot shall contain an average lot width of at least 90 feet,
calculated so that the minimum lot area of 12,600 square feet shall
be provided within 140 feet of the front lot line.
(5) All land, other than building lots and roadways, resulting from and
made available by the reduction of lot sizes pursuant to this
subsection shall be reserved for open space. The amount of open
space to be reserved shall be at least two acres unless the open
space to be reserved abuts land already owned by the Village or by
the Board of Education of the Village or land shown on the Master
Plan or Official Map of the Village as park or school/park land.
(6) The Planning Board need not approve any subdivision employing
open space zoning if, in its sole discretion, open space zoning would
not be suitable for the orderly development of the area in which it is
located or would not conform to the general pattern of the
development of existing community facilities or school/park lands
or the general pattern of the development of such facilities or
school/park lands as shown on the master plan or Official Map of
the Village.
B. Family day-care homes. Family day-care homes contained in a
residence, when permitted, shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) There shall be no physical evidence of said use from the exterior of
the residential building.
(2) Signs of any kind advertising the nonresidential use are prohibited.
(3) The remodeling of any residential building in any way to create the
impression of business activity from the exterior of the residential
building is prohibited.
(4) No family day-care home shall have the services of any person not
residing therein.
(5) Any family day-care home shall be limited to the first floor of such
residence and shall not occupy more than 25% of the habitable
floor area of the residence or 50% of the habitable floor area on the
ground floor, whichever is less.
C. (Reserved)141
D. Car rental establishments. Car rental establishments, when permitted,
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The minimum lot size for any lot upon which any car rental
establishment is located shall be 14,000 square feet.
141. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, pertaining to home professional offices, as amended,
was repealed 4-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2933.
§ 190-124 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-124
175:738
(2) The minimum street frontage of such lot shall be 100 feet. If a car
rental establishment is located on a corner lot, the minimum street
frontage on each street shall be 100 feet.
(3) Entrance and exit driveways to and from any lot upon which is
located a car rental establishment shall have an unrestricted width
of not less than 16 feet nor more than 24 feet, shall be located not
nearer than 10 feet from any lot line and shall be so laid out as to
avoid the necessity of any vehicle leaving the property by backing
out across any public sidewalk, street, highway, right-of-way or
portion thereof.
(4) The area of all driveways and other areas over which motor
vehicles are intended to be driven or parked on any lot upon which
is located a car rental establishment shall be paved with a
bituminous or concrete surface sufficient to meet the Village
paving specifications applicable to streets and roadways.
(5) On any premises upon which a car rental establishment is located,
all services or repairs to or for motor vehicles, other than such
minor items as the changing and filling of tires or the filling of
gasoline or oil, shall be conducted within the confines of a building
capable of being wholly enclosed.
(6) No part of any building used as a car rental establishment and no
filling pump or other service appliance, whether for gasoline, oil or
any other combustible liquid or material, shall be erected within 10
feet of any side or rear lot line, and the ten-foot free area required
hereunder shall be at all times kept free, open and unobstructed for
the purposes of ready access by emergency fire and police vehicles.
(7) At any car rental establishment, storage facilities for gasoline, oil
or other flammable materials in bulk shall be located wholly
underground and no nearer than 35 feet from any lot line other
than any street side line. No gasoline or oil pumps, oil or greasing
mechanism or other service appliance installed for use at such
premises shall be within 10 feet of any street side line, and no
gasoline pump shall be located or permitted within any enclosed or
semi-enclosed building.
(8) No part of any building or structure used in whole or in part as a
car rental establishment shall be located within 100 feet of any
boundary line of any residential zone district nor 300 feet,
measured in a straight line, from the nearest lot line of any lot upon
which is located a like car rental establishment.
(9) The area to be used for the parking of automobiles for rental shall
not be more than two square feet of area for each square foot of all
enclosed buildings having four walls and a roof devoted to the car
rental operation.
§ 190-124 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-124
175:739
E. Outdoor storage. The following regulations shall govern outdoor
storage within the Village:
(1) In the R-125, R-110, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Residential Zones, and in
other zones where a legal one-family or two-family dwelling exists,
outdoor storage shall be permitted only as an accessory use to a
one-family detached or two-family dwelling and shall be limited to
private camping trailers, boats and boat trailers, garden tractors
and implements, automobiles, motorcycles and motorbikes, except
as otherwise provided below. Such storage shall comply with the
following requirements:
(a) Outdoor storage shall be permitted in the side and rear yard.
(b) The item as stored shall not exceed six feet in height.
(c) The item shall be screened with a fence or screening hedge so
that such item is not visible from any abutting residential
property or street.
(d) Any items stored in the side yard shall not be permitted closer
to the side lot line than the side yard setback requirements for
a principal building on the same lot.
(e) Any of the permitted items enumerated in § 190-124E(1) that
exceed a height of six feet, as well as any pickup or panel truck,
mobile home, bus, van used for commercial purposes or
recreation vehicle, may be stored on any residential lot only if
such item shall be kept in an enclosed garage on such lot;
provided, however, that the parking of any recreational vehicle
outside a garage for up to five separate or consecutive days
during a calendar year shall be permitted.
(2) Outdoor storage of any kind is prohibited in the residential zones,
except for a legal one-family detached or two-family dwelling.
[Amended 8-9-2006 by Ord. No. 3015; 3-23-2016 by Ord. No.
3493]
(3) Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting parking
of passenger vehicles used by the occupant for day-to- day
activities, provided that such vehicles have side windows and are
parked on the driveway. Trucks parked overnight shall be garaged.
(4) In all nonresidential zones, no article, equipment, vehicle, supplies
or material shall be kept, stored or displayed outside the confines
of any building unless and until the following regulations are
complied with, except that outdoor cafes licensed by the Village
and permitted by this chapter shall be exempt from the following
requirements to the extent such exception is required to carry out
the outdoor cafe business:
(a) Outdoor storage is only permitted in the side and rear yards.
§ 190-124 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-124
175:740
(b) Any items stored in the side yard shall not be permitted closer
to the side lot line than the side yard setback requirements for
a principal building on the same lot.
(c) Outdoor storage shall be screened by special planting or
fencing, maintained in good condition, so that items being
stored shall not be visible from any adjacent property or public
street. [Amended 4-7-2010 by Ord. No. 3242]
(d) Any fence required to screen the outdoor storage of flammable
material otherwise permitted by this chapter shall not be
closer than 20 feet to any property line of the lot upon which it
is erected.
(5) Where otherwise permitted by this chapter, the display of new and
used motor vehicles for retail sales as a permitted accessory use in
the B-2 Zone District shall not be required to be screened by a
planting or fence, except where the premises for such permitted
use abuts or faces any premises situated in any residential zone.
[Amended 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3493]
(6) Motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats and trailers parked or
stored within the Village shall not be used for sleeping, bathing,
toilet functions or the preparation of food, on either a permanent or
temporary basis. [Added 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 3114]
(7) Motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats and trailers parked or
stored in the Village shall not be used for the storage of items or
materials. Exempted from this prohibition is the storage of items or
materials in such vehicles or equipment that are designed for this
purpose, when such vehicles or equipment are accessory and
incidental to the principal use on the property and are not
prohibited by other regulations. By way of example, but not
limitation, this subsection shall be interpreted to prohibit the
storage of items or materials in a commercial vehicle or
commercial trailer on a residential property, unless such
commercial vehicle or trailer is permitted to be located on the
property by other regulations of the Village. [Added 4-9-2008 by
Ord. No. 3114]
(8) The storage of flammable, toxic or hazardous materials on property
or in vehicles shall comply with all applicable regulations, including
but not limited to the regulations of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, the Village’s Department of Health and
the Fire Department. [Added 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 3114]
F. Fences, freestanding walls and retaining walls. The following
regulations apply to fences, freestanding walls and retaining walls. In
addition, enclosures for swimming pools and hot tubs shall be required
to comply with the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code of
the State of New Jersey, in addition to the following regulations. In case
§ 190-124 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-124
175:741
of conflict between this subsection and the Uniform Construction Code
of the State of New Jersey, the more restrictive requirement shall apply.
[Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2818; 9-11-2019 by Ord. No.
3730]
(1) Fences and retaining walls shall be permitted in front, side and rear
yards. Unless required to be located in the front yard by this
chapter for buffers or screening purposes, freestanding walls shall
be permitted only in the side and rear yards, except that sitting
walls and walls that are designed as a planter, either of which do
not exceed a height of 24 inches, shall be permitted in the front
yard. [Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120; 6-13-2012 by
Ord. No. 3343]
(2) Minimum setback. The required setbacks for fences and walls shall
be as follows: [Amended 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120]
(a) Fences and freestanding walls may abut property lines without
any setback required. Retaining walls may abut the front
property line only without any setback required.
(b) The exposed face of retaining walls shall be set back from any
side or rear lot line a horizontal distance not less than one foot
for each foot of height of the retaining wall. For walls located
five feet or less from the property line, the required setback
shall be based upon the height of the retaining wall above the
ground level at the property line. For other walls, the required
setback shall be based upon the height of the retaining wall
above the finished ground level at the base of the wall.
(c) In the case of multiple retaining walls, the exposed face of each
wall shall be set back from the exposed face of each other wall
a horizontal distance not less than one foot for each foot of
height of the higher retaining wall. The required distance
between walls shall be based upon the vertical difference
between the top of the wall above and the top of the wall
directly below. In the case of walls of varying height, the
setback at any point shall be based upon the height of the wall
at the same point.
(d) For purposes of determining the required minimum setback,
the height of any fence or other barrier located at the top of a
retaining wall shall be included within the height of the
retaining wall unless such fence or other barrier is set back
from the face of the wall a horizontal distance not less than one
foot for each foot of height of the barrier or the retaining wall,
whichever is greater, measured from the finished grade at the
base of the barrier and wall, respectively.
(3) Maximum height. The maximum permitted height of fences,
freestanding walls and retaining walls shall be as follows:
§ 190-124 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-124
175:742
[Amended 12-13-2006 by Ord. No. 3034; 5-14-2008 by Ord.
No. 3120]
(a) The height of fences and freestanding walls accessory to
single-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings,
community shelters and residences, and any other uses that
are subject to the same requirements as the foregoing uses,
shall not exceed four feet; provided, however, that a height of
up to six feet shall be permitted for such fences and
freestanding walls if all of the following conditions are
complied with: [Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
[1] The fence or freestanding wall is located at or near a
property line that abuts a property developed primarily
with a nonresidential use, multifamily dwelling or singlefamily
attached dwelling, or the fence is a required
enclosure for a regulated pool, provided that in the event
the pool is removed or is no longer required to be
enclosed, such fence shall be removed, reduced in height
or otherwise brought into compliance with Chapter 190.
[2] The fence or freestanding wall is located in the side and/or
rear yard of the subject property.
(b) The height of fences and freestanding walls accessory to
single-family attached dwellings, multifamily dwellings and
nonresidential uses shall not exceed four feet, unless such
fence or freestanding wall is required by § 190-94D and
approved by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment and is
located within the side or rear yard, in which case the height
shall not exceed six feet, except as may be provided otherwise
by this chapter. In addition, a height of up to six feet shall be
permitted for fences and freestanding walls that are accessory
to single-family attached dwellings and multifamily dwellings if
all of the following conditions are complied with: [Amended
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
[1] The fence or freestanding wall is located at or near a
property line that abuts a property developed primarily
with a nonresidential use, or the fence is a required
enclosure for a regulated pool, provided that in the event
the pool is removed or is no longer required to be
enclosed, such fence shall be removed, reduced in height
or otherwise brought into compliance with Chapter 190.
[2] The fence or freestanding wall is located in the side and/or
rear yard of the subject property.
(c) The height of retaining walls shall not exceed four feet,
measured from the finished ground level at the base of the
§ 190-124 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-124
175:743
wall. In the case of multiple retaining walls, the following shall
apply:
[1] The height of any individual wall shall not exceed four feet.
[2] The height of any wall located uphill from a lower wall
shall be measured from the top of the lower wall, unless
the exposed faces of the two walls are separated by a
horizontal distance equal to or greater than the elevation
difference between the tops of the two walls. In the latter
case, the height of the uphill wall shall be measured from
the finished ground level at the base of the wall.
[3] The total height of all walls combined shall not exceed 12
feet within a horizontal distance of 20 feet. The twelve-foot
height shall be measured from the finished ground level at
the base of the lowest wall within 20 feet.
(d) In determining the height of fences, freestanding walls and
retaining walls, the following shall apply:
[1] For fences and walls that are not uniform in height along
the top of the fence, the height shall be measured to the
highest point of the fence, except as provided otherwise
herein.
[2] Notwithstanding the maximum height limitations
applicable to fences and walls herein, fence posts and
gates may exceed the maximum permitted fence height by
up to one foot.
[3] For fences and walls located on sloping ground, the height
shall be measured from the ground directly below the
point of measurement.
[4] The height of fences and freestanding walls shall be
measured as set forth in § 190-119D(6).
[5] In the case of fences, guard rails or other barriers located
at the top of retaining walls, the combined height of the
barrier and the retaining wall shall not exceed the
permitted height for either fences or walls, unless the
barrier and wall are separated as provided in Subsection
F(2)(d) above.
(4) Sight distance. No fence, freestanding wall or retaining wall shall
be located on any property in any way which interferes with
necessary safe sight distance for either operators of vehicles or
pedestrians at intersections of streets, driveways, access aisles for
parking or loading areas, and/or sidewalks, or which interferes
with necessary safe sight distance along horizontal curves of
streets. The following shall apply:
§ 190-124 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-124
175:744
(a) The Village Engineer shall be responsible for determining the
appropriate sight distance in each case, and shall take into
account the horizontal alignment of traveled ways,
topographical conditions, the normal speed of travel, the
presence of existing visual obstructions, and other such
characteristics that they may deem appropriate.
(b) Notwithstanding the permitted height, location and design of
fences, freestanding walls and retaining walls set forth in this
chapter and in other regulations, the Village Engineer may
require more stringent requirements as may be necessary to
ensure safe sight distance.
(5) Safety barriers. The reviewing authority may, in appropriate
instances, require a guard rail or other restraining device at the top
of retaining walls if deemed necessary or advisable to protect
persons, vehicles or equipment from falling off the wall.
(6) Materials and construction. The following standards shall apply to
the materials and construction of fences and walls.
(a) In the event that both sides of a fence or freestanding wall are
not identical, the finished or preferred side shall be required to
face the street and/or abutting properties, as applicable. For
purposes of administering this provision, the finished or
preferred side shall be that side which best conceals the fence
posts, rails and other supporting parts, and/or which is
painted, stained or otherwise treated when only one such side
is so treated.
(b) Walls shall not be faced with unfinished, painted or stained
poured concrete, concrete block or cinder block, unless the
same is textured to simulate natural stone or is split-face block.
(c) Fences located within the front yard shall not be more than
60% solid, unless required by this chapter for buffers or
screening purposes, in which case fences may be completely
solid. The measurement of solidity shall be made perpendicular
to the side of the fence. In addition, fences located within the
front yard shall not be more than six inches thick. [Amended
6-13-2012 by Ord. No. 3343]
(d) Fences, freestanding walls or retaining walls that may present
a danger or hazard to the public welfare, including but not
limited to fences or walls, which are electrified, contain broken
glass, razor wire or barbed wire, or other sharp edges, are
prohibited.
(7) Swimming pool enclosures shall be required to comply with
§ 251-17, in addition to the provisions of this subsection not in
conflict with § 251-17.
§ 190-124 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-124
175:745
(8) Recreational facility enclosures other than swimming pool
enclosures shall be required to comply with § 190-124G(4),
notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection F(2) and (3) above.
G. Recreational facilities for single-family detached or two-family
residential uses. Recreational facilities basketball courts, handball
courts, paddleball courts, platform tennis courts, racquetball courts,
tennis courts and similar recreation facilities accessory to single-family
detached or two-family residential uses and designed to serve the
residents on the premises, when permitted, shall comply with the
following requirements. Notwithstanding the above, basketball
equipment which utilizes a permitted driveway on the lot as the play
surface is permitted in the same zone districts as the foregoing
recreational facilities, but is not subject to the following requirements;
provided, however, that such equipment shall be set back from any
property line a distance equal to or greater than the height of the
equipment above grade. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 2565;
6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 2670; 3-23-2016 by Ord. No. 3493]
(1) The recreational facilities shall be permitted only in the rear yard.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of the specific zone
regulations to the contrary, the total coverage by improvements,
including said recreation facilities, shall not exceed 40% of the rear
yard area.
(3) The recreational facility shall not be closer than 15 feet from any
side or rear property line or 25 feet from any principal structure on
any abutting lot, whichever is greater. On corner lots, the
recreational facility shall be set back from the side street a distance
at least equal to the front yard setback requirement of the zone
district in which the subject lot is located or to the established front
yard setback of the lot adjacent to the rear lot line of the lot on
which the recreational facility is located, whichever is greater.
(4) The maximum height of the fence enclosure, if there is one, shall be
10 feet from ground level. Fence enclosures shall be of chain link
construction and must include a top rail.
(5) No artificial lighting is permitted.
(6) In addition to the enclosure fencing, if any, the recreational facility
shall be screened from adjoining property and from view from the
adjoining streets by the installation and maintenance of landscape
plantings of sufficient density, at least six feet in height.
H. Playhouses, tree houses and similar temporary recreational structures
for children. Playhouses, tree houses and similar temporary
recreational structures for children, when permitted, shall comply with
the following requirements:
(1) The structures are only permitted in the rear yard.
§ 190-124 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-124
175:746
(2) The structures shall comply with the provisions regulating
accessory structures in § 190-119C(1).
(3) The structures shall not contain a gross floor area greater than 64
square feet.
(4) The height of the structures shall not exceed 10 feet measured
from the floor to the ridgeline or highest point of said structure or
20 feet above the ground.
(5) The structures shall be located at least 12 feet from any principal
building situated on the same lot.
(6) The structures shall not be erected without first obtaining a
building permit which will permit the construction and occupancy
for a three-year period to commence at the date of issuance. The
occupancy permit may be renewed for additional three-year
periods after application to and inspection by the Director of
Building and Inspections.
I. Gasoline storage tanks and related equipment. Gasoline storage tanks
of any type and pumps and equipment related thereto shall be
permitted as an accessory use only in the B-2 and C Commercial Zone
Districts. Each such installation must comply with the provisions of
§§ 190-123A(9) and (10) and 190-124D(6) and (7), as applicable, as to
location.
J. Security gates. Folding gates and screens or movable tracked doors and
similar nighttime guards on store fronts or other nonresidential
buildings for the purposes of night security are prohibited. Existing
folding gates, screens or movable tracked doors and similar nighttime
guards as hereinabove referred to are hereby designated objectionable
nonconforming structures and are required to be removed by the owner
or occupant of said structure within one year from the date of adoption
of this amendment.
K. Awnings. Awnings shall comply with the following regulations:
[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) In the B-1 and B-2 zones, no awning shall extend from the wall of
the building to which it is attached more than eight feet.
(2) Awnings in the B-1 and B-2 zones may extend into the public rightof-
way; provided, however, that no awning shall extend over a
public sidewalk more than four feet. No awning shall extend into
the public right-of-way in any zone district except in the B-1 and
B-2 zones.
(3) All awnings shall be made of fabric material such as canvas,
exclusive of the structural members. Any awning in the B-1 and B-2
zones that projects into a public right-of-way shall be retractable
§ 190-124 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-124
175:747
with a mechanism fully capable of being operative on a daily basis
if needed.
(4) The bottom of any part of any awning shall be no closer than seven
feet from the grade below the awning when such awning is located
over a pedestrian way, or a dimension greater than seven feet, as
determined by the reviewing Board or official, as applicable, when
the awning is located over a vehicular travel path.
L. Canopies. Canopies shall comply with the following regulations:
[Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) In the B-1 and B-2 zones, canopies shall not extend more than eight
feet from the wall of a building.
(2) Canopies shall not extend into any public right-of-way.
(3) No canopy shall be constructed closer than 12 inches to the vertical
extension of the curb line of the street.
(4) No canopy shall extend past any required setback line affecting the
building to which it is affixed.
M. Exterior equipment. Mechanical equipment and tanks located outside
of a building, including but not limited to air conditioning equipment,
heat exchangers, fans, compressors, propane tanks and oil tanks,
generators, condensers and similar equipment, shall be subject to the
following regulations: [Amended 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) The installation of such exterior equipment shall require the
issuance of a zoning permit.
(2) Such equipment shall comply with the minimum required front
yard setback for principal buildings and shall be screened from the
view of adjacent properties and streets; provided, however, that the
screening requirement shall not apply to window-mounted
equipment such as fans and window air conditioners.
(3) Such equipment shall be set back at least 10 feet from any
residential property line.
(4) Exterior equipment located on the roof of a building shall be
subject to the requirements of § 190-124P.
N. Amateur radio stations. Amateur radio stations shall be permitted as an
accessory use to all permitted residential principal uses in the Village,
subject to the following requirements: [Added 10-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 2643]
(1) The applicant shall obtain a zoning permit from the Zoning Officer,
which shall include submission of adequate plans and supporting
materials to demonstrate compliance with this chapter and with all
other applicable codes and regulations.
§ 190-124 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-124
175:748
(2) The applicant, who shall reside at the premises in question, shall
submit a valid current amateur radio operator's license from the
Federal Communications Commission. Such license must be
maintained at all times that the antenna and supporting structures
are installed. License renewals shall be filed with the Zoning
Officer. If at any time the license expires and is not renewed, or the
licensee no longer resides at the premises, the antenna and any
supporting structures shall be removed within 30 days of such
license expiration or change of residency.
(3) No more than one amateur radio station shall be permitted on a lot
or accessory to a dwelling.
(4) The height of the antenna and any supporting structures shall not
exceed 45 feet, such height to be measured as set forth in §
190-119D(6). In determining the height of the antenna and
supporting structures, the extended height shall be used for
antennas which use a telescoping or extendible design. [Amended
5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3120]
(5) If freestanding or mounted on any structure other than a roof of the
principal building, all parts of the antenna and supporting
structures shall be located only in the rear yard and shall be set
back from any property line a distance equal to or greater than the
height of the antenna and supporting structures.
(6) If mounted on the roof of the principal building, the antenna and
supporting structures shall be set back from the building facade a
distance equal to or greater than the height of such antenna and
related structures above the elevation of the building where the
antenna and related structures are mounted, or as required by the
Construction Code, whichever is more restrictive. The antenna and
supporting structures shall also be located so as to minimize the
view of the same from any street, as determined by the Zoning
Officer.
(7) If the station is capable of exceeding 50 watts of transmitting
power (aka "peak envelope power"), the applicant shall be required
to demonstrate that all applicable regulations concerning
electromagnetic radiation shall be complied with.
(8) Variances from the foregoing regulations may be granted by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable,
provided that the applicant demonstrates that such variance is
necessary to reasonably accommodate adequate amateur radio
communications while balancing the legitimate community
interests of aesthetics and safety, in accordance with PRB-1 of the
Federal Communications Commission, 101 FCC 2d 952 (1985), and
47 CFR 97.15(e).
§ 190-124 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-124
175:749
O. Antennas accessory to principal use. Antennas which meet the
definition of "accessory building or structure" in § 190-3 are permitted
in all zone districts as an accessory structure, subject to the following
regulations; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to
cellular telecommunications antennas and amateur radio stations,
which are regulated by §§ 190-123E and 190-124N, respectively. The
following requirements are intended to reduce the negative visual
impacts from antennas and to provide for public safety.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as applicable, shall in any appeal balance the objectives
sought by the requirements against the extent to which the regulations
materially limit transmission or reception by the antenna or imposes
more than a minimal cost on the antenna owner. [Added 10-13-1998
by Ord. No. 2643]
(1) Exemption of certain antennas from regulations. Pursuant to the
1996 ruling of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the
following antennas are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
(a) A transmission satellite dish no greater than one meter (39.37
inches) in diameter.
(b) A receive-only satellite dish greater than one meter (39.37
inches) and less than or equal to two meters (78.74 inches) in
diameter and located in a nonresidential zone district.
(c) A transmission satellite dish no greater than two meters (78.74
inches) in diameter and located in a nonresidential zone
district.
(2) Limited applicability of regulations involving certain antennas.
Pursuant to the 1996 ruling of the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the
following antennas only to the extent such provisions do not impair
the installation, maintenance or use of such antennas. The
determination regarding such impairment shall be made by the
Zoning Officer and may be appealed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in § 190-29.
(a) Antennas designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service
(DBS), including direct-to-home satellite service, and no
greater than one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter.
(b) Antennas designed to receive video programming services via
multipoint distribution services, including multichannel
multipoint distribution services (MMDS), instructional
television fixed services and local multipoint distribution
services, and no greater than one meter (39.37 inches) in
diameter or diagonal measurement, provided that, if such
antennas are located on a mast, the mast is 12 feet or less in
height.
§ 190-124 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-124
175:750
(c) Antennas designed to receive television broadcast signals
(TVBS), provided that, if such antennas are located on a mast,
the mast is 12 feet or less in height.
(3) Freestanding antennas. The following requirements shall apply to
freestanding antennas regulated by this Subsection O:
(a) No lot may contain more than one freestanding antenna.
(b) Freestanding antennas shall only be permitted is the rear yard.
(c) Freestanding antennas shall be effectively screened by a
special planting screen or fence as determined by the
reviewing authority to be necessary to minimize the view of the
antenna from any adjacent property or public street.
(d) Freestanding antennas shall be set back from all lot lines a
distance equal to or greater than the height of the antenna.
(e) The height of a freestanding antenna shall not exceed 45 feet
above the ground at the base of the antenna, exclusive of any
filling, berming, mounding or excavating which alters the
grade at the base of the antenna from the grade in the general
vicinity of the antenna; provided, however, that the height of
freestanding satellite dish antennas shall not exceed 15 feet
above the ground.
(f) The diameter or diagonal dimension of freestanding satellite
dish antennas shall not exceed one meter (39.37 inches) in any
residential zone district or two meters (78.74 inches) in any
nonresidential zone district.
(4) Roof-mounted antennas. The following requirements shall apply to
roof-mounted antennas regulated by this Subsection O:
(a) If mounted on the roof of the principal building, the antenna
and supporting structures shall be set back from the building
facade a distance equal to or greater than the height of such
antenna and related structures above the elevation of the
building where the antenna and related structures are
mounted, or as required by the Construction Code, whichever
is more restrictive. The antenna and supporting structures
shall also be located so as to minimize the view of the same
from any street, as determined by the Zoning Officer.
(b) The height of any roof-mounted antenna shall not exceed the
height of the roof by more than 12 feet.
P. Roof-mounted equipment. Equipment mounted on the roof of a
nonresidential building, including but not limited to heating, ventilating
and air-conditioning equipment, shall be subject to the following
requirements: [Added 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2643]
§ 190-124 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-124
175:751
(1) A zoning permit shall be required. [Amended 4-7-2010 by Ord.
No. 3242]
(2) Such equipment shall be set back from the building facade a
distance equal to or greater than the height of such equipment
above the elevation of the building where the equipment is
mounted, or as required by the Construction Code, whichever is
more restrictive.
(3) The equipment shall be located so as to minimize the view of the
same from any street or adjoining property and may be required,
when appropriate, to be screened by materials that are the same or
compatible with the building facade or roof materials, as
determined by the Board or the Site Plan Exemption Committee, as
applicable. [Amended 4-7-2010 by Ord. No. 3242]
(4) The Board or the Site Plan Exemption Committee, as applicable,
may require, when appropriate, that detrimental impacts from
noise, odors, smoke, etc., produced by the equipment be properly
mitigated. [Amended 4-7-2010 by Ord. No. 3242]
Q. Home office uses. [Added 6-9-2004 by Ord. No. 2882]
(1) The purposes of this subsection are to:
(a) Permit, on a limited basis, certain home offices as described in
this subsection. The permitted home offices shall be incidental
to the residential uses of the premises, compatible with
residential uses, and limited in extent, degree and time. The
permitted conduct under this subsection shall not detract from
the residential character and quality of the neighborhood.
(b) Protect residential areas from any adverse impacts associated
with home offices and protect residential property values.
(c) Ensure that the health, safety and welfare of neighbors and
residents are protected and that those rights are not
compromised in any manner whatsoever by the operation of
the particular home office.
(d) Establish performance criteria and standards for home offices
that will provide fair and equitable administration and
enforcement of this subsection.
(2) "Home office" is defined as follows:
HOME OFFICE — Any nonresidential office activity conducted or
engaged in by a person within the residential dwelling occupied as
his or her permanent residence for financial gain or as a volunteer
or otherwise without monetary compensation. A home office is
an accessory use to the primary use of the property, which is
residential.
§ 190-124 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-124
175:752
(3) The following standards shall govern home offices:
(a) The gross floor area devoted to the home office shall not
exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the dwelling, or 500
square feet, whichever is less.
(b) The permitted home office shall be accessed only from the
residential area of the home, and there shall not be a separate
entrance from the home office area to the outside of the home.
(c) The permitted home office shall utilize only typical office
equipment, e.g., telephones, computers, typewriters, fax
machines and copying machines. The permitted home office
shall utilize only typical office supplies necessary to operate
the permitted office equipment.
(d) The operation of the home office shall not be evident from the
exterior of the home. As an example, there shall be no signs,
on-site parking or architectural features that would indicate a
nonresidential use.
(e) The permitted home office shall not be visited by customers or
clients and shall only be visited by persons making routine
deliveries or service calls to service the permitted equipment.
(f) No inventory shall be stored in the residential premises or in
the area dedicated to the home office. "Inventory" is defined as
follows: "personal property intended for sale or delivery to
another party."
(g) No commercial vehicles of any nature shall be parked either
on-site or off site, except for the purpose of making a permitted
delivery or service call.
(h) No signs shall be permitted on the exterior or interior of the
home, which shall advertise or indicate the location of the
home office. The only permitted sign shall be that to identify
the residence as set forth in § 190-122C(1) of the Village Code.
(i) The permitted home office shall not conduct on-site wholesale
or retail sales of any nature, unless conducted via
telecommunications equipment, and not involve the shipment
or delivery of merchandise to or from the location housing the
home office.
(j) The permitted home office shall only be conducted by or
employ or utilize as assistants, whether for gain or not,
residents of the home, and such home shall be their permanent
legal residence.
R. General regulations for inclusionary housing developments. Any
inclusionary development shall be subject to the following
requirements, in addition to the requirements of the zone district within
§ 190-124 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-124
175:753
which the development is located and all other applicable requirements
of this chapter. In case of conflict between the following requirements
and the requirements of this chapter, the following requirements shall
supersede the requirements of this chapter. [Added 5-12-2004 by
Ord. No. 2891; amended 12-12-2007 by Ord. No. 3090; 3-23-2016
by Ord. No. 3493]
(1) Building height in the B-1 and B-2 Zone Districts. The maximum
building height permitted for any inclusionary development in the
B-1 or B-2 District shall be 50 feet.
(2) Floor area ratio in the B-1 and B-2 Zone Districts. The maximum
floor area ratio permitted for any inclusionary development in the
B-1 District shall be 65%, and the maximum floor area ratio
permitted for any inclusionary development in the B-2 District shall
be 60%.
(3) Percentage of affordable units in the B-1 and B-2 Zone Districts.
Twenty percent of the total number of the residential units to be
developed subsequent to May 5, 2004, shall be made affordable to
low- and moderate-income households, in accordance with the
Substantive Rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
(N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.1 et seq.), as may be amended, including but not
necessarily limited to phasing controls [N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(d) and
(e)], inclusionary developments (N.J.A.C. 5:93-7), controls on
affordability (N.J.A.C. 5:93-9) and affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C.
5:93-11), all as may be amended.
(4) Phasing of affordable units. The affordable units in any inclusionary
development shall be built in accordance with the following
schedule:
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed*
Percentage of Market
Housing Units Completed*
0 25%
10 25% + 1 unit
50 50%
75 75%
100 90%
100%
* NOTE: Completed = certificate of occupancy issued
(5) Distribution of affordable units.
(a) With the exception of inclusionary developments constructed
pursuant to the four-percent low-income tax credit regulations
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Service Code Section 42h, at
§ 190-124 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-124
175:754
least half of all affordable units within each inclusionary
development shall be affordable to low-income households.
(b) With the exception of inclusionary developments constructed
pursuant to the four-percent low-income tax credit regulations
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Service Code Section 42h, at
least half of all affordable rental units shall be affordable to
low-income households.
(c) With the exception of inclusionary developments constructed
pursuant to the four-percent low-income tax credit regulations
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Service Code Section 42h, at
least 1/3 of all affordable units in each bedroom distribution
shall be affordable to low-income households.
(6) Bedroom distribution. Inclusionary developments shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands so that:
(a) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is at least
10% and no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are twobedroom
units; and
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are threebedroom
units.
(7) Washers, dryers and heating source.
(a) Each dwelling unit shall either be provided with a clothes
washer and dryer or else the plumbing and electric
connections shall be installed by the developer for the ready
connection of said washers and dryers by the occupants of the
housing units.
(b) Low- and moderate-income units shall utilize the same heating
source as market units within the same development.
(8) Occupancy restrictions. The developer shall agree to not impose
any residency requirements upon prospective renters or
purchasers of any low- or moderate-income housing units. The
developer shall agree to not impose age requirements upon
occupants of low- and moderate-income housing units.
(9) Affirmative marketing. The developer shall prepare and submit an
affirmative marketing plan consistent with Subchapter 11 of the
Substantive Rules of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
(N.J.A.C. 5:93-11), and as provided herein. The affirmative
marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy designed to attract
buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority groups,
regardless of sex, age or number of children, to housing units
which are being marketed by a developer or sponsor of affordable
§ 190-124 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-124
175:755
housing. The plan is a continuing program and covers the period of
deed restriction for affordability controls.
(a) Administration responsibility. The Municipal Housing Liaison
shall have the responsibility of administering the affirmative
marketing plan.
(b) Contents of plan. The affirmative marketing plan shall include
the information required by N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.1(b).
(c) Advertising program details. The advertising program shall be
designed to reach all segments of the eligible population within
the housing region. The plan shall describe the media to be
used in advertising and publicizing the availability of housing,
and shall include the information required by N.J.A.C.
5:93-11.3(b).
(d) Marketing process. The marketing process for available lowand
moderate-income housing units shall begin at least four
months prior to expected occupancy. In implementing the
marketing program, there shall be at least one paid
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the
housing region during the first week of the marketing
program. Such advertisement shall include the information
required by N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.3(c).
(e) Application forms. Applications for low- and moderate-income
housing units shall be available in several convenient locations,
including, at a minimum, the Village Municipal Building, the
Village Public Library, and at the developer's sales office.
Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
(f) Advertising cost responsibility. The cost for advertising lowand
moderate-income housing units shall be the developer's
responsibility, and this responsibility shall be made a condition
of any approval of an inclusionary development by the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment.
(g) Marketing for initial sales and rental. Marketing for the initial
sales and/or rental of low- and moderate-income housing units
shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.4, which
establishes the procedures to be followed in screening
applicants and verifying incomes.
(h) Continuing marketing activities. Marketing activities to ensure
a current pool of income eligible applicants shall continue
following completion of initial occupancy. Such activities shall
be in accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.5.
(i) Monitoring and reporting requirements. The affirmative
marketing activities shall be monitored and evaluation reports
§ 190-124 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-124
175:756
filed with the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6.
(10) Continuing controls on affordability. The developer shall submit a
plan for controls on affordability in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9
to provide assurances that low- and moderate-income housing units
remain affordable over time and that such units are occupied by
low- and moderate-income households. The following provisions
shall apply:
(a) Administration responsibility. The Municipal Housing Liaison
shall have the responsibility of administering the affordability
controls.
(b) Income verification and certification shall follow the
procedures set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1.
(c) The length of affordability controls shall be as set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.2, and shall be for a period of at least 30 years
for new housing units.
(d) All affordable housing units shall be controlled by a deed
restriction and mortgage lien in a form approved by the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, and in accordance with
the rules in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3.
(e) Initial rent and sales prices shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:93-7.4. Thereafter, rent and sales prices shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.
S. Residential decks, patios and related improvements. Decks, patios,
gazebos and similar structures, as well as related improvements,
including but not limited to fireplaces, fire pits, barbecues, hot tubs,
and similar recreational improvements accessory to a residential
dwelling shall be subject to the following requirements: [Added
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) Such improvements shall be located only in the side and/or rear
yards, and shall be prohibited in the front yard.
(2) Such improvements shall be set back from the side and rear lot
lines a distance not less than 10 feet.
T. Residential swimming and wading pools. Swimming and wading pools
defined as "regulated pools" in § 190-3 and which are accessory to a
residential dwelling shall be subject to the following requirements:
[Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591]
(1) Such pools, including any decking or patio adjacent to the pool,
shall be prohibited in the front yard, and shall be located from the
front lot line a distance not less than the minimum front yard depth,
whichever is more restrictive.
§ 190-124 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-124
175:757
§ 190-125. Historic preservation.
The following provisions shall apply to all applications for development
involving property located within an historic district or historic site
designated by this chapter, except as otherwise provided by this chapter:
(2) Such pools, including any decking or patio adjacent to the pool,
shall be set back from the side and rear lot lines a distance not less
than 10 feet. The foregoing requirement shall not apply to portabletype
wading pools.
(3) Fence enclosures for such pools shall comply with the applicable
requirements in § 190-124F and in Chapter 251, Swimming
Pools.142 In case of conflict between the enclosure provisions of
Chapter 251 and the requirements of § 190-124F, the provisions of
Chapter 251 shall apply.
A. Design criteria and guidelines for rehabilitation projects. In regard to
all applications for development and reports on preservation permits
pursuant to this chapter, the Historic Preservation Commission shall be
guided by the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation
and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings (1990), as may
hereafter be amended; provided that where these provisions conflict
with the other provisions of this chapter, said other provisions shall
control. The current version of the Secretary of the Interior's standards
are incorporated herein as follows:
(1) New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property.
The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be
compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural features
to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
(2) New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the
essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
(3) Construction of historic designs that were never built shall not be
undertaken.
(4) New additions, alterations or new construction in a historic
landscape shall be visually differentiated from the old and shall be
compatible with the historic character of the landscape.
(5) Replacement of missing historic plant material or vegetation
features shall be substantiated by documentary or physical
evidence. The replacement plant material or features shall match
the historic appearance, function and, where possible, species or
variety.
142. Editor’s Note: Former Ch. 251, Swimming Pools, was repealed 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591.
§ 190-124 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-125
175:758
(6) A property shall be used for its historic purpose or shall be placed
in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining
characteristics of the property and its environment.
(7) The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of
features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
(8) Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical
development, such as adding conjectural features or historic
features from other properties shall be avoided.
(9) Most properties change over time; those changes that have
acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained
and preserved.
(10) Distinctive materials, features, finishes and construction
techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a
property shall be preserved.
(11) Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement
of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in
design, color, texture and other visual qualities and, where
possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be
substantiated by documentary or physical evidence.
(12) Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface
cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the
gentlest means possible.
(13) Significant archeological resources shall be protected and
preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation
measures shall be undertaken.
B. Criteria and guidelines for new construction/visual compatibility
standards. In regard to all applications for development and reports on
preservation permits pursuant to this chapter, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall be guided by the standards set forth herein in
determining the compatibility of a building, structure or appurtenance
thereof with the buildings and places to which they are visually related,
provided that where these provisions conflict with the other provisions
of this chapter, said other provisions shall control. The following
standards shall be known as "visual compatibility factors."
(1) Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
§ 190-125 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-125
175:759
(2) Proportion of building's front facade. The relationship of the width
of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related.
(3) Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the
width of windows to the height of windows in a building shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(4) Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of solids
to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with the building and places to which it is visually
related.
(5) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall
be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(6) Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship of
entrance and porch projections to the street shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(7) Relationship of materials, texture and color. The relationship of
materials, texture and color of the facade and roof of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
the buildings to which it is visually related. Bright or brilliant colors
shall be used only for accent and shall not substantially depart from
the character of existing neighborhood colors so as to detract from
the overall appearance of the neighborhood.
(8) Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with buildings to which it is visually related.
(9) Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building such as walls,
open-type fencing and evergreen landscape masses shall form
cohesive walls of enclosure along a street, to the extent necessary
to maintain visual compatibility of the building with the buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
(10) Scale of building. The size of a building, the mass of a building in
relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and
balconies shall be visually compatible with the buildings and places
to which it is visually related.
(11) Directional expression of front elevation. A building shall be
visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually
related in its directional character, whether this is vertical
character, horizontal character or nondirectional character.
§ 190-125 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-125
175:760
C. Demolition or relocation. In regard to an application to demolish or
move an historic building, site, place or structure, the following matters
shall be considered:
(1) Its historic, architectural, cultural and aesthetic significance.
(2) Its current and potential use for those purposes currently
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance or for the use proposed.
(3) Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal would be
detrimental to the public interest.
(4) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with great difficulty.
(5) The extent to which its retention would increase property values,
promote business, create new positions, attract tourists, students,
writers, historians, artists and artisans, attract new residents,
encourage study and interest in American history, stimulate
interest and study in architecture and design, educate citizens in
American culture and heritage or make the municipality a more
attractive and desirable place in which to live.
(6) The probable impact of its removal upon the ambiance of the
historic district.
(7) The structural soundness and integrity of the building and the
economic feasibility of restoring or rehabilitating the structure so
as to comply with the requirements of the Uniform Construction
Code of the State of New Jersey.
(8) The compelling reasons for not retaining the structure or
improvement at its present site, the proximity of the proposed new
location and its accessibility to residents of the municipality and
the probability of significant damage to the structure or
improvement as a result of the relocation. In addition, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall consider the compatibility, nature
and character of the current and the proposed surrounding areas
as they relate to the intent and purposes of this chapter and
whether the proposed new location is visually compatible in
accordance with the standards set forth herein.
(9) The compatibility, nature and character of the current and the
proposed surrounding areas as they relate to the intent and
purposes of this chapter in accordance with the standards set forth
herein.
D. Property maintenance. In the event that an historic site or a building or
structure located in the Historic District is not maintained in
accordance with the provisions of the existing Property Maintenance
§ 190-125 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-125
175:761
§ 190-126. Nonconforming uses and structures.
The following provisions shall apply to uses and structures which lawfully
existed prior to the adoption of the zoning regulations, Article X of this
chapter, or any amendment thereof, but which do not presently conform to
this article or amendment thereof:
Ordinance of the Village of Ridgewood, Chapter 223 of the Village
Code, then the property owner shall be responsible pursuant to the
terms of the Property Maintenance Ordinance and the BOCA Existing
Structure Code.
E. Design guidelines for Village Center Historic District. In addition to the
other provisions of this § 190-125, all applications for development
within the Village Center Historic District shall be required to comply
with the design guidelines contained in the report entitled "Design
Guidelines for the Village Center Historic District, Village of
Ridgewood, New Jersey," dated May 2006 and prepared by T. Robins
Brown for the Ridgewood Historic Preservation Commission. [Added
10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 3082]
A. Continuation permitted. Any nonconforming use or structure which
lawfully existed at the time of adoption of this chapter or any
amendment thereto may be continued upon the lot or in the structure
so occupied. Any such nonconforming structure may be restored or
repaired in the event of partial destruction thereof, as provided in
Subsection E below.
B. Subdivisions involving the same. No lot containing a nonconforming use
shall be subdivided so as to reduce the lot area of such lot. No lot
containing a nonconforming structure shall be subdivided so as to
increase the degree or extent of the nonconforming condition.
C. Expansions or alterations. The following provisions shall apply to the
expansion or alteration of nonconforming structures or uses:
(1) Any nonconforming use or structure which is nonconforming
because of use shall not be enlarged, extended or structurally
altered in any manner whatsoever.
(2) No nonconforming structure may be altered if the alteration would
increase the degree or extent of the nonconforming condition or
would create any condition on the property that would not be in
conformance with this chapter.
(3) A nonconforming use or structure changed or altered to a
conforming use or structure may not thereafter be changed back to
a nonconforming use or structure.
(4) A nonconforming use or structure shall not be changed or altered
to diminish the nature, degree or extent of the nonconforming
condition in one location while simultaneously increasing the
§ 190-125 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-126
175:762
nature, degree or extent of the nonconforming condition in another
location on the property.
D. Abandonment of nonconforming uses. Notwithstanding the provisions
of Subsection A above, in the event that there shall be an abandonment
of any nonconforming use, such use shall not be permitted to continue.
For purposes of administering this chapter, a nonconforming use shall
be presumed to be abandoned if such use shall have ceased to operate
for a period of 12 consecutive calendar months, absent a showing by
the property owner and a finding by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
that the use has not been abandoned, notwithstanding the cessation of
operation. Any such hearing on abandonment shall be processed as an
appeal pursuant to § 190-29.
E. Restoration or repairs. Nothing in this section shall prevent restoration
or continuance of a nonconforming building or structure which is
partially destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or of any public enemy
or the like. "Partial destruction" shall be defined as any destruction of
less than 50% of the area or volume, whichever is more restrictive, of
the whole building or structure at the time of the partial destruction. If,
however, any such building or structure shall be destroyed in excess of
50% of the area or volume of the whole building or structure at the time
of such destruction, then after any permitted reconstruction, the same
may be used only in such manner as to conform to all the requirements,
terms and conditions of this chapter.
F. Approved projects. Nothing in this section shall require any change in
plans, construction or designated use of a structure or building for
which a preliminary site plan and/or subdivision has been approved,
provided that the use and/or structure conforms to the terms of the
approved plan, and provided that the period of protection provided by
this chapter from changes in the zoning regulations has not expired.
G. Application for certificate of nonconforming status. The prospective
purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person interested in any
land upon which a nonconforming use or structure exists may apply in
writing for the issuance of a certificate certifying that the use or
structure existed before the adoption of the ordinance which rendered
the use or structure nonconforming. The applicant shall have the
burden of proof. Application pursuant to this subsection may be made to
the Zoning Officer within one year of the adoption of the ordinance
which rendered the use or structure nonconforming or at any time to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Fees as required by this chapter shall
accompany any such application. Denial by the Zoning Officer of such
application shall be appealable to the Zoning Board of Adjustment and
shall be processed as an appeal pursuant to § 190-29.
H. Conversion to conforming use. The conversion of an existing structure
from a nonconforming use to a use permitted in the zone district in
which such structure is located shall be subject to the same regulations
as are new structures, except that notwithstanding the required
§ 190-126 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-126
175:763
§ 190-127. Nonconforming lots.
The following provisions shall apply to any lot which lawfully existed at the
time of the adoption of the zoning regulations or any amendment thereto,
but which presently does not conform to the zoning requirements for lot
area, lot width, lot frontage or lot location:
§ 190-128. Interpretation, appeals and variances.
Interpretations of this article and relief from the decisions of any
administrative officer involving the provisions of this article may be
appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article VI, Appeals,
provided that a developer may file an application for an interpretation
or a variance without prior application to an administrative officer, in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Article VI.
§ 190-128.1. Temporary storage pods. [Added 1-16-2019 by Ord. No.
3695]
parking provisions of § 190-121, conversions may be exempted by the
Planning Board from furnishing such required additional off-street
parking if the applicant can clearly demonstrate to the Planning Board's
satisfaction that the same is a physical impossibility. No such
conversion, however, shall reduce the number of existing parking
spaces or the area of the premises in question available for such use.
I. Nonconforming signs. In addition to the provisions of this section,
nonconforming signs shall be subject to the provisions of § 190-122B(3).
A. Such lots may be used for any use permitted in the district in which it is
located, subject to the following requirements:
(1) At the time of and since the adoption of the zoning regulation
making such lot nonconforming, the owner of the lot shall not have
owned any adjoining property; or the lot must be part of a recorded
subdivision approved by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment; and
(2) All other applicable zoning regulations besides lot area, lot width,
lot frontage or lot location must be complied with.
B. Such lots shall not be subdivided so as to increase the degree or extent
of any nonconforming lot condition or so as to prevent compliance with
this chapter by any reasonable future development on the property.
A. Application. Pods shall comply with the standards established by this
chapter together with all other applicable regulations of the Village.
Where the requirements of any part of this chapter conflict with any
other section of the Village Code, the stricter provisions of this chapter
shall govern.
§ 190-126 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-128.1
175:764
(1) A permit shall be required for the placement of a pod at any site for
any period of time greater than one week. The owner/occupant of a
site must apply to the Village Zoning Officer for a permit to place a
pod on a site. Permit fees are delineated in Chapter 145.
(2) A permit may be issued to allow the placement of a pod on a site for
an initial period of 30 days. A permit may be renewed for no more
than two additional six-month periods upon applications for
renewal by a permit holder, but no longer than 30 days after a valid
certificate of approval or temporary certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Building Department. Permit renewal fees are
delineated in Chapter 145.
(3) A permit for a pod will not be issued to any user found to be in
violation of any provision of the Zoning Ordinance143 until such
time as the violation or violations are corrected.
B. Use provisions. Pods shall be permitted in all residential zones subject
to the following provisions:
(1) No more than one pod may be placed on the applicant's property at
any one time.
(2) Pods shall be placed only on the driveway, allotted parking areas or
on portions of property not located in the right-of-way. No pod shall
be located in any manner that obstructs sidewalks. If the pod
cannot be located in these locations the location must comply with
Subsections B(3) through (5) below.
(3) No pod shall be located within 10 feet of a property line, unless
located on a driveway.
(4) All pods shall be set back minimally 10 feet from principal
buildings.
(5) All pods shall be located in such a manner as to utilize existing
buffers for the purpose of screening pods from adjoining
properties.
(6) Pods shall not be larger than 200 square feet in area.
(7) Pods shall not be higher than 10 feet from grade.
(8) Pods shall only be used by the owner or occupant of the property on
which the pods are placed. Pods shall be used only to store
household items and nonhazardous construction equipment and
materials that are to be utilized on site but shall not be utilized for
any other commercial purpose.
143. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Land Use and Development.
§ 190-128.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-128.1
175:765
(9) Pods shall not be used for the storage of any hazardous substance,
including but not limited to chemical, flammable or explosive
materials. Pods shall also not be used for the storage of trash.
(10) Pods shall not be used for temporary habitation by humans or
animals.
C. Signage.
(1) No additional signage shall be placed on any pod other than
signage containing the name, address and telephone number of the
person or entity engaged in the business of renting the pod or
placing the pod on a user's site.
(2) All signs on pods must be permanently adhered to or painted on the
pod.
D. Electrical service; lighting. There shall be no lighting fixtures attached
to any pod nor shall there be any lighting fixtures utilized to light the
interior of a pod. Additionally, electrical service to the pod shall not be
permitted.
E. Maintenance. All pods shall be maintained in good condition, free from
evidence of deterioration, weathering, discoloration, rust, ripping,
tearing, or other unsightly condition. All pods must be locked when not
being used. Tarps shall be permitted on the roof if properly secured.
F. Violations and penalties.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a pod to remain on a site
which he or she owns, rents, occupies or controls without first
obtaining a permit for said pod.
(2) An applicant who allows a pod to remain on site for longer than
seven days without first obtaining a permit as required by this
chapter shall be notified that he or she has two days to remove the
pod or to obtain a permit for same.
(3) Each day that a pod remains on site shall subject the applicant to
penalties, with each day that the pod remains on the site
considered to be a separate violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
(4) Any person found to have violated a provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a minimum fine of $250 per violation, not to exceed
$2,000.
(5) If any conditions/regulations are violated the Village can revoke the
permit and require its removal immediately.
(6) These regulations shall be enforced by the Village Police
Department, employees of the Building and Engineering
Departments or their designees.
§ 190-128.1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-128.1
175:766
ARTICLE XI
Official Map
§ 190-129. Establishment.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., there is hereby established an Official
Map which is titled "Official Map, Village of Ridgewood, Bergen County,
New Jersey," as amended, now filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
The Official Map shall be deemed conclusive with respect to the location
and width of public areas, whether or not such areas are improved or
unimproved or are in actual physical existence.
§ 190-130. Reservation of public areas.
If the Village Master Plan or Official Map provides for the reservation
of designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or public
areas within the proposed development, the Board may require that such
streets, ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in locations and sizes
suitable to their intended uses before approving the subdivision or site plan.
The following provisions shall apply to the such reservation:
A. The Board may reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways,
basins or areas shown on the plat for a period of one year after the
approval of the final plat or within such further time as may be agreed
to by the developer.
B. Unless during such period or extension thereof the Village shall have
entered into a contract to purchase or institute condemnation
proceedings according to law for the fee or a lesser interest in the land
comprising such streets, ways, basins or areas, the developer shall not
be bound by such reservations shown on the plat and may proceed to
use such land for private use in accordance with applicable
development regulations.
C. The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation of
use. In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been
mutually agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the fair
market value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the period
of reservation. The determination of such fair market value shall
include but not be limited to consideration of the real property taxes
apportioned to the land reserved and prorated for the period of
reservation.
D. The developer shall be compensated for the reasonable increased cost
of legal, engineering or other professional services incurred in
connection with obtaining subdivision approval or site plan approval, as
the case may be, caused by the reservation of areas on the Master Plan
or Official Map.
§ 190-129 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-130
175:767
§ 190-131. Permits for structures to comply with map.
For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the Official Map of the Village
of Ridgewood, no permit shall be issued for any building or structure in any
public area as shown on the Official Map or shown on a plat filed pursuant
to this chapter before adoption of the Official Map.
§ 190-132. Lots to abut street.
No permit for the erection of any building or structure shall be issued unless
the lot abuts a street giving access to such proposed building or structure.
Such street shall have been duly placed on the Official Map or shall be an
existing state, county or Village street or highway or a street shown upon a
plat approved by the Planning Board or a street on a plat duly filed in the
office of the county recording officer prior to the passage of this chapter
or any prior law which required prior approval of plats by the governing
body or other authorized body. Before any such permit shall be issued, such
street shall have been certified to be suitably improved to the satisfaction of
the governing body or such suitable improvement shall have been assured
by means of a performance guaranty in accordance with standards and
specifications for road improvements approved by the governing body, as
adequate in respect to the public health, safety and general welfare of
the special circumstance of the particular street and it shall have been
established that the proposed access conforms with the standards of the
State Highway Access Management Code adopted by the Commissioner of
the Transportation in the case of a state highway, with the standards of any
access management code adopted by the county in the case of a county road
or highway and with the standards of any Village access management code
adopted in the case of a Village street or highway.
§ 190-133. Appeals.
Relief from the decisions of any administrative officer involving the
provisions of this article may be appealed in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Article VI, Appeals, provided that a developer may
file an application for relief without prior application to an administrative
officer, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article VI.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to streets and roads, flood
control basins or public drainageways necessitated by the subdivision
or land development and required for final approval.
§ 190-130 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-133
175:768
ARTICLE XII
Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
§ 190-134. Power to enforce.
A. The Village Council shall enforce this chapter and may require directly
or delegate the authority to require the issuance of specified permits,
certificates or authorizations as a prerequisite to:
(1) The erection, construction, alteration, repair, remodeling,
conversion, removal or destruction of any building or structure;
(2) The use or occupancy of any building, structure or land; and
(3) The subdivision or resubdivision of any land.
B. Pursuant to this provision, there is hereby created the office of the
Zoning Officer of the Village of Ridgewood.
C. Duties of Zoning Officer and Village Engineer. It shall be the duty of the
Zoning Officer to enforce Articles X, XI and XIII of this chapter and of
the Village Engineer and Public Works Director, or their designee, to
enforce Articles VII and IX of this chapter. Pursuant to that duty, such
officials are authorized to investigate any violation or alleged violation
of such articles coming to his/her attention, whether by complaint of
third persons or from their own personal knowledge or observation.
When any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is
used in violation of any provision of Articles VII, IX, X, XI and XIII, it
shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or Village Engineer and Public
Works Director, or their designated representative, as applicable, to
proceed with the enforcement of said article and the penalties provided
for hereunder. Such enforcement may include the issuance of summons
requiring an appearance in Municipal Court. They may also pursue
such other statutory method or methods, heretofore or hereafter
provided, as may be open to them. [Amended 1-17-2007 by Ord. No.
3035]
D. In the enforcement of Articles VII, IX, X, XI and XIII, the Zoning Officer
or Village Engineer and Public Works Director, as applicable, may apply
to the Municipal Court Judge of the Village for a warrant to search and
inspect the properties and premises upon which he/she has reason to
believe any violation of said article has taken or is taking place, and
upon probable cause shown, the Municipal Court Judge may issue such
a warrant, and the information obtained pursuant thereto shall be
admissible as evidence in any court of competent jurisdiction for the
purpose of proving any case brought for violation of this chapter.
[Amended 1-17-2007 by Ord. No. 3035]
§ 190-134 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-135
175:769
§ 190-135. Power to institute action.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of this chapter, the proper local authorities, as contained herein,
or an interested party may institute any appropriate action or proceedings
to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance or use to restrain, correct or abate such
violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
Each and every day such violation continues after the expiration of an
abatement notice or after initial construction, as the case may be, shall be
deemed a separate and distinct violation.
§ 190-136. Violations and penalties.
The owner or user of any building or structure, lot or land or part thereof
where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist and
any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in
connection therewith and who assists in the commission of such violation
shall each be guilty of a separate misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall each be liable for a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
§ 190-135 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-136
175:770
ARTICLE XIII
Growth Share Obligation for Affordable Housing
[Added 6-14-2006 by Ord. No. 3001]
Every development which increases the number of affordable housing
units that must be addressed by the Village of Ridgewood's housing
element and fair share plan is subject to the following:
§ 190-137. Legislative intent.
The legislative intent and recitals set forth in the preamble to Ordinance
No. 3001 (adopting this article) are hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference herein as if set forth herein at length.
§ 190-138. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to the following developments,
subject to the exemptions in § 190-139 below:
A. Residential developments. Any development which results in a net
increase in the number of market-rate dwelling units in the Village of
Ridgewood. For purposes of administering this provision, "net increase"
shall be construed to be an increase in the number of dwelling units
existing on the subject property on January 1, 2004. A dwelling unit that
was under construction on January 1, 2004, but which had not yet
received a final certificate of occupancy, shall not be considered
"existing" on that date for purposes of administering this provision.
B. Nonresidential developments. Any development which results in a net
increase in the gross floor area of any nonresidential building in the
Village of Ridgewood of the following use groups, as defined by the
International Building Code (IBC) [which has been incorporated by
reference into the Uniform Construction Code (UGC)]. For purposes of
administering this provision, "net increase" shall be construed to be an
increase in the amount of gross floor area devoted to nonresidential use
from that existing on the subject property on January 1, 2004.
Nonresidential floor area that was under construction on January 1,
2004, but which had not yet received a final certificate of occupancy,
shall not be considered "existing" on that date for purposes of
administering this provision.
Use
Group Description*
B Office buildings. Places where business transactions of all
kinds occur. Includes banks, corporate offices, government
offices, professional offices, car showrooms and outpatient
clinics.
M Mercantile uses. Buildings used to display and sell
products. Includes retail stores, strip malls, shops and gas
stations.
§ 190-137 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-138
175:771
§ 190-139. Exemptions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 190-138 above, the following
developments shall be exempt from the provisions of this article:
Use
Group Description*
F Factories where people make, process, or assemble
products. Includes automobile manufacturers, electric
power plants, foundries, and incinerators. F use group
includes F1 and F2.
S Storage uses. Includes warehouses, parking garages,
lumberyards, and aircraft hangers. S group includes S1 and
S2.
H High hazard manufacturing, processing, generation and
storage uses. H group includes H1, H2, H3, H4 and H5
groups.
A1 Assembly uses including concert halls and TV studios.
A2 Assembly uses including casinos, nightclubs, restaurants
and taverns.
A3 Assembly uses including libraries, lecture halls, arcades,
galleries, bowling alleys, funeral parlors, gymnasiums and
museums but excluding houses of worship.
A4 Assembly uses including arenas, skating rinks and pools.
E Schools K - 12.
I Institutional uses such as hospitals, nursing homes,
assisted-living facilities and jails. I group includes I1, I2, I3
and I4.
R1 Hotels and motels.
*Note: The descriptions in the above table are not intended to be
exhaustive, and additional uses are or may be included within the use
group; in all cases, the IBC definitions control. The inclusion of any
use in the above table is not to be construed to mean that such use is
permitted in the Village of Ridgewood or in any particular zoning
district; such use shall only be permitted in accordance with the
balance of this chapter or other applicable law.
A. Certain affordable housing developments. Market-rate dwelling units
within developments that provide affordable housing units in
accordance with the housing element of the Village of Ridgewood
Master Plan and the Village of Ridgewood's fair share plan regulations,
in accordance with either the first- or second-round rules of the Council
on Affordable Housing and in accordance with the applicable affordable
housing requirements of the respective zone districts; provided,
however, that such exemption shall only apply to the number of market-
§ 190-138 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-139
175:772
§ 190-140. Developer's obligation.
Prior to or as a condition precedent to the grant of any approval of a
development application by the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment,
and prior to the issuance of any zoning approval by the Zoning Officer
or issuance of any construction permit by the Construction Official, as
applicable, for any development described by § 190-138 and not exempted
by § 190-139, the developer shall be required to comply with the
requirements of this article and to enter into an agreement with the Village
Council, in order to address the affect of the development upon the Village
of Ridgewood's affordable housing obligation, in accordance with the
following requirements:
rate dwelling units in the development that do not exceed a ratio of four
market-rate units for every one affordable unit in the development.
B. Government developments. Developments of federal, state, county and
municipal governments.
C. Developments with prior approvals. Approved developments that are
exempt from changes in zoning regulations for specified time periods
pursuant to provisions of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and developments that have received all
required permits authorizing construction prior to the effective date of
this article, and which are constructed in accordance with said permits.
Developments with permits or other approvals that expire prior to
construction but subsequent to the effective date of this article shall not
be exempt from this article unless such approvals are extended by the
approving authority in accordance with applicable law.
D. Exemption upon appeal. Upon appeal to the Village Council, a
development may be exempted, in full or in part, by the Village Council
from the requirements of this article if the developer proves to the
satisfaction of the Council that no reasonable development of the
property in question is economically feasible unless such full or partial
exemption is granted, and that such economic infeasibility is not due to
action or inaction of the developer, property owner or any predecessor
in title.
E. The Village Council may require the preparation of a pro forma or other
documentation to substantiate the developer's assertion, and the
Village Council may submit such pro forma or other documentation for
review by a third party retained by the Village Council.
A. Residential development.
(1) A net increase (new construction less demolition) of every eight
market-rate dwelling units, or fraction thereof, increases the
affordable housing obligation of the Village of Ridgewood by one
affordable housing unit, or fraction thereof. For purposes of making
this calculation, the demolition permit must have been issued on or
§ 190-139 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-140
175:773
after January 1, 2004; otherwise the net increase is calculated
based upon the new construction only.
(2) For every unit increase, or fraction thereof, in the Village of
Ridgewood's affordable housing obligation resulting from the
development, the developer shall be required to increase the
number of affordable housing units in the Village of Ridgewood by
an equal number, as set forth in Subsection A(3), (4) and (5) below.
(3) For every whole unit of increase in the Village of Ridgewood's
obligation resulting from the residential development, the
developer shall provide one affordable unit on the site or tract
being developed or in another location in the Village of Ridgewood,
in accordance with all applicable zoning regulations. For example,
a nine dwelling-unit development may address this requirement by
marketing one of the nine units as an affordable unit (eight marketrate
units and one affordable unit). Alternatively, if all nine dwelling
units on the site are developed as market-rate units, the developer
shall address an obligation to provide 1.125 affordable units (i.e.,
nine market-rate units divided by eight equals 1.125) by providing
one or more affordable units elsewhere in the municipality.
(4) For every fractional unit of increase of 1/2 unit or more in the
Village of Ridgewood's obligation resulting from the residential
development, the developer shall provide an affordable unit on the
site or tract being developed or at another location in the Village of
Ridgewood, in accordance with the applicable zoning regulations,
if the Village of Ridgewood or another developer is willing to pay
the cost of any resulting fractional unit surplus. The cost shall be
calculated using the same criteria as those used to determine the
value of the payments in § 190-142. If such payment is provided,
the developer shall not be entitled to claim any surplus credit as set
forth in Subsection D below. If neither the Village nor another
developer is willing to make such payment, the developer shall not
be required to provide such affordable unit, but shall have the
option to develop an affordable unit on the site or tract being
developed or at another location in the Village of Ridgewood, in
accordance with the applicable zoning regulations, and to claim a
credit for any resulting fractional unit surplus as set forth in
Subsection C below, and/or pay a fee to the Village of Ridgewood in
accordance with § 190-142.
(5) For every fractional unit of increase less than 1/2 unit in the Village
of Ridgewood's obligation resulting from the residential
development, the developer shall have the option to develop an
affordable unit on the site or tract being developed or at another
location in the Village of Ridgewood, in accordance with the
applicable zoning regulations, and to claim a credit for any
resulting fractional unit surplus as set forth in Subsection C below,
and/or pay a fee to the Village of Ridgewood in accordance with
§ 190-142.
§ 190-140 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-140
175:774
(6) None of the foregoing shall be construed as amending the
permitted or required uses, floor area ratio, density, coverage,
building height, lot area, yard setback, parking or other zoning
regulation that would otherwise apply to the development.
B. Nonresidential development.
(1) A net increase (new construction less demolition) of every 25
estimated jobs, or fraction thereof, shall increase the obligation of
the Village of Ridgewood by one affordable housing unit, or fraction
thereof. The number of estimated jobs shall be based on the gross
floor area in square feet of new buildings or additions to existing
buildings, less the gross floor area of any building to be demolished
on the site, and on the use group of the development, in accordance
with the following table. For purposes of making this calculation,
the demolition permit must have been issued on or after January 1,
2004; otherwise the net increase is calculated based upon the new
construction only.
Use
Group Description
Square Feet of
Gross Floor
Area Generating
Obligation of
One Affordable
Unit
Jobs Per
1,000
Square Feet
B Office buildings. Places where business
transactions of all kinds occur. Includes banks,
corporate offices, government offices,
professional offices, car showrooms and
outpatient clinics.
8,333 3
M Mercantile uses. Buildings used to display and
sell products. Includes retail stores, strip malls,
shops and gas stations.
25,000 1
F Factories where people make, process, or
assemble products. Includes automobile
manufacturers, electric power plants,
foundries, and incinerators. F use group
includes F1 and F2.
12,500 2
S Storage uses. Includes warehouses, parking
garages, lumberyards, and aircraft hangers. S
group includes S1 and S2.
125,000 0.2
H High hazard manufacturing, processing,
generation and storage uses. H group includes
H1, H2, H3, H4 and H5.
25,000 1
A1 Assembly uses including concert halls and TV
studios.
12,500 2
A2 Assembly uses including casinos, nightclubs,
restaurants and taverns.
8,333 3
§ 190-140 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-140
175:775
Use
Group Description
Square Feet of
Gross Floor
Area Generating
Obligation of
One Affordable
Unit
Jobs Per
1,000
Square Feet
A3 Assembly uses including libraries, lecture halls,
arcades, galleries, bowling alleys, funeral
parlors, gymnasiums and museums but
excluding houses of worship.
8,333 3
A4 Assembly uses including arenas, skating rinks
and pools.
8,333 3
A5 Assembly uses including bleachers,
grandstands, amusement park structures and
stadiums
Exclude Exclude
E Schools K - 12. 25,000 1
I Institutional uses such as hospitals, nursing
homes, assisted-living facilities and jails. I
group includes I1, I2, I3 and I4.
12,500 2
R1 Hotels and motels. 31,250 0.8
U Miscellaneous uses. Fences, tanks, barns,
agricultural buildings, sheds, greenhouses, etc.
Exclude Exclude
(2) For every unit increase, or fraction thereof, in the Village of
Ridgewood's affordable housing obligation resulting from the
development, the developer shall be required to increase the
number of affordable housing units in the Village of Ridgewood by
an equal number, as set forth in Subsection B(3) below.
(3) For every unit of increase, or fraction thereof, in the Village of
Ridgewood's affordable housing obligation resulting from the
nonresidential development, the developer shall have the option to
provide an affordable unit at another location in the Village of
Ridgewood, in accordance with the applicable zoning regulations,
and/or pay a fee to the Village of Ridgewood in accordance with
§ 190-142. If a developer provides an affordable unit or units which
is/are in excess of the obligation, the developer shall be entitled to
claim a credit for any surplus as set forth in Subsection D below,
unless the cost of said surplus was paid by the Village of
Ridgewood, in which case no surplus credit may be claimed.
(4) None of the foregoing shall be construed as amending the
permitted or required uses, floor area ratio, density, coverage,
building height, lot area, yard setback, parking or other zoning
regulation that would otherwise apply to the development.
§ 190-140 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-140
175:776
C. Mixed residential-nonresidential development. In the case of
developments involving a mixture of residential and nonresidential
uses, the following shall apply:
(1) The affordable housing obligation generated by the residential
portion of the development shall be addressed in the same manner
as required for residential developments in Subsection A above.
(2) The affordable housing obligation generated by the nonresidential
portion of the development shall be addressed in the same manner
as required for nonresidential developments in Subsection B above;
provided, however, that in addition to the options in Subsection B
the developer shall have the option to address the obligation by
providing affordable units on the same site being developed.
D. Surplus units; credits. As a means of addressing a fractional increase in
the Village of Ridgewood's affordable housing obligation, or for other
reasons, a developer may provide more affordable housing units than
required. In addition, the Village Council may negotiate with a
developer to compensate the developer for the provision of more
affordable housing units than required. The following provisions shall
apply:
(1) Any developer that provides more affordable housing units than
required, or fraction thereof, the cost of which have not been paid
by the Village of Ridgewood, shall be credited with such surplus. If
the Village of Ridgewood or some other entity pays the costs
involved in the creation of surplus units, the Village of Ridgewood
or such entity shall be credited with such surplus.
(2) Credits for surplus units may be applied by the owner of such
credits to a subsequent development by the same developer or may
be sold or otherwise transferred to other developers, who may then
apply such credits to a subsequent development in the Village of
Ridgewood.
(3) The sale or other transfer of such credits shall require the approval
of both parties to the transaction, and a record of such sale or other
transfer shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
(4) The Village Clerk shall maintain a record of the creation of surplus
units, credits for the same, and the owners of such credits; credits
available to interested parties for sale or transfer; and prior sales
or transfers of credits in the Village of Ridgewood. The Clerk shall
make such records available for public inspection upon request.
E. Credits for very low-income units. In accordance with COAH's
substantive rules at N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.22, two units of credit shall be given
for each affordable unit available to households of the general public
earning 30% or less of median income for the housing region within
which the Village of Ridgewood is located, as determined by the Council
on Affordable Housing.
§ 190-140 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-141
175:777
§ 190-141. Requirements for affordable housing units.
All affordable housing units shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter that apply to comparable market-rate housing units of the same
type in the same zone district. In addition, affordable housing units provided
pursuant to this article shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. Units to comply with COAH rules. All affordable units to be created
shall be eligible for credit against the Village of Ridgewood's affordable
housing obligations, and to that end shall comply with all applicable
regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH).
B. Limitation on age-restricted units. No age-restricted affordable units
and/or affordable sales units may be credited in excess of the number of
such units permitted to be credited within the Village of Ridgewood by
COAH's regulations.
C. Rental obligation. In residential or mixed-use developments involving
rental housing, the affordable units to be provided shall also be rental
units.
D. Construction phasing. Affordable housing units, excluding such units to
be funded by a payment pursuant to § 190-142, shall be built in
accordance with the following schedule:
Percentage of
Market-rate Units
Completed
Minimum Percentage of
Low- and Moderate-
Income Units
Completed
25 0
25 + 1 unit 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
E. Heating source. Affordable units shall utilize the same heating source
as market units within the development.
F. Administration. The developer, in cooperation with the Village Council,
shall demonstrate capacity to administer the units in accordance with
the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.
G. Low/moderate-income split. The developer, in cooperation with the
Village Council, shall demonstrate that the units will have a low/
moderate-income split in accordance with the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26. For example, in each affordable
development, at least 50% of the restricted units within each bedroom
distribution shall be low-income units and the remainder may be
moderate-income units. Where an odd number of affordable units are
§ 190-141 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-141
175:778
required to be provided, a majority of the units shall be low-income
units.
H. Rents and sale prices. The developer, in cooperation with the Village
Council, shall demonstrate that the rents or sale prices of affordable
units shall be established in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-7 and with
the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26. For
example:
(1) The maximum rent for affordable units within each affordable
development shall be affordable to households earning no more
than 60% of median income. The average rent for low- and
moderate-income units shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 52% of median income. The developers and/or
municipal sponsors of restricted rental units shall establish at least
one rent for each bedroom type for both low-income and moderateincome
units, provided that at least 10% of all low- and moderateincome
units shall be affordable to households earning no more
than 35% of median income.
(2) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income. Each affordable development
must achieve an affordability average of 55% for restricted
ownership units. In achieving this affordability average, moderateincome
ownership units must be available for at least three
different prices for each bedroom type, and low-income ownership
units must be available for at least two different prices for each
bedroom type, insofar as is possible given the number of affordable
units in the development.
I. Marketing of units. The developer, in cooperation with the Village
Council, shall demonstrate that the units will be affirmatively marketed
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-7 and with the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.
J. Continuing affordability controls. The developer, in cooperation with
the Village Council, shall demonstrate that the units will have the
appropriate controls on affordability in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-7
and with the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.
K. Bedroom distribution. The developer, in cooperation with the Village
Council, shall demonstrate that the units will have the appropriate
bedroom distributions in accordance with the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.
(1) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units is
no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderate-income
units;
§ 190-141 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-141
175:779
§ 190-142. Payments in lieu of developing affordable housing.
Only when permitted by § 190-140A, B and C above, a developer may make
a payment to the Village of Ridgewood in lieu of developing affordable
housing units. The following provisions shall apply to such payments:
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are twobedroom
units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are threebedroom
units; and
(d) The remainder, if any, may be allocated at the discretion of the
developer.
(e) Where there are an insufficient number of affordable units
provided to meet the above bedroom distribution, the first unit
shall be a two-bedroom unit, the second unit shall be a threebedroom
unit and the third unit shall be a one-bedroom unit.
(2) Age-restricted low- and moderate-income units may utilize a
modified bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number of
bedrooms shall equal the number of age-restricted low- and
moderate-income units within the affordable development. The
standard may be met by creating all one-bedroom units or by
creating a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
L. Other requirements. The developer, in cooperation with the Village
Council, shall demonstrate that the units comply with all other
applicable requirements of the substantive rules of the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing, N.J.A.C. 5:94, and the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.
A. Amount of payment. The amount of payments in lieu of constructing
affordable units shall be $200,000 for each unit of affordable housing.
[Amended 10-10-2007 by Ord. No. 3084]
(1) The amount of the payment shall be based upon the cost of the
Village of Ridgewood to create, or to pay another party to create,
the same number, or fraction thereof, of affordable housing units
within the Village of Ridgewood as the increased obligation
resulting from the development, including both sales and rental
unit components of the obligation, using any of the methods
permitted by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH) as set forth in Subsection B below.
(2) Both the initial hard and soft costs necessary to create the unit
shall be included in the calculation, but profit and potential profit
shall be excluded. The Village Council may require the preparation
of a pro forma to confirm that the payment is accurate and based
upon realistic costs within the Village of Ridgewood to create such
affordable units, and the Village Council may submit such pro
§ 190-141 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-142
175:780
forma for review by a third party or parties retained by the Village
Council.
B. Use of payment. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on
site shall only be used to fund eligible affordable housing activities
within the Village of Ridgewood, including but not limited to the
following as described and regulated by COAH's substantive rules at
N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.5, 4.6 and 4.8 through 4.15, provided that the type of
activity or activities to be funded shall be in the Village Council's sole
discretion, and further provided that such activities are eligible for
credit against the Village of Ridgewood's affordable housing obligation,
comply with all applicable requirements of COAH's substantive rules,
and comply with the zoning regulations of the Village of Ridgewood:
(1) New construction with an affordable housing component.
(2) Municipally sponsored and 100% affordable programs.
(3) Alternative living arrangements.
(4) Buy-down program.
(5) Municipally sponsored rental program.
(6) Assisted-living residences.
(7) Affordable housing partnership programs.
(8) Expanded crediting opportunities.
C. Deposit of payment; housing trust fund. Payments in lieu of
constructing affordable units shall be deposited in a separate interestbearing
housing trust fund or deposited in a housing trust fund
established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-6.11(a). The Village of Ridgewood
Clerk shall maintain a record of name and address of entity making the
payment, the amount deposited in the account, plus interest, and the
purpose and amounts of all expenditures from the account. The Clerk
shall make such record available for public inspection upon request.
D. Refund of payment. In the event that a developer makes such a
payment, but then does not proceed to develop the project that resulted
in the affordable housing obligation, the developer may request a
refund of the payment. Such request shall be made in writing to the
Village Council. If requested, the Village Council shall refund such fee,
plus any interest in the account resulting from the payment, less any
administrative expenses required to administer the account. Any refund
issued by the Village Council shall be construed as a failure of the
applicant to satisfy a condition precedent to the development approval
and shall therefore terminate any and all rights to such development.
The developer may reinstate such rights by making a new payment,
with the amount of such payment to be renegotiated as set forth in
§ 190-142A above. The foregoing shall not be construed to extend or
otherwise alter any rights to proceed with the development as
§ 190-142 HOUSING STANDARDS § 190-142
175:781
established by the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, the rules of the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing or other applicable law.144
144. Editor’s Note: Former Art. XIV, Procedures To Request Amendment of Village Master Plan
or Development Regulations, added 7-18-2007 by Ord. No. 3066, which immediately
followed, was repealed 9-7-2016 by Ord. No. 3541.
§ 190-142 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 190-142
175:782
Chapter 194
LIGHTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
§ 194-1. Purpose.
Interior and exterior lighting in residential zones of the Village of
Ridgewood is hereby regulated in order to prevent the same from becoming
a nuisance, contrary to the health, safety and welfare of persons residing in
the residential zones of the Village.
§ 194-2. Nuisance prohibited; shielding of light. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
No artificial source of light shall be constructed or utilized within the
residential districts of the Village of Ridgewood145 as to create a nuisance
across property lot lines. All such exposed sources of light shall be shielded
so that the illumination of any kind therefrom, whether from interior or
exterior sources, shall not exceed one footcandle at any point along any
property lot line in the residential zones of the Village.
Chapter 197
MOBILE TELEPHONE USE
§ 197-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ENGAGE IN A CALL — Talking into or listening on a hand-held mobile
telephone, but shall not include holding a mobile telephone to activate,
deactivate or initiate a function of such telephone.
HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONE — A mobile telephone with which a
user engages in a call using at least one hand.
HANDS-FREE MOBILE TELEPHONE — A mobile telephone that has an
internal feature or function, or that is equipped with an attachment or
addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, by
which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand, whether or
not the use of either hand is necessary to activate, deactivate or initiate a
function of such telephone.
145. Editor's Note: Residential districts are enumerated in Ch. 190, Land Use and
Development.
§ 190-142 LIGHTING § 197-1
194:783
IMMEDIATE PROXIMITY — The distance that permits the operator of a
mobile telephone to hear telecommunications transmitted over such mobile
telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such operator's ear.
MOBILE TELEPHONE — The device used by subscribers and other users of
wireless telephone service to access such service.
USING — Holding a mobile telephone to, or in the immediate proximity of,
the user's ear.
WIRELESS TELEPHONE SERVICE — Two-way real-time voice
telecommunications service that is interconnected to a public switched
telephone network and is provided by a commercial mobile radio service.
§ 197-2. Prohibited uses.
§ 197-3. Exceptions.
Chapter 199
NEWSRACKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 249.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall operate a
motor vehicle upon a public street or highway while using a mobile
telephone to engage in a call while such vehicle is in motion.
B. An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to, or in
the immediate proximity of, his or her ear while such vehicle is in
motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this
section. The presumption established by this subsection is rebuttable
by evidence tending to show that the operator was not engaged in a
call.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as authorizing the
seizure or forfeiture of a mobile telephone, unless otherwise provided
by law.
A. Section 197-2A, B and C of this chapter shall not apply to:
(1) The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purpose of
communicating with any of the following regarding an emergency
situation: an emergency response operator; a hospital, physician's
office or health clinic; an ambulance company or corps; a fire
department, district or company; or a police department.
(2) The operator of an authorized emergency vehicle.
(3) The use of a hands-free mobile telephone.
§ 197-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 197-3
199:784
§ 199-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — The person responsible for placing and maintaining a
newsrack in a public street, as herein defined.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the
United States in accordance with federal statute or regulation and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law.
NEWSRACK — Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit
or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers only.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designated or ordinarily
used for vehicle travel.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the use of pedestrians.
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes
and shall include but not be limited to roadways, parkways, alleys and
sidewalks.
§ 199-2. Permit required. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place,
maintain or operate on any public street, sidewalk or other public place
in the Village of Ridgewood any newsrack without first having obtained a
permit from the Department of Buildings and Inspections specifying the
exact location of such newsrack or newsracks. One permit may be issued to
include any number of newsracks and shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 199-3. Application for permit.
Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the Department of
Buildings and Inspections and approved by the Department of Public Works
upon such form as shall be provided by them and shall contain the name and
address of the applicant and the proposed specific location of said newsrack
or newsracks and shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 199-4. Issuance; term; conditions; fees.
A. Permits may be issued for the installation of a newsrack or newsracks
without prior inspection of the location, but such newsrack or
newsracks and the installation, use or maintenance thereof shall be
conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A
permit fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, is required. The amount of
the fee may be amended by ordinance of the Village Council at any time
§ 197-3 NEWSRACKS § 199-4
199:785
subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. [Amended 7-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 2325; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
B. The permit shall be valid for a period of one year, on a calendar-year
basis, commencing on January 1 and shall be renewable on January 1 of
any subsequent year. The annual fee shall be prorated if the permit is
issued effective subsequent to January 1.
C. No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the applicant
and any other persons, organizations, firms or corporations on whose
behalf the application is made by filing such application do represent,
stipulate, contract and agree that they will jointly and severally defend,
indemnify and hold the Village of Ridgewood harmless against liability
for any and all claims for damage to property or injury to or death of
persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or
the control, maintenance or ownership of the newsracks permitted.
D. Before the Department may issue a newsrack permit to any person, that
person must execute an indemnification agreement substantially as
follows:
"The applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms or
corporations on whose behalf the application is made represent,
stipulate, contract and agree that they do jointly and severally defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the Village of Ridgewood against liability
for any and all claims for damage to property or injury to or death of
persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or
the control, maintenance or ownership of the newsracks permitted."
E. Before the Department may issue a newsrack permit to any person, that
person shall file with the Department of Buildings and Inspections an
insurance policy of a company duly licensed to transact business under
the insurance laws of this state in the sum of $100,000 for one person
and for more than one person $1,000,000, insuring against loss from
liability imposed by law upon the distributor for damages on account of
bodily injury or death suffered, and in the sum of $50,000 against loss
on account of property damage suffered by any person or persons as a
result of an accident occurring by reason of the ownership, control or
maintenance of the newsracks permitted, and no license shall continue
effective unless such insurance in the full and collectible amount of
$100,000 for one person and $1,000,000 for more than one person for
bodily injuries or death and $50,000 for property damages shall remain
in force during the entire term of the license. Such insurance policy
shall provide for the payment of any final judgment recovered by any
person on account of the ownership, maintenance and control of such
newsracks or any fault in respect thereto and shall be for the benefit of
any person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
§ 199-4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 199-5
199:786
§ 199-5. Installation and maintenance standards.
Any newsrack which, in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any public
sidewalk, roadway or street shall comply with the following standards:
A. No newsrack shall exceed 60 inches in height, 24 inches in width or 20
inches in thickness.
B. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than those dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
newspapers sold therein.
C. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in
the event that he is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coinreturn
mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.
D. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the name
and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working
telephone service to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in the
event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism or to give the
notices provided for in this chapter.
E. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so
that:
(1) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
(3) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free
of cracks, dents, blemishes and discolorations.
(4) The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading.
(5) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person or place to maintain any publication
or material in newsracks which exposes to public view any pictorial
material which depicts or appears to depict nudity or offensive sexually
explicit material.
G. Each newsrack shall be maintained to prevent the newspapers from
being scattered about the area.
§ 199-5 NEWSRACKS § 199-6
199:787
§ 199-6. Location and placement.
Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon or on any portion of a
public street or sidewalk or projects onto, into or over any part of a public
street or sidewalk shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
A. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or
over any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests wholly
or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street.
B. No newsracks shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public
street or sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property;
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles;
(3) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
(4) Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals,
hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
C. The newsrack or newsracks shall be placed or otherwise secured so as
to prevent their being blown down or around the public street or
sidewalk but shall not be chained or otherwise secured to any traffic or
street signs, signals, hydrants or mailboxes.
D. No newsracks shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within three feet of a curb.
(3) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
(4) Within five feet of any driveway.
(5) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet.
(6) Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
(7) Within 500 feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the
street in the same block, containing the same issue or edition of the
same publication.
(8) Within 10 feet of any standby or sprinkler connection or related
safety or fire equipment.
§ 199-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 199-6
199:788
§ 199-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the general penalty
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, of the Village Code.
Chapter 201
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 215. Poppers — See Ch. 221A.
§ 201-1. Prohibited acts.
§ 201-2. Train whistles or horns. [Added 12-12-2001 by Ord. No.
2766]
The sounding of any train whistles or horns in the Village of Ridgewood is
prohibited on any day at any time except in the case of an emergency.
Chapter 207
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public assemblies — See Ch. 207A.
Political fund-raising — See Ch. 221.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 249.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 265.
(9) Within five feet of any building, unless written permission is
secured from the property owner and filed with the application.
A. The making, creating or permitting of any unreasonable and
unnecessary loud or disturbing noise in the Village of Ridgewood is
hereby prohibited.
B. The type of noise intended to be prohibited is noise of such character,
intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life, health or welfare of
any individual or which steadily or intermittently annoys, disturbs,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of any
individual.
C. The trier of fact in any prosecution brought under this section shall
apply the standards and principles of common-law nuisance in
determining whether the noise is unreasonable and unnecessary.
§ 199-6 NOISE § 201-2
201:789
§ 207-1. Title.
This chapter shall constitute the Parade Ordinance of the Village of
Ridgewood, to be codified in the Code of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 207-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARADE — Any march, demonstration, procession, motorcade, ceremony,
exhibition or pageant of any kind consisting of persons, animals or vehicles
or a combination therof upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public
grounds within the Village with an intent of attracting public attention
that interferes with or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow
or regulation of traffic upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public
grounds. "Parade" shall include walk-a-thons, bike-a-thons, fun-runs and
similar events or activities.
§ 207-3. Permit required; fee.
No person shall engage in or conduct any parade unless a permit is issued
by the office of the Chief of Police, except that no permit shall be required
for funeral processions; school activities on school property under the
immediate direction and supervision of proper school authorities; activities
of any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; or
parades, athletic events or other special events which occur exclusively on
Village property under the jurisdiction of the Village Department of Parks
and Recreation. Applications shall be filed on forms provided by the office
of the Chief of Police. Applications shall be filed with the office of the Chief
of Police no less than 10 business days but not more than 90 business days
prior to the date of the parade and shall be accompanied by an application
fee of $15. This fee shall be waived if the applicant/sponsoring organization
signs a verified statement that he believes that the purpose of the parade or
special event is First Amendment expression.
§ 207-4. Contents of application.
Applications for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person making the
application for the permit.
B. If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the full legal name of the organization, the address and
telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the
authorized and responsible head of such organization; the business
formation, if any, and the state in which it is registered and the name,
address and telephone number of its registered agent.
§ 201-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 207-4
201:790
§ 207-5. Standards for issuance of permit.
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for in this chapter
unless, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may be otherwise obtained, he finds that:
C. If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any
person or entity other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit
shall provide written authorization from that person or entity for the
applicant to apply for the permit on behalf of the person or entity.
D. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the
parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct.
E. The date when the parade is to be conducted.
F. The route to be traveled, including the starting point and the
termination point.
G. The approximate number of persons who, and animals, vehicles and
other apparatus which, will constitute such parade and the type of
animals and a description of the vehicles and apparatus.
H. The hours when such parade will start and terminate. (The hours of the
parade should include the time of the actual parade, exclusive of any
assembly time prior to the parade.)
I. A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of
the width of the streets proposed to be traversed.
J. Whether street closures are required and, if so, which streets and for
how long.
K. The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade and the
times at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at such areas.
L. The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade.
M. Whether sound amplification equipment will be used and/or live music
will be involved.
N. Whether food will be sold along the parade route and/or at the starting
or termination points.
O. Plans for and time frame of full cleanup and restoration of the parade
route and assembly areas.
P. Such other information as the Chief of Police may deem necessary in
order to properly provide for traffic control, street and property
maintenance and the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
A. There is an outstanding approved permit for another parade or there is
an established contractual obligation or prior historical relationship
with the Village for a scheduled parade, event or occurrence for a time
§ 207-4 NOISE § 207-5
201:791
and place that is so proximate to that applied for as to constitute a
conflict therewith.
B. The conduct of the parade will substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic contiguous to its
route.
C. The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the Village to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the Village.
D. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the assembly
point of the parade will unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such
assembly area.
E. The conduct of such parade will interfere with movement of firefighting
equipment en route to a fire.
F. The parade is not scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.
G. The parade is to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product,
merchandise or event; is being held purely for private profit or
commercial motive; or is for any unlawful purpose.
H. The parade will be held along a route or at a location adjacent to a
school at a time when such school is in session and the noise created by
the parade will substantially disrupt the educational activities of the
school.
I. The parade will be held along a route or at a location where it will
substantially interfere with Village construction or maintenance work
previously scheduled to take place.
J. The information provided in the application is found to be false,
misleading or incomplete in any material detail.
K. The applicant, sponsoring organization or any involved party to the
application has on prior occasions damaged public or private property
and has not paid for such damage or has not fulfilled agreed-upon
obligations to the Village; owes the Village any reimbursement for costs
associated with protecting the public welfare during prior parades or
for cleanup of prior parades; or otherwise has not complied with the
conditions of a previously issued parade permit.
L. The application was not submitted within the time frame outlined above
in § 207-3.
§ 207-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 207-6
201:792
§ 207-6. Approval and denial generally; notice; conflicting
applications.
The Chief of Police shall act upon an application for a parade permit within
three business days after the filing thereof and shall, within such time,
notify the applicant of his action. In the event of a denial of the permit, the
Chief of Police shall give the reasons therefor in writing to the applicant. If
more than one application is received for parade permits on the same date,
the application first received in the Village Clerk's office shall be approved
if it complies with all the requirements of this chapter.
§ 207-7. Appeal from denial.
An appeal from a denial of a permit application may be made to the Village
Manager in writing within three business days of such denial stating the
description of the event, the relief sought and why such relief should
be granted. The Village Manager shall act upon the appeal as soon as
practicable after receiving notice of the appeal. The Village Manager will
base his decision solely on the information contained in the permit
application and the written notice of appeal.
§ 207-8. Indemnification agreement; insurance.
A. Prior to the issuance of a parade permit, the applicant and authorized
officer of the sponsoring organization, if any, shall sign an agreement to
reimburse (i) the Village, for any costs it incurs for repairing damage to
Village property sustained in connection with and proximately caused
by parade activities, for additional costs incurred by the Village for
protecting the public welfare during the parade, and for costs incurred
by the Village for cleanup and restoration of the parade route and
assembly areas not properly cleaned up by applicant/sponsoring
organization after the parade and (ii) Village residents, for any costs
they incur for repairing damage to their private property sustained in
connection with and proximately caused by parade activities. This
agreement shall also provide that the applicant/sponsoring
organization shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend the Village, its
officials, agents and employees against any claims, costs, damages,
demands, liability and notices resulting from any damage or injury
proximately caused by parade activities and the actions of the
permittee/sponsoring organization in connection with the parade.
B. The applicant/sponsoring organization of a parade shall possess or
obtain public liability insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,000
per occurrence and $2,000,000 in the aggregate to protect against loss
from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury
and property damage arising from the parade. Evidence of insurance,
satisfactory to the Chief of Police, must be filed with the Chief of Police
no less than five days before the date of the event; provided, however,
that where good cause is shown in writing by the applicant, the Chief of
Police may waive the filing deadline. This insurance requirement shall
§ 207-6 NOISE § 207-8
201:793
§ 207-9. Duties of permittee.
A permittee under this chapter shall comply with all permit terms and with
all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairman or other person
heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his
person during the conduct of the parade.
§ 207-10. Revocation of permit.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
under this chapter if an applicant/sponsoring organization fails to comply
with the standards for issuance of a permit as herein set forth in § 207-5.
Chapter 207A
PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades — See Ch. 207.
Political fund-raising — See Ch. 221.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 249.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 265.
§ 207A-1. Title.
This chapter shall constitute the Public Assembly Ordinance of the Village
of Ridgewood, to be codified in the Code of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 207A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC ASSEMBLY — An assembly, gathering or meeting of more than 10
persons for a common purpose in a place open to the general public which
is the result of prior planning, which continues for more than 30 minutes
and which does not obstruct vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the Village.
Such gatherings, meetings and assemblies will be accommodated in Village
parks, public plazas or sidewalks adjacent to public roadways.
be waived by the Chief of Police if the applicant/sponsoring
organization signs a verified statement that he believes that the
purpose of the parade or special event is First Amendment expression
and that the cost of insurance is so financially burdensome that it would
constitute an unreasonable burden on the right of First Amendment
expression.
§ 207-8 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 207A-3
201:794
§ 207A-3. Permit required.
No person or organization shall arrange, conduct or organize a public
assembly unless a permit is issued by the office of the Chief of Police.
Applications shall be filed on forms provided by the office of the Chief of
Police. Applications shall be filed with the office of the Chief of Police no less
than five business days prior to the date of the public assembly. There shall
be no charge for the issuance of a permit to conduct a public assembly.
§ 207A-4. Contents of application.
Applications for a public assembly permit shall set forth the following
information:
§ 207A-5. Permit issuance standards.
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for in this chapter
unless, from a consideration of the application and from such other
information as may be otherwise obtained, he finds that:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person or organization
seeking to conduct such assembly (if an organization, name, address
and telephone number of the contact person).
B. The number of individuals expected to participate in the public
assembly.
C. The date, location, time and expected duration of the public assembly.
D. Whether sound amplification equipment will be used and/or live music
will be involved.
E. Any special requirements for security or police protection.
F. Any special requirements for security or police protection.
G. A certification that the public assembly will not obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
A. The information provided in the application is found to be false,
misleading or incomplete in any material detail.
B. The applicant has on prior occasions damaged public or private
property and has not paid for such damage; owes the Village any
reimbursement for costs associated with protecting the public welfare
during a prior public assembly or for costs of cleanup for a prior
assembly; or otherwise has not complied with the conditions of a
previously issued public assembly permit.
C. The public assembly conflicts with previously scheduled or planned
activities at the same location, including but not limited to Village
construction/maintenance, a previously-permitted public assembly or
Village recreational activities.
§ 207A-3 NOISE § 207A-5
201:795
§ 207A-6. Approval and denial generally; notice; conflicting
applications.
The Chief of Police shall act upon an application for a public assembly
permit within two business days after the filing thereof and shall, within
such time, notify the applicant of his action. In the event of a denial of the
permit, the Chief of Police shall give the reasons therefor in writing to the
applicant. If more than one application is received for a public assembly
permit on the same date, the application first received in the Village Clerk's
office shall be granted if it complies with all the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 207A-7. Appeal from denial.
An appeal from a denial of a permit application may be made to the
Village Manager in writing within two business days of such denial stating
the description of the event, the relief sought and why such relief should
be granted. The Village Manager shall act upon the appeal as soon as
practicable after receiving notice of the appeal. The Village Manager shall
base his/her decision solely on the information contained in the permit
application and the written notice of appeal.
§ 207A-8. Indemnification agreement; insurance.
D. The public assembly will be held at a location adjacent to a school at a
time when such school is in session and the noise created by the
assembly will substantially disrupt the educational activities of the
school.
E. The public assembly is scheduled to be held at such time and place as to
be substantially disruptive to the peace and quiet of Village residents.
In such a case, the Village will take all reasonable steps to find an
alternative time and location for the public assembly.
F. The public assembly is prohibited by state statute.
G. The application was not submitted within the time frame outlined above
in § 207-3.
A. Prior to the issuance of a public assembly permit, the applicant and
authorized officer of the sponsoring organization, if any, shall sign an
agreement to reimburse (i) the Village, for any costs it incurs for
repairing damage to Village property sustained in connection with and
proximately caused by the activities of the assembly, for additional costs
incurred by the Village for protecting the public welfare during the
assembly, and for costs incurred by the Village for cleanup and
restoration of the assembly site not properly undertaken by applicant/
sponsoring organization and (ii) Village residents, for any costs they
incur for repairing damage to their private property sustained in
connection with and proximately caused by activities of the assembly.
This agreement shall also provide that the applicant/sponsoring
§ 207A-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 207A-8
201:796
§ 207A-9. Duties of permittee.
A permittee under this chapter shall comply with all permit terms and with
all applicable laws and ordinances. The organizer of the public assembly (or
contact person, if the assembly is sponsored by an organization) shall carry
the assembly permit upon his person during the public assembly.
§ 207A-10. Revocation of permit.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a public assembly
permit issued under this chapter if an applicant/sponsoring organization
fails to comply with the standards for issuance of a permit as herein set
forth in § 207A-5.
Chapter 210
PARK AND RIDE FACILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 258. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 265.
§ 210-1. Authority.
The Mayor and Village Manager are hereby authorized to negotiate and
execute an agreement between the Village of Ridgewood and the New
Jersey Transit Corporation and the New Jersey Department of
organization shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend the Village,
its officials, agents and employees against any claims, costs, damages,
demands, liability and notices resulting from any damage or injury
proximately caused by the public assembly and the actions of the
permittee/sponsoring organization in connection with the public
assembly.
B. The applicant/sponsoring organization of a parade shall possess or
obtain public liability insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,000
per occurrence and $2,000,000 in the aggregate to protect against loss
from liability imposed by law for damages on account of bodily injury
and property damage arising from the parade. Evidence of insurance,
satisfactory to the Chief of Police, must be filed with the Chief of Police
no less than five days before the date of the event; provided, however,
that where good cause is shown in writing by the applicant, the Chief of
Police may waive the filing deadline. This insurance requirement shall
be waived by the Chief of Police if the applicant/sponsoring
organization signs a verified statement that he believes that the
assembly's purpose is First Amendment expression and that the cost of
insurance is so financially burdensome that it would constitute an
unreasonable burden on the right of First Amendment expression.
§ 207A-8 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 210-1
210:797
Transportation for the operation of a park and ride facility on a portion
of Block 4703, Lot 21, on the Tax Assessment Map of the Village of
Ridgewood,146 which premises are more particularly set forth and detailed
on a certain map entitled "Route 17, Section 5T, Jurisdictional Limit Map,
Ridgewood Park and Ride, Village of Ridgewood, County of Bergen, dated
December 1985, and prepared by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation and identified as MP 16.630."
§ 210-2. Operation.
The operation of the park and ride lot shall be under the supervision of the
Village Manager of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 210-3. (Reserved)147
§ 210-4. Towing; removal and storage costs. [Amended 10-10-2001
by Ord. No. 2758]
Any vehicle located within the park and ride facility which is parked in
violation of any state statute or municipal ordinance or any such vehicle
which is disabled to the extent that the operator cannot move it shall
be subject to removal by any police officer of the Village of Ridgewood
by towing. The owner of the vehicle shall pay the reasonable costs of
removal and storage which may result from such removal before reclaiming
possession of the vehicle.148
Chapter 212
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 103.
Animals — See Ch. 105.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Games of chance — See Ch. 161.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 218.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 260.
146. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Village offices.
147. Editor's Note: Former § 210-3, Application for permit; regulations, as amended 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375, was repealed 10-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2758.
148. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Permits, adopted 6-24-1986 by Ord. No. 2033, as amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375, and which immediately followed this section, was repealed
10-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2758.
§ 210-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 210-4
210:798
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 212-1. Unlawful entry.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any portion of lawn or other
cultivated ground in any public park within the Village when forbidden so
to do by an official sign or other official notification.
§ 212-2. Littering.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or leave any paper or
waste material whatsoever in or upon any part of the surface of any public
park within the Village or in or upon any park property or appurtenance
therein except in the receptacles provided in such park for that purpose.
§ 212-3. Booths and wagons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or erect any booth, stand or
other structure or to place any wagon or other vehicle, except such as may
be propelled by hand and adapted for the carrying of children, invalids or
dolls, on or in any public park of the Village without the written permission
of the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 212-4. Sales and advertising.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale within any public
park of the Village any goods, wares or merchandise whatsoever or to
display or distribute any advertising device, circular or card in any such
park.
§ 212-5. Hunting or injuring animals or birds prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, molest, injure, capture or in any
way interfere with the freedom of any bird being free and undomesticated
in any public park in the Village or the freedom of any squirrel, fish or other
animal in any such public park.
§ 212-6. Abusive or profane language; solicitation; games of
chance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to utter any profane, threatening or
abusive language or loud outcry or to perform any obscene or indecent act,
to commit any nuisance, to solicit any contribution or subscription or to play
any game of chance in any public park within the Village or to bring into
such park any instrument of chance or gambling whatsoever.
§ 212-1 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-7
210:799
§ 212-7. Village Manager authorized to promulgate rules and
regulations. [Added 5-27-1975 by Ord. No. 1571; amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
Subject to the approval of the Council, which said approval may be in
the form of subsequent ratification, the Village Manager may adopt and
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with statute
or ordinance, governing the use of Village parks, playgrounds and open
spaces and the conduct of persons therein. Such rules and regulations
shall become effective after publication in a newspaper circulating in the
Village and shall thereafter be posted in a conspicuous place at the park,
playground or open space for which effective and maintained in the office of
the Village Clerk for public inspection between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. prevailing time. Violation of any such rule or regulation shall be
punishable in accordance with Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, of
this Code.
§ 212-7 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 212-7
210:800
ARTICLE II
Graydon Park and Graydon Pool
[Amended 2-22-1977 by Ord. No. 1630; 4-10-1979 by Ord. No. 1709;
11-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1776; 11-12-1990 by Ord. No. 2285]
§ 212-8. Areas incorporated.
A. The Graydon Park area shall include the municipal swimming pool and
all its appurtenances, the grounds surrounding the same, including the
recreational facilities, and the areas adjacent thereto set aside for the
parking of vehicles and bicycles, all as more particularly described
herein as follows:
BEGINNING at a point on the northerly sideline of Linwood Avenue,
said point being 81.50 feet westerly from the westerly sideline of
Northern Parkway, said point also being the southeast corner of Lot
3 in Block 3209 as shown on the 1978 Tax Map of the Village of
Ridgewood, and running thence;
(1) Westerly along the northerly line of Linwood Avenue, a distance of
280 feet more or less to an angle point; thence
(2) Westerly still along the northerly line of Linwood Avenue, a
distance of 498.87 feet to a point of a curve; thence
(3) Along a curve to the right having a radius of 58.90 feet, an arc
distance of 82.77 feet to a point on the easterly line of North Maple
Avenue (51.25 feet wide); thence
(4) North 7 degrees 54 minutes East along the easterly line of North
Maple Avenue a distance of 425.58 feet to a point; thence
(5) North 66 degrees 05 minutes 30 seconds West a distance of 10.05
feet to the easterly line of North Maple Avenue (41.25 feet wide);
thence
(6) North 7 degrees 54 minutes East still along the easterly line of
North Maple Avenue a distance of 45 feet to a point; thence
(7) North 82 degrees 14 minutes East a distance of 70.00 feet to a
point; thence
(8) Along a curve to the right having a radius of 162.16 feet, an arc
distance of 78.43 feet to a point; thence
(9) South 70 degrees 03 minutes 15 seconds East a distance of 171.49
feet to a point; thence
(10) Along a curve to the right having a radius of 277.50 feet, an arc
distance of 49.87 feet to a point; thence
(11) South 59 degrees 45 minutes 30 seconds East a distance of 165.00
feet to a point; thence
§ 212-8 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-8
210:801
§ 212-9. Summer season hours.
Graydon Park, as described in § 212-8, shall be open for summer season
between the dates and during the hours established by regulation and
approved and promulgated by the Village Manager pursuant to the
provisions of § 3-39B and F of the Ridgewood Village Code.
§ 212-10. Use restrictions; season tags. [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
(12) Along a curve to the right having a radius of 274.56 feet, an arc
distance of 209.25 feet to a point on the northerly line of said Lot 3;
thence
(13) South 66 degrees 05 minutes 30 seconds West a distance of 165.06
feet to a point on the westerly line of lands of the Public Service
Electric and Gas Company; thence
(14) Southerly along the westerly line of the PSE&G Co. right-of-way a
distance of 322 feet more or less to the northerly line of Linwood
Avenue and the point and place of beginning.
B. The above description is for the purpose of describing the area known
as "Graydon Park" in the Village of Ridgewood, and includes the
swimming pool and all its appurtenances and the grounds surrounding
the pool, including the buildings, structures and parking area located
thereon.
A. The use of Graydon Park, owing to its limited size and capacity, shall be
and the same hereby is restricted to residents of the Village,
nonresidents of the Village whose primary residence is situated in an
adjoining municipality with a portion of such residential property
situated within the Village, guests of such residents and permitted
adjoining nonresidents, as defined herein, and nonresident employees
of the Village and/or the school district of the Township of Ridgewood
and the immediate families of such nonresident employees. In order to
pay a part of the cost of maintaining the same, the Village Council shall
from time to time by ordinance fix an admission fee for such users, and
the person or persons wishing to use the same shall first obtain from
the Village office a season tag (for a resident, permitted adjoining
nonresident, nonresident employee and the immediate family of such
nonresident employee) or a guest tag for a bona fide guest of a resident
or adjoining nonresident, as herein defined.
B. Graydon Pool. [Added 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2992; amended
4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 3050; 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3073;
5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3119; 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 3121;
5-13-2009 by Ord. No. 3185; 3-24-2010 by Ord. No. 3250;
3-9-2011 by Ord. No. 3281]
§ 212-8 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 212-10
210:802
§ 212-11. Tag required; exhibition.
It shall be unlawful for any persons to use Graydon Park or to enter upon
the ground or the buildings thereof during the aforesaid summer season
without having first obtained the tag above provided for. Such tag shall be
carried and exhibited by the person to whom it is issued at all times while
upon the Graydon Pool property.
§ 212-12. Unauthorized entry.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or use the municipal
swimming pool or the grounds or buildings thereof or the park or to park
any vehicle therein except as authorized from time to time by virtue of
regulations approved and promulgated by the Village Manager in
accordance with this chapter.
(1) Residents from other municipalities are permitted to utilize
Graydon Pool, subject to all of the terms, covenants and restrictions
with reference to the use thereof, which are now in effect or which
may hereinafter be placed in effect.
(2) The permitted use of the Graydon Pool by residents from other
municipalities shall terminate on September 3, 2012.
(3) The fee to be charged to each adult (age 16 or over) for the use of
the pool is as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The fee for children,
ages two to 15, is as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. No charge shall
be made for a child under the age of two years.
§ 212-10 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-12
210:803

ARTICLE III
Frank Kasschau Memorial Shell
[Amended 10-28-1980 by Ord. No. 1772]
§ 212-13. Purpose.
The music shell on Veteran's Field was erected and donated as a gift to the
Village of Ridgewood in memory of Frank Kasschau, a widely recognized
choral conductor, organist and teacher. The music shell is named the "Frank
Kasschau Memorial Shell." The shell is dedicated to and accepted for use by
the citizens of the Village of Ridgewood as a place where summer programs
of fine music and related artistic and cultural endeavors may be presented
to the community in a setting of natural beauty.
§ 212-14. Shell Committee; programs. [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
The shell programs shall be conducted under the auspices and direction
of the Frank Kasschau Memorial Shell Committee. The members of the
Committee shall be appointed by the Village Council to serve at the pleasure
of the Council. The programs shall be conducted in cooperation with the
Department of Parks and Recreation of the Village and shall be scheduled
in cooperation with and consideration of other municipal and school uses
of the Veteran's Field. Subject to final approval thereof by resolution of
the Village Council, the Kasschau Memorial Shell Committee is authorized
to adopt reasonable rules and regulations concerning the use of the shell
consistent with the purposes of dedication as herein set forth. The Village
Council may by ordinance from time to time authorize such fees as are
required to reimburse the Village for costs of maintenance, supervision and
repair of the shell or of the field.149
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Fees.
§ 212-13 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-14
210:805

ARTICLE IV
Citizens Park
§ 212-15. Area; hours of operation. [Amended 2-22-1977 by Ord.
No. 1630]
Citizens Park, known as Lot 22, Block 2403, Tax Map of the Village, shall be
open to the public during the hours established by regulation approved and
promulgated by the Village Manager pursuant to the provisions of § 3-39C
and F of the Ridgewood Village Code.
§ 212-16. Unlawful entry.
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into or be present in such park
except during such times as such park shall be open to the public.
§ 212-15 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-16
210:807

ARTICLE V
Official Map
§ 212-17. Purpose.
The establishment of an official map for public parks and playgrounds of the
Village showing the location and extent of public parks and playgrounds,
whether existing or proposed, is declared to be for the purpose of
conserving and promoting the public health and safety, morals and general
welfare of the Village.
§ 212-18. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
OFFICIAL MAP — The two maps adopted by this article entitled "Official
Map Part I" and "Official Map Detail, Part II," or any subsequent
amendments thereto, showing the location and extent of certain public
parks, whether existing or proposed.
PLAT — The map of any subdivision or subdivisions.
PUBLIC PARK — Any land used or intended to be used for park, recreation,
play area, school park, playground, land conservation or other public uses.
SUBDIVISION — The creation or combination of parcels of lands as defined
and regulated by Chapter 190, Land Use and Development, and shall
include resubdivision.[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
§ 212-19. Adoption of map.
The Official Map of the Village is hereby adopted and is made a part hereof
as if fully set forth herein. It shall be deemed conclusive with respect to the
location and extent of public parks or playgrounds shown thereon, whether
existing or proposed, and whether improved or unimproved. The Official
Map shall not be deemed conclusive with respect to the names, widths or
locations of any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way, and any streets shown on such Official Map are shown
only for the purposes of identifying the location and extent of public parks
and playgrounds shown thereon.
§ 212-20. Reservation of land for future use. [Amended 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375]
Upon the application for approval of a plat, the Village may reserve for
future public use the location and extent of public parks and playgrounds
shown on the Official Map and within the area of such plat for a period
of one year after the approval of the final plat or within such further
time as may be agreed to by the applying party. Unless within such oneyear
period or any extension thereof the Village shall have entered into a
contract to purchase or instituted condemnation proceedings for the park
or playground according to law, such applying party shall not be bound to
§ 212-17 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-20
210:809
observe the reservation of such public parks or playgrounds as set forth on
the Official Map. During such period of one year or any extension thereof,
the applicant for plat approval and his assigns and successors in interest
may use the area so reserved for any purpose other than the location of
buildings or improvements thereon, consistent with Chapter 190, Land Use
and Development, provided that the topography thereof and the trees and
shrubs thereon shall not be changed, altered, destroyed or removed without
the prior consent, in writing, of the Planning Board of the Village, upon
application by the applying party.
§ 212-21. Issuance of building permits. [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
No permit for the erection of any building shall be issued by the Director
of the Department of Building and Inspections of the Village on or for
any land reserved as a public park on the Official Map if such land shall
not be part of a subdivision for a period of one year from the date of
application for such permit. No permit for the erection of any building shall
be issued by the Director of the Department of Building and Inspections
of the Village on or for any land reserved as a public park on the Official
Map if such land shall be part of a subdivision for a period of one year
from the date of approval of a final plat. In either case, the applying party
may agree to an extension of such one-year period. Unless within such oneyear
period or any extension thereof the Village shall have entered into a
contract to purchase or instituted condemnation proceedings for such park
or playground according to law, such applying party shall not be bound to
observe the reservation of such public parks or playgrounds. During such
period of one year or any extension thereof, the applicant for plat approval
and his assigns and successors in interest may use the area so reserved for
any purpose other than the location of buildings or improvements thereon,
consistent with Chapter 190, Land Use and Development, provided that the
topography thereof and the trees and shrubs thereon shall not be changed,
altered, destroyed or removed without the prior consent, in writing, of the
Planning Board of the Village, upon application by the applying party.
§ 212-22. Other powers not limited. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
This article shall not be construed to limit any power otherwise granted
to the Village or to the Board of Adjustment of the Village as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 212-23. Map available for inspection. [Added 6-24-1975 by Ord.
No. 1580]
The Official Map shall be kept on file in the office of the Village Clerk and
made available for inspection during normal business hours.
§ 212-20 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 212-23
210:810
ARTICLE VI
Traffic
[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
§ 212-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively set forth:
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — A pedal bicycle having a helper motor
characterized in that either the maximum piston displacement is less than
50 cubic centimeters or said motor is rated at no more than 1.5 brake
horsepower and said bicycle is capable of a maximum speed of no more than
25 miles per hour on a flat surface.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motorized means of conveyance of persons or
property, including but not limited to those vehicles covered by N.J.S.A.
39:1-1 et seq., go-carts, motorbikes, minibikes, motorscooters, trail bikes
and other similar devices, regardless of the number of wheels thereon.
PUBLIC PLACE — Parks, playgrounds and any open area of public resort
or other lands owned either by the Village of Ridgewood or the Board of
Education of the Township of Ridgewood.
§ 212-25. Vehicles prohibited; exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle or a
motorized bicycle in or upon any public place in the Village and upon
private properties designated subject to this article by the owner
thereof as follows:
Lot Block
1 2906
1 3101
20 3104
13 3201
2 3209
7 3607
29 3612
2 4005
30 4107
31 4107
B. This prohibition shall not apply to the operation of motor vehicles
owned or operated by the Village of Ridgewood, its agents, servants or
employees in the course of Village business and shall further not apply
to any motor vehicle licensed pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
§ 212-24 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-25
210:811
§ 212-26. Public roads excluded from provisions.
It is not intended hereby to establish any regulation or prohibition
pertaining to the operation of motor vehicles or motorized bicycles in
or upon any of the public roads, streets or highways of the Village of
Ridgewood, which said operation is regulated by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
39:1-1 et seq. in or upon any public parking place or driveway used in
connection with any such public place.
§ 212-25 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 212-26
210:812
ARTICLE VII
Rules and Regulations
[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
§ 212-27. Tennis courts.
A. It is determined to be in the public interest to charge and collect fees
for the use of the Village tennis courts in order to partially defray the
cost of establishing and maintaining the same.
B. The Department of Parks and Recreation has, pursuant to the
Administrative Code150, set forth a schedule of such fees to be so
charged, as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
C. No person shall be permitted the use of the Village tennis courts
without a permit tag to be displayed upon request, evidencing payment
of the required fee.
D. The Village Manager and the Superintendent, Division of Recreation,
are hereby directed to provide for a system for application, registration
and collection of said fees and the issuance of permits therefor as
quickly as possible.
E. Parks and Recreation and Board of Education sponsored programs on
the courts take precedence over all other play. [Added 9-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3738]
F. Players should commence play on the hour. At the end of the designated
hour of play, players may continue to play only if there are no players
waiting. A court must be occupied by a minimum of two registered
players. [Added 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3738]
G. Posted playing hours are from 8:00 a.m. to dark. [Added 9-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3738]
H. Courts are to be used for tennis and pickleball only; no other use is
permitted. Roller-skating, skateboarding or bicycle riding on the courts
are prohibited at all times. [Added 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3738]
I. Tennis shoes and sneakers must be worn while on the courts. [Added
9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3738]
J. Pets are prohibited from being on the courts at all times. [Added
9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3738]
K. Smoking, vaping, tobacco products, food and beverage are prohibited
within the playing area. [Added 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3738]
L. Privately instructed lessons are prohibited on municipal tennis courts
at all times. [Added 9-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3738]
150. Editor's Note: See Ch. 3, Administration of Government.
§ 212-27 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-27
210:813
§ 212-28. Golfing. [Amended 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2950]
§ 212-29. Dogs. [Amended 6-14-2017 by Ord. No. 3600; 5-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 3721]
M. All pickleball players must use muted pickleballs at all times. [Added
2-19-2020 by Ord. No. 3777]
A. No person shall hit, drive, putt or chip any golf ball or simulated golf
ball in or upon any public park, playground, athletic field or public open
space under the jurisdiction of the Village of Ridgewood.
B. The Village Manager of the Village of Ridgewood is hereby authorized
to permit putting in certain specifically designated areas of public
space owned or operated by the Village of Ridgewood under rules and
regulations promulgated by the Village Manager and approved by
resolution of the Village Council.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PLAYGROUND — An outdoor area on public property provided for
persons to play in or on, usually children.
PLAYING FIELDS — An outdoor field area or designed area or court on
public property used for team or individual oriented games, events and
recreation.
PLAYSCAPE — An outdoor area on public property with specifically
designed and integrated play equipment, usually for children.
WALKING OR JOGGING PATH — An area, path, track or course that is
set, designated or laid down for walking or jogging.
B. Dogs are hereby prohibited from all public playing fields, playgrounds
and playscapes in the Village, and from the following public park areas
or property: Pleasant Park, Veterans Memorial Park playing fields, open
areas surrounding the walking or jogging path at Veterans Memorial
Park, Citizens Park playing fields, Maple Park, and the open areas
surrounding the Lester Stable. Dogs are also prohibited from all public
tennis courts including those located at: Bellair Road, Glen School,
North Monroe Street, Somerville School and Ridgewood High School,
as well as from both Graydon Park and Graydon Pool.
C. Subject to Subsection B above, as it pertains to public parks with
playing fields, playgrounds or playscapes, dogs shall only be permitted
to be walked on leashes (with a leash no longer than six feet in length)
with an adequate collar at the following parks: Citizens Park, Twinney
Pond Park, Memorial Park at Van Neste Square, Leuning Park, Kings
Pond Park, Veterans Memorial Park walking or jogging path, Irene
Habernickel Family Park paved walking or jogging paths and on the
trails, Schedler Property, Dunham Trail (open space area from Grove
Street to Spring Avenue), Grove Park, Gypsy Pond Park (south of the
§ 212-27 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 212-29
210:814
Lakeview Compost Facility) and North Road Park. Any unidentified
public park areas or property that are not included in Subsection B
above or this Subsection C shall be subject to the regulations pertaining
to playing fields, playgrounds or playscapes in Subsection B above.
§ 212-29 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-29
210:815

ARTICLE VIII
Lester Stable
[Added 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3589]
§ 212-30. Use of Village facilities: Lester Stable.
A. Applications for use:
(1) All application requests for the use of the Lester Stable building or
portion thereof shall be made to the Director of Parks and
Recreation or their designee at least 30 calendar days in advance of
the date(s) requested. Dates requested shall be clearly stated on
the application for use of the Lester Stable form.
(2) The submitted application shall be reviewed by the Parks and
Recreation Department under the conditions and limitations
included below. Approved applications shall provide the following:
(a) A completed Village of Ridgewood Parks and Recreation holdharmless
agreement.
(b) A certificate of liability insurance, from an insurance carrier
acceptable to the Village, with a minimum in the amount of
$2,000,000 aggregate coverage, naming the Village of
Ridgewood as additional insured, may be required for certain
uses of Lester Stable.
(c) The requisite fees in accordance with Chapter 145 of the
Village Code.
B. Classes of usage. The use of the rooms and facilities of Lester Stable
shall be available to local Village of Ridgewood organizations in
accordance with the following order of priority:
(1) Class A: Groups meeting under the sole jurisdiction and direction of
the Parks and Recreation Department, as well as activities of
Department of Parks and Recreation's "recognized groups."
(2) Class B: Official business meetings of Village of Ridgewood
municipal government agencies or departments; Board of
Education, boards and committees.
(3) Class C: Local branches of clubs and groups, both charitable and/or
civic in nature.
(4) Class D: All other groups, organizations or individuals.
C. Fee assignment for classes of use.
(1) Class A: For all organizations falling in priority Class A there shall
be no charge for meeting rooms during normal work hours,
Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
§ 212-30 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-30
210:817
(a) Security charges shall apply for evening hours and weekends
that require staffing.
(2) Class B: For all organizations falling in priority Class B there shall
be no charge for meeting rooms during normal work hours,
Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
(a) Security charges apply for evening hours and weekends that
require staffing.
(3) Class C:
(a) For Class C, the following charge will apply:
[1] Small meeting room (Activity Room, main level).
[2] Conference Room — (Bolger Room, main level).
[3] Large meeting room (Community Room, lower level).
(b) Security charges apply for evening hours and weekends that
require staffing.
(c) When Classes A, B, and C desire a venue for social or
fundraising purposes, rather than regular meetings,
supplemental charges may be applicable.
(4) Class D: Applicants, other than the before-mentioned in Class A, B,
and C, requesting use of the stable facilities or venues for
programs, meeting purposes, social gatherings and/or fundraising
events shall be subjected to the following charges:
(a) Rental fee: for the first two hours and each hour thereafter.
(b) Security fee: for the first two hours and each hour thereafter.
(c) Kitchen and on-site equipment use: a flat fee will apply for use
of the Lester Stable kitchen appliances, tables, chairs,
electronics/technology (i.e., televisions, VHS and DVD players,
projector and screen).
(d) Nonresident use fee: All non-Ridgewood based groups must
pay an additional flat building usage fee.
(e) Large group fees: large groups may require or request the
services of various Village departments for their event. Such
efforts will be identified and charged to the group. Hourly rates
will be the employee's rate times 1.35. Examples of such efforts
include delivery of picnic tables, garbage and recycling
containers/collection, grills, etc.
[1] Large groups (over 50 attending) will also be required to
retain additional Village staff for security at the
established rates.
§ 212-30 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 212-30
210:818
ARTICLE IX
Use of Village Facilities - Village Hall Meeting Rooms
[Added 4-11-2018 by Ord. No. 3640]
§ 212-31. Application; classes; locations; conduct; fees.
A. Applications for use: All application requests for the use of the Village
Hall meeting rooms thereof shall be made to the Director of Parks and
Recreation or their designee at least 30 calendar days in advance of the
date(s) requested. Dates requested shall be clearly stated on the
application for Village Hall meeting rooms form. The submitted
application shall be reviewed by the Parks and Recreation Department
under the conditions and limitations included below. Approved
applications shall provide the following:
(1) A completed Village of Ridgewood Parks and Recreation hold
harmless agreement.
(2) A certificate of liability insurance, from an insurance carrier
acceptable to the Village, with a minimum in the amount of
$2,000,000 aggregate coverage, naming the Village of Ridgewood
as additional insured, may be required for certain uses of the
Village Hall meeting rooms.
(3) The requisite fees in accordance with Chapter 145 of the Village
Code.
(4) Acknowledgement and acceptance of the conditions of the
Ridgewood Community Center Policies and Procedures.
B. Classes of usage. The use of the rooms and facilities of the Village Hall
shall be available to local Village of Ridgewood organizations in
accordance with the following order of priority:
(1) Class A: Official business meetings of Village of Ridgewood
municipal government agencies or departments; Ridgewood Board
of Education, Village Council-appointed boards and committees,
and official professional association meetings.
(2) Class B: Groups meeting under the sole jurisdiction and direction of
the Village of Ridgewood and activities co-sponsored/recognized by
the Village of Ridgewood.
(3) Class C: Village of Ridgewood, Ridgewood Board of Education, and
local branches of clubs and groups, both charitable and/or civic in
nature [Membership in this category must be comprised of a
majority of Ridgewood residents (60%) and the organization must
have a Village of Ridgewood mailing address].
(4) Class D: Village of Ridgewood residents and all other groups or
organizations of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 212-31 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-31
210:819
(5) Class E: Nonresidents.
C. Available locations for use (all on Level 1 Village Hall).
(1) Locations.
(a) Garden Room: Capacity for 12 to 25 seated individuals.
(b) Senior Lounge: Capacity for 25 to 30 people seated at
individual tables, 50 seated in chairs.
(c) Youth Lounge: Capacity for up to 75 people seated at individual
tables; maximum 150 people seated or standing.
(2) In the event Village operations require use of one of these rooms,
the Village Manager shall have the authority to prioritize use.
D. Conduct. The conduct of meetings utilizing Village Hall facilities shall
be respectable and well governed. The following conditions shall apply:
(1) No unpatriotic acts or actions.
(2) No religious acts or actions.
(3) All children under the age of 18 years shall be supervised by the
adults signing the application.
(4) No alcoholic beverages are or will be permitted in the building or
on adjacent Village of Ridgewood property for any meeting or
function.
(5) No smoking is permitted inside or within 25 feet of the outside of
the building.
(6) No gambling or raffles of any type shall be permitted.
(7) A specific additional application and approval is required for
groups to conduct sales or fundraising in support of a particular
activity.
(8) No part of the building, except the space permitted in the approved
application, will be entered or used.
(9) Village Hall must be vacated by 4:30 p.m., if used during the
workday, and 10:00 p.m. if used in the evening. Any group or room
use after the designated closing time must pay additional security
coverage and room rental fees (with a one-hour minimum charge).
E. Fee schedule. The following fees are assessed to cover the cost of
utilities and maintenance for the desired space used. Please make all
checks payable to the Village of Ridgewood. Please be sure to include
setup and cleanup in your time request.
(1) Class A: For all organizations falling into priority Class A:
§ 212-31 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 212-31
210:820
(a) All rooms shall be available for use.
(b) There shall be no room charge. There shall be no security
charge.
(2) Class B: For all organizations falling into priority Class B:
(a) All rooms shall be available for use.
(b) There shall be no room use charge during regular open
business hours, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
(c) No security staff charge will be rendered during normal work
hours, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
(d) If staffing is required, a security charge as set forth in Ch. 145,
Fees, shall apply during weekends, public holidays, as well as
hours after 4:30 p.m. Large groups (over 75 attending) will
also require one additional Village Staff member for security of
the building at the rate as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
(3) Class C: For all organizations falling into priority Class C, the
following charges shall apply (minimum of two hours):
(a) Garden Room: as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
(b) Senior Lounge: as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
(c) Youth Lounge: as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
(d) If staffing is required, a security charge as set forth in Ch. 145,
Fees, shall apply during weekends, public holidays, as well as
hours after 4:30 p.m. Large groups (over 75 attending) will
also require one additional Village Staff member for security of
the building at the rate as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
(4) Class D: For all organizations falling into priority Class D, The
following charges shall apply (minimum of two hours):
(a) All rooms: as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
(b) If staffing is required, a security charge as set forth in Ch. 145,
Fees, shall apply during weekends, public holidays, as well as
hours after 4:30 p.m. Large groups (over 75 attending) will
also require one additional Village Staff member for security of
the building at the rate as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
(5) Class E: For all organizations falling into priority Class E, the
following charges shall apply (minimum of two hours):
(a) All rooms: as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
(b) If staffing is required, a security charge as set forth in Ch. 145,
Fees, shall apply during weekends, public holidays, as well as
hours after 4:30 p.m. Large groups (over 75 attending) will
§ 212-31 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-31
210:821
also require one additional Village Staff member for security of
the building at the rate as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
(6) Amenities fee (specific to Classes C, D, and E): For kitchen use and
use of on-site equipment: A fee as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees, will
apply for the use of the kitchen, tables, chairs, table games,
electronic/technology (i.e., television, projector and screen).
§ 212-31 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 212-31
210:822
ARTICLE X
Skate Park Use Rules and Regulations
[Added 4-11-2018 by Ord. No. 3638]
§ 212-32. Location; hours; conditions of usage; membership badge;
conduct.
The Village of Ridgewood seasonal skate park facility is located adjacent to
the Lester Stable, 259 North Maple Avenue.
A. Hours of operation. The facility will be available to the general public
after the close of the hockey season, from approximately mid-April
through mid-October. Hours of use shall be daily from 9:00 a.m. to
sunset.
B. Conditions of usage:
(1) The skate park facility is limited to use by skateboards and in-line
skates only.
(2) The skate park facility is a skate at your own risk, nonsupervised
facility.
(3) All skaters are to inspect the skating surfaces before use and to
remove all trash, debris, and other objects that may prevent a safe,
smooth riding experience. Any damage is to be reported
immediately to the Village of Ridgewood Director of Parks and
Recreation, Lester Stable, 259 North Maple Avenue, Ridgewood
New Jersey.
(4) Skater protective equipment is required at all times (i.e., helmets,
elbow, wrist, and knee pads and protectors).
(5) The skate park has been designed for beginner to intermediate skill
levels. All users are expected to be courteous to others using the
facility and the nearby park.
(6) Parking for use of the skate park is at the Graydon Pool north
parking lot at the corner of Linwood Avenue and Northern Parkway.
C. Membership badge required.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to use the seasonal skate park
facility or to enter upon its grounds thereof during the
aforedescribed season without having first obtained a photoidentification
membership badge provided for such. The
membership badge shall be carried and exhibited by the person to
whom it is issued at all times while at the seasonal skate park
facility or its grounds and is part of the user accountability for the
facility. The membership badge process includes a hold-harmless
waiver to be executed by the badge holder or parent/guardian if
under 18.
§ 212-32 PARK AND RIDE FACILITY § 212-32
210:823
(2) All organized groups of 10 or more individuals shall first obtain a
group use permit from the Parks and Recreation Department (no
charge). All members of the group shall have membership badges
in their possession.
D. Conduct. The following conduct by users of the seasonal skate park
facility is prohibited. Violations shall result in the removal of the
offending party from the premises.
(1) Possession of food, beverages, alcohol, tobacco or controlled
substances.
(2) Use of the skate park during inclement weather (rain, snow, hail, or
when the facility surfaces are wet).
(3) Use of the skate park during scheduled instructional programs by
Village of Ridgewood Parks and Recreation Department or during
skate park maintenance periods.
(4) It is recommended that all children under the age of 18 years shall
be supervised by an adult or guardian.
(5) No pets allowed.
(6) Use of profane, loud, threatening, or indecent language. No loud
music.
(7) No alcoholic beverages are or will be permitted in the building or
on adjacent Village of Ridgewood property for any meeting or
function.
(8) No smoking within the skate park or the surrounding parklands.
[Amended 6-13-2018 by Ord. No. 3639]
(9) Skate park users shall not park a motor vehicle in the parking lot
for Lester Stable (N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.6).
(10) Use of the skate park without displaying a valid photo-identification
membership badge.
(11) Use in the skate park of bicycles, roller skates, go-peds, scooters,
and/or any other motorized vehicle. [Amended 6-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 3639]
(12) Loitering within 25 feet of the seasonal skate park facility when the
facility is closed.
§ 212-32 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 212-32
210:824
Chapter 215
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 101.
Amusements — See Ch. 103.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 218.
Poppers — See Ch. 221A.
Power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment — See Ch. 222.
Silly string — See Ch. 240.
Skateboards — See Ch. 241.
Smoking — See Ch. 244.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 265.
§ 215-1. Begging.
No person shall go from door to door or place himself in the streets to beg
or gather alms.
§ 215-2. Public places.
As used in §§ 215-3 and 215-4, the term "public place" shall mean any
street, sidewalk, curb, park, playground, place, property or other open area
of public resort owned by the Village or the Board of Education of the
Township of Ridgewood.
§ 215-3. Prohibited conduct.
The following conduct in or about public places shall be prohibited:
A. Cutting, injuring, defacing, removing, disturbing, marking or writing
upon any tree, shrub, building, fence, bench, sign, monument,
memorial or other structure, apparatus or property; lounging, idling,
sitting or lying on any monument or memorial; picking, cutting or
removing any shrub, brush, bush, plant or flower.
B. Selling or displaying or offering to sell goods or wares, except by
special permit as provided by § 215-4.
C. Conducting exhibitions or entertainment, except by special permit as
provided by § 215-4.
D. Uttering of abusive, indecent or profane language.
E. Fighting or other conduct disruptive of the public peace.
F. Betting, gambling and gaming.
G. Consumption of alcoholic beverages or possession of the same in
opened or nonoriginal containers, except in areas designated from time
§ 212-32 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 215-3
215:825
§ 215-4. Issuance of permits for certain activities. [Amended
6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 1934]
The Village Manager is hereby authorized and empowered to issue permits
for activities enumerated in § 215-3 requiring the same and not otherwise
violating any ordinance, rule or regulation of the Village upon his
determination that the public health, safety and general welfare will not
be endangered thereby. Written application for permits must be made in
duplicate to the Village Clerk at least seven days in advance of the
occurrence of the proposed activity.
§ 215-5. Hunting prohibited.
No person shall engage in hunting within the limits of the Village.151
§ 215-6. Obstructing streets.
No person shall obstruct or interfere with any person lawfully being in or
upon any street.
§ 215-7. (Reserved)152
§ 215-8. Distribution of advertising matter.
No person shall distribute or cause to be distributed within the Village,
except through the United States Mail, to any person upon any public
highway or place or to any house, place or vehicle any commercial
advertising matter or article, unless the same has been previously ordered
by the person in possession of the house, place or vehicle to which the
same shall be distributed; provided however, that this section shall not
prohibit the distribution of announcements or advertising accompanying
the delivery of goods purchased, but this exception is not to include
advertising matter accompanying or enclosed with newspapers, magazines
or periodicals ordered.
to time by the Village Manager and with the written approval of the
Village Manager as provided by § 215-4. [Amended 5-27-1975 by
Ord. No. 1570; 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 1934]
H. Littering.
I. Interference with or failure to obey any police officer or parks or
playgrounds personnel in the proper performance of their duties.
151. Editor's Note: Former Sections 21-6 through 21-9, which immediately followed this
section, regarding loitering, were deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
152. Editor's Note: Former § 215-7, Sunday activities, amended 3-27-1973 by Ord. No. 1476,
was repealed 11-9-1993 by Ord. No. 2432.
§ 215-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 215-8
215:826
Chapter 218
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and special sales — See Ch. 107.
Businesses and occupations — See Ch. 117.
Farmers' market — See Ch. 141.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Garage sales — See Ch. 163.
Sidewalks sales — See Ch. 239.
§ 218-1. Legislative purpose.
Two of the purposes of this chapter which regulates and restricts
solicitation by charitable and noncharitable organizations within the Village
of Ridgewood are to protect homeowner privacy and to prevent crime within
the Village. The registration requirements of this chapter serve the purpose
of providing the public with information relative to the solicitation, and the
identification requirements protect the residents of the Village from being
confronted with unidentified and possible criminally minded persons at the
doors of their residences. Whereas the Village's interest in crime prevention
increases at night when serious crimes occur more frequently, this chapter's
limitation on the hours of solicitation of Village residents on their residential
property is intended to further the Village's interest in crime prevention. It
is the judgment of the Village Council that the daylight ordinance advances
the Village's crime prevention interest by reducing the number of people on
the streets after dark.
§ 218-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Any person traveling from house to house
or from street to street taking or attempting to take orders for the sale
of goods, wares or merchandise, subscriptions or personal property of
any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished
or performed in the future, whether or not the individual has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of such or whether he is collecting advance
payment on such sales or not; any person engaged in soliciting information
and going from house to house or from street to street for the purpose of
conducting a poll, survey or similar activity for any purpose; any person
conducting a solicitation, as defined herein, or requesting contributions of
any kind and going from house to house or from street to street on the
public streets.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS — Any person which is or holds itself out
to be organized or operated for any charitable purpose.
§ 215-8 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 218-2
218:827
CHARITABLE PURPOSE — Any benevolent, humane, philanthropic,
religious, patriotic, eleemosynary or other nonprofit purpose, including the
purposes of influencing legislation or influencing the actions of any public
official or instigating, prosecuting or intervening in litigation. The term
"charitable purpose" shall not be construed to include the direct benefit of
the individual making the solicitation.
CONTRIBUTION — The promise, payment or grant of any money or
property of any kind or value or the pledge of a future donation.
INDIVIDUAL — Only a natural person.
PEDDLER — Any person traveling from house to house or from street to
street carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares and merchandise,
offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales of food by traveling
from house to house or who shall sell or offer the same for sale from a
wagon, automotive vehicle, motor truck, railroad car or other vehicle or
conveyance, and further provided that one who solicits orders and, as a
separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers a part of his scheme or
design to evade the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a "peddler,"
subject to the provisions of this chapter. The word "peddler" shall often
include the words "hawker" and "huckster."
PERSON — Any individual, organization, trust, foundation, association,
partnership, corporation, society or other group or combination acting as a
unit.
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — The request, directly or indirectly, for the
donation of money, property, any thing of value or financial assistance of
any kind, and shall include the selling or offering for sale of any property,
real or personal, tangible or intangible, whether of value or not, including
but not limited to goods, books, tags, service emblems, tickets, publications
or subscriptions to publications or brochures, and conducted from house
to house or on the public streets. A "solicitation" is complete when the
solicitation is communicated to any individual then located within the
corporate limits of the Village.
§ 218-3. Unlawful solicitation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through an agent or
employee, or for a peddler, solicitor or canvasser to ply or conduct his
trade or solicitation within the Village of Ridgewood without having
first obtained a certificate of registration from the Village Clerk, as
hereinafter provided. [Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3075]
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or as the agent or
employee of a person, or for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to ply or
conduct his trade or solicitation within the Village unless his principal
or employer has received a certificate of registration, as hereinafter
provided. [Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3075]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person or for any peddler, solicitor or
canvasser to ply or conduct his trade or solicitation within the Village
§ 218-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 218-3
218:828
§ 218-4. Registration required.
without visibly displaying an identification card issued to that person
by the Village Clerk, as hereinafter provided. [Amended 8-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 3075]
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to alter an identification card issued
by the Village Clerk.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person or for any peddler, solicitor or
canvasser to solicit while displaying an identification card issued by the
Village Clerk in the name of another. [Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No.
3075]
F. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to ply or
conduct his trade or to solicit between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. on any day. [Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3075]
G. It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through an agent or
employee, or for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to ply or conduct his
trade or to solicit within the Village of Ridgewood after expiration of
any certificate of registration. [Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No.
3075]
H. It shall be unlawful for any person registering, or the agents or
employees thereof, or for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to ply or
conduct his trade or solicit outside the scope of the purposes set forth in
the registration statement upon which the certificate of registration
was issued. [Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3075]
I. It shall be unlawful for any person who shall solicit or for any peddler,
solicitor or canvasser to ply or conduct his trade or solicit within the
Village to represent that the issuance of the certificate of registration or
an identification card by the Village constitutes an endorsement or
approval of the purposes of such solicitation by the Village or any officer
or employee thereof.
J. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in solicitation or for any
peddler, solicitor or canvasser to knock at the door or ring the doorbell
of any home, apartment or any other dwelling unit in the Village upon
which is clearly displayed at the entrance a notice which reads "No
Solicitors" or which otherwise clearly purports to prohibit solicitation
on the premises, unless such person is or has been invited upon the
premises by the occupant thereof.
K. It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or for any peddler or canvasser to
fail or refuse to depart from any premises upon being requested, either
orally or in writing, to leave the premises by any owner or occupant
thereof.
A. All persons, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or by law,
desiring to solicit for charitable or other purposes or to peddle, solicit
§ 218-3 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 218-4
218:829
or canvas within the Village shall file with the Police Department prior
to any such solicitation a registration statement on forms provided by
the Police Department containing the following information:
(1) The name of the person registering and desiring to solicit or to
peddle, solicit or otherwise canvass.
(2) Whether the person registering is a natural person, partnership,
corporation or association and:
(a) If a natural person, the business and residence address and
telephone number must be given.
(b) If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal
business address and telephone number of each partner must
be given.
(c) If a corporation, the person registering must state whether it is
organized under the laws of New Jersey or is a foreign
corporation and must state the mailing address, the business
location, the telephone number, the name of the individual in
charge of the local office of such corporation and the names of
all officers and directors or holders of 10% or more of the stock
of or interest in said corporation or trustees of said corporation
and, if a foreign corporation, the place of incorporation.
(d) If an association, the registration statement shall show the
association's principal business address and telephone
number, if any, and shall show the names and principal
business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of all
members of the association unless they exceed 10 in number,
in which case the application shall so state and the person
registering may alternatively list the names and principal
business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of the
officers and directors who are trustees of the association. If the
association is part of a multistate organization or association,
the mailing address and business location of its central office
shall be given in addition to the mailing address and business
location of its local office.
(3) The name, address, date of birth, social security number, personal
photograph(s) and complete driver's license information of the
person or persons who shall be conducting the solicitation or
otherwise peddling, soliciting or canvassing. [Amended 8-8-2007
by Ord. No. 3075]
(4) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold or services to be performed for which funds are to be solicited
and an explanation of the intended use of the funds toward that
purpose. [Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3075]
§ 218-4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 218-4
218:830
§ 218-5. Procedure upon filing registration statement.
The Department of Police shall review the registration statement to
determine its compliance with the terms of this chapter. Such review shall
be completed in a prompt manner. Thereafter, the registration statement
endorsed by the Police Department shall be forwarded to the Village Clerk
who is directed, upon payment of the prescribed fee or in the event of
an applicant who is not required to pay a fee, to either issue a certificate
of registration within 48 hours after receipt of the same or to notify the
(5) The names, mailing addresses, telephone numbers, social security
numbers and drivers' license information of all individuals who will
be in direct charge or control of the solicitation or of the peddling,
soliciting or canvassing but who otherwise will not take active part
in going from door to door or from street to street.
(6) The time period within which the solicitation or the peddling,
soliciting or canvassing is to be conducted, giving the date of the
commencement and termination of the effort.
(7) If a vehicle or vehicles are to be used in the solicitation, a
description of the same, including year, make and model, together
with a license plate number, registration certificate information
and liability insurance information or other satisfactory means of
identification. [Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3075]
(8) The names of any other municipalities in which the person
registering has solicited or otherwise peddled, solicited or
canvassed within the previous 12 months. [Amended 8-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 3075]
(9) A statement to the effect that if a certificate of registration is
granted, such certificate will not be used as, or represented to be,
an endorsement by the Village or any of its officers or employees.
(10) The names of any officer, director, trustee, partner, stockholder,
peddler, solicitor or canvasser who has been convicted of a felony
or a misdemeanor or found liable in a civil action involving any
solicitation or transaction or enterprise found to be fraudulent
within the past 10 years, the nature of the offense or liability, the
state where the conviction or judgment occurred and the year of
such conviction or judgment.
(11) An explanation of the reasons, if the person registering is unable to
provide any of the foregoing information, why such information is
not available.
B. The registration statement must be signed by the applicant, if the
person registering is an individual; if the person registering is a
partnership, by a partner in charge; if the person registering is a
corporation or association, by an officer authorized to execute such
certificate of registration.
§ 218-4 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 218-5
218:831
person registering that the registration statement does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter and to specifically point out the information
that has not been furnished and that is required before a certificate of
registration can be issued. The Village Clerk shall attend to this function
within 48 hours after receipt of the registration statement. In the event that
the applicant is aggrieved by the failure to issue a certificate of registration,
the applicant shall have the right, within five days of denial by the Village
Clerk, to appeal the denial to the Village Manager. The Village Manager
shall conduct an informal hearing and issue a determination within five
days of the filing of an appeal to the Village Manager. In the event that
the applicant is aggrieved by the determination of the Village Manager, the
applicant shall be entitled to apply for summary relief in the Superior Court
of New Jersey, and the Village consents to summary jurisdiction of the issues
involved.
§ 218-6. Fees. [Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 3075]
The license fee to defray the cost to the Village of processing, verifying and
supervising the application information shall be as set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees.
§ 218-7. Exemptions from registration.
The following persons are exempt from the registration requirement of this
chapter:
A. Any person whose activities are regulated exclusively by the state.
B. Any person selling subscriptions for the delivery of newspapers to the
door of a residence or business on a regular daily or weekly schedule.
C. Anything otherwise contained in this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, any person may travel from house to house, or from
street to street, solely for the purpose of communicating information or
seeking views or polling for noncommercial purposes, for example,
political or charitable or religious conversation, without the
requirement of registering hereunder. This chapter shall not be utilized
to regulate the free exchange of ideas of a political or religious or
charitable nature, unless the free exchange of ideas is accompanied by
an attempt to sell or to solicit, as is defined in § 218-2, Definitions, of
this chapter.
D. Any persons desiring to solicit, peddle or canvass within the Village for
charitable or other nonprofit purposes and religious and political
organizations shall be exempt from satisfying the requirements of this
chapter. Persons desiring to solicit, peddle or canvass for charitable or
nonprofit purposes shall notify the Village Clerk's office of such intent
or desire in person prior to any such solicitation, peddling or
canvassing and provide proof of charitable or nonprofit purpose and, in
the case of a charitable organization, proof of the qualifications as such
§ 218-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 218-7
218:832
§ 218-8. Identification cards.
§ 218-9. Expiration and revocation.
Chapter 221
POLITICAL FUND-RAISING
under the Internal Revenue Code. [Added 8-8-2007 by Ord. No.
3075]
A. The Village Clerk shall prescribe the form for identification cards.
However, each such identification card shall bear the name of the
person registering, the registration number, the name of the person or
agent and the expiration date of the certificate of registration and shall
have printed prominently thereon in red: "This identification card is not
an endorsement by the Village of Ridgewood or its officers and
employees."
B. The person registering shall provide by a separate list the names,
addresses, dates of birth and social security numbers and drivers'
license information of all agents or employees for whom identification
cards are desired. The Village Clerk shall issue cards on forms provided
by the Village Clerk.
C. The identification card shall be worn at all times on an outer garment,
in order that it may provide a ready means of identification.
A. Every certificate of registration and identification card issued by the
Village Clerk shall be issued on a calendar-year basis and shall
terminate on December 31 in the year in which it was issued. The fees
shall not be prorated over the calendar year.
B. The Village Clerk shall have the power to recommend the revocation of
any certificate of registration and identification card that may have
been granted as herein provided. Such recommendation of revocation
shall be addressed to the Village Manager who, upon receipt of such
recommendation of revocation, shall order the immediate temporary
revocation of the certificate of registration and shall notify the
certificate holder to show cause, if any, upon a date certain not less than
three days from the date of such notice why said permit should not be
permanently revoked; all solicitations under such permit shall be
suspended from the date of service of the notice until final disposition of
the case. A misrepresentation of or making untrue statements with
regard to solicitations or the purpose thereof in the application or a
finding that the solicitation has been conducted or is being conducted in
violation of this chapter or contrary to law shall be grounds for the
Village Clerk's recommendation for revocation of such permit.
§ 218-7 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 221-1
221:833
§ 221-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANDIDATE — Any individual seeking election to a public office of the
federal, state, county or municipal government, school district or political
organization.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL, EMPLOYEE AND APPOINTEE — Any person
holding elective municipal office or holding an appointed position in the
municipal government, or in any agency, commission, board or office
thereof, whether the position is full-time or part-time, compensated or
uncompensated; and any employee of municipal government or of any
agency, commission, board or office thereof, whether the position is fulltime
or part-time.
MUNICIPALITY — This municipality and any officer, department, board,
commission or agency thereof.
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION — Includes all loans and transfers of money
or other thing of value to or by any candidate, elected official or political
organization and all pledges or other commitments or assumptions of
liability to make any such transfer. Contributions shall be deemed to have
been made upon the date when such commitment is made or liability
assumed.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION — Any two or more persons acting jointly, or
any corporation, partnership or any other incorporated or unincorporated
association which is organized to, or does, aid or promote the nomination,
election or defeat of any candidate or candidates for federal, state, county,
municipal or school board office. Political organization includes, but is not
limited to, organizations otherwise defined as "political committee," "joint
candidates committee," "legislative leadership committee," and "continuing
political committee," "political party committee" and "candidate
committee."
PROPERTY OF THE MUNICIPALITY — The term "public property" means
all real and personal property owned, leased or controlled by the Village,
including but not limited to buildings, structures, vehicles, phones, fax
machines, computers, stationery, including municipal letterhead, postage
or other office equipment or supplies and other real or personal property
owned, leased or controlled by the municipality, except for public roads and
open park land.
SOLICIT — To seek by oral or written communication a contribution as same
is defined herein.
§ 221-2. General regulations.
A. Prohibition against soliciting or accepting political contributions on
public property.
§ 221-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 221-2
221:834
Chapter 221A
POPPERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 201. Silly string — See Ch. 240.
(1) No municipal official, employee or appointee may solicit, commit to
pay or receive payment of or a commitment to pay any contribution
for any candidate, elected official or political organization while in
or on public property or utilizing public property. This section shall
include solicitation or acceptance of political contributions made
over the telephone or by use of a computer, including private
telephones and computers, if the person soliciting or accepting the
political contribution or using the telephone or computer for
purposes of soliciting or accepting the political contribution is in or
on any public property.
B. Prohibited forms of fund-raising.
(1) Prohibited forms of fund-raising by municipal officials, employees
or appointees shall include, but are not limited to:
(a) Soliciting or accepting contributions using municipal
telephones, fax machines or computers.
(b) Soliciting or accepting contributions using personal telephones
while on the property of the municipality.
(c) Soliciting or accepting contributions through the use of
publicly owned computers or privately owned personal
computers while on the property of the municipality.
(d) Using municipal letterhead to solicit or accept contributions.
(e) Sending correspondence from municipal buildings or by use of
municipal services, equipment or postage.
(f) Face-to-face soliciting of an individual or an owner or
representative of a business entity while on the property of the
municipality.
(g) Use of automobiles owned or leased by the municipality to
accept or solicit contributions.
C. This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the use of public
property by organizations, including political organizations, for
meetings.
§ 221-2 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 221A-1
221:835
§ 221A-1. Discharge in public prohibited.
No person, including any individual or entity, shall discharge or permit
the discharge of a product called "Poppers" in or along the public streets,
sidewalks, parks, or public places in the Village of Ridgewood at any time.
§ 221A-2. Restrictions on sales.
No person, including any individual or entity, shall sell a product called
"Poppers" in or along the public streets, sidewalks, parks, public places, or
from any business conducted in the Village of Ridgewood, from May 15 to
July 15, both inclusive, and in December of any year.
§ 221A-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK — Any area in the Village of Ridgewood dedicated as a public park or
used for park, recreation, or conservation purposes.
POPPERS — Includes the product name "Pop Pop Snapper" or "Fun Snaps"
or any product, including the aforementioned, which consists of a ball of
gunpowder rolled up in paper intended to be utilized as a toy firework that
when thrown or dropped onto hard surfaces or otherwise detonated causes
a "pop" or "snap" noise.
PUBLIC PLACES — Any place owned, leased, or utilized for the benefit of
the public by or on behalf of the Village of Ridgewood, or any governmental
agency.
SIDEWALK — The area within the public right-of-way adjoining streets in
the Village of Ridgewood.
STREETS — Any street laid out and used as a public thoroughfare in the
Village of Ridgewood.
§ 221A-4. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties provided
in § 1-15, Violations and penalties, of the Ridgewood Code.
Chapter 222
POWER TOOLS, LANDSCAPING AND YARD MAINTENANCE
EQUIPMENT
§ 222-1. Commercial use.
A. Commercial use of power tools or landscaping and yard maintenance
equipment and motorized construction equipment is permitted in the
Village of Ridgewood in all residential zones or within 200 feet of a
§ 221A-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 222-1
221:836
§ 222-2. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to power machinery used for ice and snow
removal.
Chapter 222A
PROPERTY, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 223.
§ 222A-1. Purpose, rights and obligations.
The purpose of this chapter is to notify property owners, lienholders and
other interested parties of property within the Village of Ridgewood of the
intent of the Village to adopt the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), its provisions, procedures, authority and lawful
remedies, empowering the Village and its officials to act under the authority
of same. This chapter modifies the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation
Act only for purposes of notification, order and context and preserves all
substantive rights and obligations of the Act.
§ 222A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
residential property line when such use is conducted on a commercial
or industrial property during the following times only:
(1) From Monday to Friday, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.; and
(2) On Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
(3) Such operation is prohibited entirely on Sundays.
(4) Such operation is entirely prohibited on all federal holidays. The
federal holidays are: New Year's Day; Birthday of Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr.; Washington's Birthday; Memorial Day; Independence Day;
Labor Day; Columbus Day; Veterans Day; Thanksgiving Day; and
Christmas Day. [Added 7-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3602]
B. The Village Manager shall have the authority to permit the otherwise
prohibited uses in the case of an emergency and on Sundays pursuant
to rules and regulations promulgated by the Manager and approved by
the Village Council.
§ 222-1 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 222A-2
221:837
PUBLIC OFFICER — Any person designated or appointed by the Village
Manager or Village Council to exercise the powers and authority prescribed
by this chapter.
§ 222A-3. Abandoned property; criteria (N.J.S.A. 55:19-81).
§ 222A-4. Nuisance property; criteria (N.J.S.A. 55:19-82).
A. Except as provided in Section 6 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-83),
any property that has not been legally occupied for a period of six
months and which meets any one of the following additional criteria
may be deemed to be abandoned property upon a determination by the
public officer that:
(1) The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment
of the public officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during
that six-month period;
(2) Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy,
and no construction has taken place for at least six months as of the
date of a determination by the public officer pursuant to this
section;
(3) At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title
54 of the Revised Statutes153 as of the date of a determination by
the public officer pursuant to this section; or
(4) The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the public
officer in accordance with Section 5 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-82).
B. A property which contains both residential and nonresidential space
may be considered abandoned pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq.), so long as two-thirds or more of the total net square
footage of the building was previously legally occupied as residential
space and none of the residential space has been legally occupied for at
least six months at the time of the determination of abandonment by the
public officer and the property meets the criteria of either Subsection
A(1) or (4) of this section.
A. A property may be determined to be a nuisance if:
(1) The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3);
(2) The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases the
risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties;
153. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 54:4-1 et seq.
§ 222A-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 222A-4
221:838
§ 222A-5. Inventory of abandoned property; list to be maintained;
publication in official newspaper; notice to owner of record;
challenge by owner (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55).
(3) The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to potential
health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to take reasonable
and necessary measures to secure the property; or the Village of
Ridgewood has secured the property in order to prevent such
hazards after the owner has failed to do so;
(4) The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut
vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure or grounds has
created potential health and safety hazards and the owner has
failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to remove the
hazards; or
(5) The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare, of
the residents for the area in close proximity to the property, and the
owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to
remedy the conditions.
B. A public officer who determines a property to be a nuisance pursuant to
Subsection A(2) through (5) of this section shall follow the notification
procedures set forth in P.L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq.).
A. The Village Manager may direct the public officer to identify
"abandoned property" for the purpose of establishing an abandoned
property list throughout the Village, or within those parts of the Village
as the Manager may designate. Each parcel so identified shall include
the tax lot and block number, the name of the owner of record, if known,
and the street address of the lot.
B. The public officer may add properties to the abandoned property list at
any time and alternatively may delete or remove properties from the list
at any time when the public officer finds that the property no longer
meets the criteria of an abandoned property.
C. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of
rehabilitation work authorized by the permits. Removal of certain
properties from the abandoned property list may be performed in
accordance with any and all provisions of the Abandoned Properties
Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:1-78 et seq.
D. The public officer shall establish the abandoned property list by
publication in an official newspaper of the Village, which publication
shall constitute public notice, and, within 10 days after publication, the
public officer shall send a notice, by regular and certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the record owner of each and every property
§ 222A-4 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 222A-5
221:839
included on the published list. The publication shall include the name
of the record owner, tax lot and block number and street address. The
public officer, in consultation with the Assessor, shall also send out
notice by regular mail to any known mortgagee, servicing organization,
or property tax processing organization that regularly receives a
duplicate copy of the tax bill for the property. The mailed notice shall
indicate the factual basis for the public officer's determination that the
property is abandoned property, specifying the rules and regulations
promulgated and the information relied upon in making such finding.
The public officer is further required to satisfy all other prescribed
notices and filings pursuant to the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation
Act and entitled to all other remedies and available procedures afforded
by same.
E. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his/her property
on the abandoned property list as authorized above by appealing that
determination to the public officer within 30 days of the owner's receipt
of the certified or regular mailed notice or 40 days from the date upon
which the notice was sent. An owner whose identity was not known to
the public officer shall have 40 days from the date upon which notice
was published or posted, whichever is the later, to challenge the
inclusion of the property on the abandoned property list. For good
cause shown to the public officer, a late challenge shall be accepted by
the public officer. Within 30 days of receipt of a challenge, the public
officer shall schedule a hearing for a redetermination of the inclusion.
Any property included on the list is presumed to have satisfied the
criteria for inclusion, and the burden is on the property owner to submit
the proper paperwork and/or testimony that can demonstrate that the
property was erroneously included on the list. The affidavit or
certification shall be accompanied by supporting documentation, which
may include but not be limited to photographs and repair invoices, bills
and construction contracts. The sole ground for appeal shall be the
property in question is not abandoned property. The public officer shall
promptly, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular
mail notify the property owner of the decision and the reasons therefor.
F. The owner or lienholder may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the public officer pursuant to Subsection E of this section
by instituting, in accordance with the New Jersey Court Rules, a
summary proceeding in the Superior Court, Law Division, sitting in the
county in which the property is located, which action shall be tried de
novo. Such action shall be instituted within 20 days of the date of the
notice of decision mailed by the public officer pursuant to Subsection E
of this section. The sole ground for appeal shall be that the property in
question is not abandoned property as that term is defined in Section 35
of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-54). The failure to institute an action
of appeal on a timely basis shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to
challenging the adverse determination, except that, for good cause
shown, the court may extend.154
§ 222A-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 222A-6
221:840
§ 222A-6. Property deemed not abandoned; criteria; certification of
abandonment provided upon request (N.J.S.A. 55:19-83).
§ 222A-7. Removal of property from list of abandoned properties;
remediation (N.J.S.A. 55:19-57).
A. If an entity other than the Village of Ridgewood has purchased or taken
assignment for the Village of a tax sale certificate on a property that has
not been legally occupied for a period of six months, that property shall
not be placed on the abandoned property list pursuant to Section 36 of
P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) if 1) the owner of the certificate has
continued to pay all Village of Ridgewood taxes and liens on the
property in the tax year when due; and 2) the owner of the certificate
takes action to initiate foreclosure proceedings within six months after
the property is eligible for foreclosure pursuant to either Subdivision a
or b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, as appropriate, and diligently pursues
foreclosure proceedings in a timely fashion thereafter.
B. A property which is used on a seasonal basis shall be deemed to be
abandoned only if the property meets any two of the additional criteria
set forth in Section 4 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-81).
C. A determination that a property is abandoned property under the
provisions of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), shall not
constitute a finding that the use of the property has been abandoned for
purposed of municipal zoning or land use regulation.
D. Upon request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate seeking
to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property pursuant to
Subdivision b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, the public officer or the tax collector
shall, in a timely fashion, provide the requester with a certification that
the property fulfills the definition of abandoned according to the
criteria set forth in Sections 4 and 5 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-81 and 55:19-82).
A. An owner may remove a property from the list of abandoned properties
prior to sale of the tax sale certificate by paying all taxes and Village
liens due, including interest and penalties, and:
(1) By posting cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating all
conditions because of which the property has been determined to
be abandoned pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-55) and depositing cash or a bond to cover the cost of any
environmental cleanup required on the property, evidenced by a
certification by a licensed engineer retained by the owner and
reviewed and approved by the public officer stating that the cash or
bond adequately covers the cost of the cleanup; or
154. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 222A-6 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 222A-7
221:841
Chapter 223
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 125.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 133.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 149.
Garbage, rubbish, refuse and recycling — See
Ch. 165.
Lighting — See Ch. 194.
Power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment — See Ch. 222.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 260.
(2) By demonstrating to the satisfaction of the public officer that the
conditions rendering the property abandoned have been
remediated in full; provided, however, that where the public officer
finds that the owner is actively engaged in remediating the
conditions because of which that property was determined to be
abandoned pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-55), as evidenced by significant rehabilitation activity on the
property, the public officer may grant an extension of time of not
more than 120 days for the owner to complete all work, during
which time no further proceeding will be taken against the owner
or the property.
B. If the owner has posted cash or a bond in order to have a property
removed from the abandoned property list and the conditions because
of which the property was determined to be abandoned have not been
fully remediated within one year of the date of posting the cash or bond,
or, in the case of a property which requires a remediation of any known,
suspected or threatened release of contaminants, if the owner has
failed to enter into a memorandum of agreement with the Department
of Environmental Protection or an administrative consent order,
remediation in conformance with the agreement or order, then the cash
or bond shall be forfeited to the Village, which shall use the cash or
bond and any interest which has accrued thereon for the purpose of
demolishing or rehabilitating the property or performing the
environmental remediation.155 Any funds remaining after the property
has been demolished, rehabilitated or cleaned up shall be returned to
the owner.
155. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 222A-7 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 222A-7
221:842
ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
§ 223-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Existing Structures Code of the Village
of Ridgewood."
§ 223-2. Purpose; applicability.
The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
in all existing structures, either nonresidential or residential. Articles XIII
through XV, excepting § 223-114, and Article XVI, §§ 223-119, 223-120,
Article XXI, §§ 223-140, 223-141 and 223-142 of this code shall not apply to
owner-occupied one-family dwellings.
§ 223-3. Intent.
This code provides for rehabilitation and reuse of existing structures and
fixes the responsibility of owners and occupants of such structures and
provides for the administration and enforcement of penalties hereunder.
§ 223-4. Construal.
This code shall be construed liberally and justly to ensure public health,
safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued use and
maintenance of structures and premises.
§ 223-5. Application of other codes.
Any repairs or alterations to a structure or changes of use therein, which
may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code, shall
be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code.157
§ 223-6. Existing remedies not impaired.
The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies or the jurisdiction of any municipal officers relating to the removal
A. In the event of a conflict between this code, the Uniform Construction
Code and the Uniform Fire Safety Act,156 the Uniform Construction
Code and the Uniform Fire Safety Act shall prevail.
B. This code shall establish minimum maintenance standards for all
structures and premises, for basic equipment and facilities, for light,
ventilation, space heating and sanitation, for space, use and location
and for safe and sanitary maintenance of all structures and premises
now in existence.
156. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
157. Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 223-1 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-6
221:843
or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe
and unsanitary.
§ 223-7. Effect on other provisions.
This code shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or
regulation existing prior to the effective date hereof, and any such violation
shall be continued to be punishable to the full extent of the law under the
provisions of those ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time the
violation was committed.
§ 223-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-7
221:844
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 223-8. Enforcement authority.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Code Official designated by the
Village Manager to enforce the provisions of this code as herein provided.
§ 223-9. Alterations or repairs.
§ 223-10. Approved materials, equipment and devices.
All materials, equipment and devices approved for use by the Code Official
shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
§ 223-11. Modification of provisions.
When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out structural or
mechanical provisions of this code or of any approved rule, the Code Official
may vary or modify such provision upon application of the owner or the
owner's representative, provided that the spirit and intent of the law shall
be observed and public welfare and safety assured.
§ 223-12. Records.
The application for modification and the final decision of the Code Official
shall be in writing and shall be officially recorded in the permanent records
of the Department.
§ 223-13. Alternative materials or methods.
The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the use of any
material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code,
provided that any such alternative has been approved. The Code Official
may approve any such alternative, provided that the Code Official finds
that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the
provisions of this code and that the material, method or work offered is, for
A. Alterations or repairs, other than increasing the height or area of a
structure, may be made to any structure without requiring the existing
structure to comply with all the requirements of the code for new
construction, provided that such new construction conforms to that
required by this code. Alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing
structure to become unsafe or adversely affect the performance of the
building.
B. Alterations or repairs to an existing structure which are nonstructural
and do not adversely affect any structural member or any part of the
structure having a required fire-resistance rating may be made with the
same materials of which the structure is constructed.
§ 223-8 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-13
221:845
the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code
in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
§ 223-14. Research and investigations.
The Code Official shall require that sufficient technical data be submitted
to substantiate the proposed use of any material or assembly, and if it is
determined that the evidence submitted is satisfactory proof of performance
for the use intended, the Code Official may approve its use subject to the
requirements of this code. The costs of all tests, reports and investigations
required under these provisions shall be paid by the applicant.
§ 223-15. Additional information. [Amended 12-13-2000 by Ord. No.
2725]
The Code Official shall use the information contained in the Uniform
Construction Code of the State of New Jersey and regulations adopted
thereunder to assist in the application of the provisions of this code to
existing buildings.
§ 223-13 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-15
221:846
ARTICLE III
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 223-16. Word usage generally.
§ 223-17. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED — As applied to a material, device or method of construction
shall mean approved by the Code Official under the provisions of this code
or approved by other authority designated by law to give approval in the
matter in question.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade.
BUILDING CODE — The building code officially adopted by the Village
Council or such other code as may be officially designated by the Village
Council for the regulation of construction, alteration, addition, repair,
removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings
and structures.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The official designated by law to enforce building,
zoning or similar laws, or a duly authorized representative.
CENTRAL HEATING — The heating system permanently installed and
adjusted so as to provide the distribution of heat to all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments from a source outside of these
rooms.
CODE OFFICIAL — The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
CONDEMN — To adjudge unfit for use or occupancy.
CONDEMNATION — The act of judicially condemning.
A. Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the future;
words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the
singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
B. Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this
article and are defined in the building, plumbing or mechanical codes,
they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
C. Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, they shall have their ordinarily accepted
meanings such as the context may imply.
D. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "multifamily dwelling,"
"premises," "residential building," "rooming house" or "rooming unit"
are used in this code, they shall be construed as though they were
followed by the words "or any part thereof."
§ 223-16 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-17
221:847
DWELLINGS —
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official designated herein or otherwise
charged with the responsibilities of administering this code, or the official's
authorized representative.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — The open space on the premises and
on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rats or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; or by poison spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility
space and similar areas are not considered "habitable space."
HOTEL — See "dwellings."
INFESTATION — The presence within or contiguous to a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET — To permit possession or occupancy of
a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building or structure by a person
who shall be the legal owner or not be the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license or pursuant
to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building arranged or used for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a single-family
unit.
A.
DORMITORY — A space in a building where group sleeping
accommodations are provided for persons not members of the same
family group, in one room or in a series of closely associated rooms.
B.
HOTEL — Any building containing six or more guest rooms intended
or designed to be used or which are used, rented or hired out to be
occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
C.
MULTIFAMILY APARTMENT HOUSE — A building or portion thereof
containing more than two dwelling units and not classified as a one- or
two-family dwelling.
D.
E. ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing one dwelling unit.
F. TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing two dwelling units.
§ 223-17 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-17
221:848
MAINTENANCE — Acts of repair and other acts to prevent a decline in
the condition of grounds, structures and equipment such that the condition
does not fall below the standards established by this code and other
applicable statutes, codes and ordinances.
MOTEL — A hotel, as defined in this code.
MULTIFAMILY (MULTIPLE) DWELLINGS — See "dwellings."
OCCUPANT — Any person, including domestic service employees, living
and/or sleeping in a dwelling unit or having possession of a space within a
building.
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person and the executor or administrator of the estate of
such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — Includes a corporation or copartnership as well as an individual.
PLUMBING — The practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation,
maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and
appurtenances within the scope of the plumbing code.
PLUMBING FIXTURE — A receptacle or device which is either permanently
or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises
and demands a supply of water therefrom; or discharges used water, liquidborne
waste materials or sewage, either directly or indirectly, to the
drainage system of the premises; or which requires both a water supply
connection and a discharge to the drainage system of the premises.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Includes the following:
The physical condition or use of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law;
A.
Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including
but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and
unsafe fences or structures;
B.
C. Any premises which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;
D. Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use;
§ 223-17 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-17
221:849
RENOVATION — A building and it facilities made to conform to present-day
minimum standards of sanitation, fire and life safety.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A building in which sleeping accommodations
or sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities as a unit are provided,
except when classified as an institution under the building code.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any residential building or any part thereof
containing one or more rooming units in which space is let by the owner or
operator to more than five persons who are not members of the family (see
"dwellings, boardinghouse").
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar
materials.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, including without
limitation because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy or use
whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes, railings,
water tanks, towers, open grade steps, sidewalks or stairways, tents or
anything erected and framed of component parts which is fastened,
anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the ground.
SUPPLIED — Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.
VENTILATION — The process of supplying and removing air by natural or
mechanical means to or from any space.
Any premises which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard or is
manifestly unsafe or unsecure as to endanger life, limb or property;
E.
Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities
required by this code have been removed or from which utilities have
been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective or the
required precautions against trespassers have not been provided;
F.
Any premises which is unsanitary or which is littered with rubbish or
garbage or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
G.
Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration
or decay; faulty construction; overcrowded; open, vacant or abandoned;
damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in danger of
collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
H.
A. MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows,
skylights, doors, louvers or stacks without wind-driven devices.
B.
§ 223-17 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-17
221:850
WORKMANLIKE STATE OF MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR — Such
maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner.
YARD — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building,
extending along the entire length of street or rear or interior lot line.
§ 223-17 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-17
221:851

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement Authority
§ 223-18. Designation.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Code Official to enforce the
provisions of this code as herein provided.
§ 223-19. Relief from personal liability.
Any code official, officer or employee who acts in good faith and without
malice in the discharge of duties of enforcement of this code is relieved of
all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property
as a result of such acts or alleged failure to act. Further, the Code Official
shall not be held liable for any costs in any action, suit or proceeding that
may be instituted by the Code Official in the enforcement of this code.
§ 223-20. Issuance of notices and orders.
The Code Official shall issue all necessary notices and orders to abate illegal
or unsafe conditions to ensure compliance with this code's requirements for
the safety, health and general welfare of the public.
§ 223-21. Inspections.
In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public, the Code
Official is authorized to enter any structure or premises at any reasonable
time for the purpose of making inspections and performing duties under this
code.
§ 223-22. Nonconformities; compliance.
If additional nonconforming conditions are encountered during the course
of any approved alteration or repair which where not considered or known
initially, the Code Official shall have the authority to require compliance
with this code of such additional conditions. The determination of what
may be necessary to bring such conditions into compliance shall take into
consideration the use of alternatives and equivalent approaches as provided
for in this code. The Code Official shall have the authority to approve
construction changes in the field when conditions are encountered which
make the originally approved work impractical, provided that such changes
in approved work can be readily determined to be in compliance with this
code and are requested by the owner or the owner's agent prior to such
construction changes. Such changes shall be specifically documented by the
owner or the owner's agent describing the change in work and the reasons
and justification for the change and shall be filed with the permit for the
project.
§ 223-18 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-23
221:853
§ 223-23. Right of entry.
If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a structure subject
to the provisions of this code refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with,
restricts or obstructs entry and free access to any part of the structure
or premises where inspection authorized by this code is sought, the
administrative authority may seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an
order that such owner, occupant or other person in charge cease and desist
with such interference.
§ 223-24. Access by owner or operator.
Every occupant of a structure or premises shall give the owner or operator
thereof or agent or employee access to any part of such structure or its
premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspection,
maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the
provisions of this code.
§ 223-25. Proper credentials to be disclosed.
The Code Official or the Code Official's authorized representative shall
disclose proper credentials of his respective office for the purpose of
inspecting any and all buildings and premises in the performance of duties
under this code.
§ 223-26. Coordination of enforcement.
Inspection of premises, the issuance of notices and orders and enforcement
thereof shall be the responsibility of Code Officials so charged by the
jurisdiction. Whenever, in the opinion of a Code Official initiating an
inspection under this code, it is deemed necessary or desirable to have
inspections by any other department, the Code Official shall make
reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of such inspection so as
to minimize the number of visits by inspectors and to confer with the other
departments for the purpose of eliminating conflicting orders before any
are issued. A department shall not, however, delay the issuance of any
emergency orders which it determines must be issued.
§ 223-27. Rule-making authority.
The Code Official shall have power as may be necessary in the interest of
public safety, health and general welfare to adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations to interpret an implement the provisions of this code to
secure the intent thereof and to designate requirements applicable because
of local climatic or other conditions; but such rules shall not have the effect
of waiving working stresses or fire-protection requirements specifically
provided in this code or violating accepted engineering practice involving
public safety. The adoption and promulgation of rules and regulations
hereunder shall be subject to the final approval of the Village Manager.
§ 223-23 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-27
221:854
ARTICLE V
Unsafe Structures
§ 223-28. Condemnation.
When a structure or part thereof is found by the Code Official to be unsafe
or when a structure or part thereof is found unfit for human occupancy or
use or is found unlawful, it may be condemned pursuant to the provisions
of this code and may be placarded and vacated. It shall not be reoccupied
without approval of the Code Official. Unsafe equipment shall be placarded
and placed out of service.
§ 223-29. Definition.
An unsafe structure is one in which all or a part thereof is found to be
dangerous to life, health, property or the safety of the public or its
occupants by not providing minimum safeguards for protection from fire or
because it is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of
such faulty construction or unstable foundation that it is likely to partially
or completely collapse.
§ 223-30. Unsafe equipment.
Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving
stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other
equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such
disrepair or condition that it is found to be a hazard to life, health, property
or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. Unsafe
equipment may contribute to the finding that the structure is unsafe or unfit
for human occupancy or use.
§ 223-31. Structures unfit for human occupancy.
A structure is unfit for human occupancy or use whenever the Code Official
finds that it is unsafe or is in disrepair, is unsanitary, is vermin- or ratinfested,
contains filth and contamination or lacks ventilation, illumination,
sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this
code or because its location constitutes a hazard to its occupants or to the
public.
§ 223-32. Unlawful structures.
An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by
more persons than permitted under this code or which was erected, altered
or occupied contrary to law.
§ 223-33. Closing of vacant structures.
If the structure or part thereof is vacant and unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use and is not in danger of structural collapse, the Code
Official may post a placard of condemnation on the premises and may
§ 223-28 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-33
221:855
order the structure closed up so it will not be an attractive nuisance to
youngsters. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the
time specified in the order, the Code Official shall cause it to be closed
through any available public agency or by the contract or arrangement
by private persons, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate.
§ 223-33 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-33
221:856
ARTICLE VI
Notices and Orders
§ 223-34. Notice to owner or responsible persons.
Whenever the Code Official determines that there has been a violation of
this code or has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred
or whenever the Code Official has condemned any structure or equipment
under the provisions of this code, notice shall be given to the owner or the
person or persons responsible therefor in the manner prescribed below. If
the Code Official has condemned the property or a part thereof, the Code
Official shall give notice to the owner and to the occupants of the intent to
placard and to vacate the property or to order equipment out of service.
§ 223-35. Contents of notice.
The notice prescribed by this code shall:
§ 223-36. Service of notice.
Such service shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner if a
copy thereof is delivered to the owner personally; or by leaving the notice
at the usual place of abode, in the presence of someone in the family of
suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof;
or by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known
address with return receipt requested; or if the certified or registered letter
is returned with receipt showing that it has not been delivered, by posting
a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by
such notice, and by mailing a copy by regular mail.
§ 223-37. When occupant is served.
When a condemnation order is served on an occupant other than the
owner or person responsible for such compliance, a reasonable time to
vacate the property after noncompliance shall be stated. Owners or persons
responsible for compliance must vacate at the time set for correction of
defects if there is failure of compliance.
A. Be in writing.
B. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
C. Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued.
D. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for the repairs
and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into
compliance with the provisions of this code.
E. Include an explanation of the owner's right to seek modification or
withdrawal of the notice by petition of appeal.
§ 223-34 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-38
221:857
§ 223-38. Transfer of ownership.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who
has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has
been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of it to
another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation
have been complied with or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee,
transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or
notice of violation issued by the Code Official and shall furnish to the Code
Official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or
notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition
for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation.
§ 223-38 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-38
221:858
ARTICLE VII
Placarding of Condemned Structures
§ 223-39. Contents of placard; vacation of premises.
After the condemnation notice required under the provisions of this code
has resulted in an order by virtue of failure to comply within the time given,
the Code Official may post on the premises or structure or parts thereof or
on defective equipment a placard bearing the words "Condemned as unfit
for human occupancy or use" and a statement of the penalties provided for
any occupancy or use or for removing the placard. The owner or the person
or persons responsible for the correction of violations shall have removed
themselves from the property on failure to comply with the correction order
in the time specified, but other occupants shall be given a reasonable time
thereafter to vacate.
§ 223-40. Occupancy of placarded structures.
Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or structure or part
thereof or who shall use placarded equipment and any owner or any person
responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded
premises shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code.
§ 223-41. Removal of placard.
The Code Official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the
defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were
based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a
condemnation placard without the approval of the Code Official shall be
subject to the penalties provided by this code.
§ 223-39 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-41
221:859

ARTICLE VIII
Emergency Orders
§ 223-42. Action of Code Official.
Whenever a Code Official finds that an emergency exists on any premises
or in any structure or part thereof or on any defective equipment which
requires immediate action to protect the public's health and safety or that of
the occupants thereof, the Code Official may, with proper notice and service
in accordance with the provisions of this code, issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring the vacating of the premises
or such action taken as the Code Official deems necessary to meet such
emergency. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, such order shall
be effective immediately, and the premises or equipment involved shall be
placarded immediately upon service of the order.
§ 223-43. Compliance with order; hearing.
Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith. He
may thereafter, upon petition directed to the Village Manager, be afforded
a hearing. The Village Manager shall determine at the hearing whether
the provisions of this code and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with.
§ 223-42 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-43
221:861

ARTICLE IX
Violations and Appeals
§ 223-44. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy any structure or
equipment regulated by this code or cause the same to be done contrary to
or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
§ 223-45. Right to appeal.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with
the enforcement of any provision of this code or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Village Manager, provided that such person shall file in
the office of the Village Manager a written petition requesting such hearing
and containing a statement of the grounds therefor within 20 days after the
day the notice was served.
§ 223-44 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-45
221:863

ARTICLE X
Demolitions
§ 223-46. Authority to order.
The Code Official may order the owner of premises upon which is located
any structure or part thereof which, in the Code Official's judgment, is so
old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use and
so that it would be unreasonable to repair the same to raze and remove
such structure or part thereof; or if it can be made safe by repairs, to repair
and make safe and sanitary or to raze and remove at the owner's option; or
where there has been a cessation of normal construction of a structure for
a period of more than two years, to raze and remove such structure or part
thereof.
§ 223-47. Unreasonable repairs.
Whenever the Code Official determines that the cost of such repairs would
exceed 100% of the current value of such structure, such repairs shall be
presumed unreasonable, and it shall be presumed for the purpose of this
section that such structure is a public nuisance which may be ordered razed
without option on the part of the owner to repair.
§ 223-48. Contents and service of order.
The order shall specify a time in which the owner shall comply therewith
and specify repairs, if any. It shall be served on the owner of record or an
agent where an agent is in charge of the building and upon the holder of any
encumbrance of record in the manner provided for service of a summons
by a court of record. If the owner or a holder of an encumbrance of record
cannot be found, the order may be served by posting it on the main entrance
of the building and by publishing it once each week for three successive
weeks in a newspaper authorized to provide service by publication.
§ 223-49. Restraining actions.
Anyone affected by any such order may, within 10 business days after
service of such order, apply to a court of record for an order restraining the
Code Official from razing and removing such structure or parts thereof.
§ 223-50. Failure to comply; charge of costs.
Whenever the owner of a property fails to comply with a demolition order
within the time prescribed, the Code Official shall cause the structure or
part thereof to be razed and removed, either through an available public
agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost
of such razing and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon
which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
§ 223-46 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-51
221:865
§ 223-51. Sale of salvage materials; proceeds.
When any structure has been ordered razed and removed, the governing
body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement
aforesaid may sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price
obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses
of such razing and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of
such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts
deducted, for the use of the person who may be entitled thereto, subject to
any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over,
the report shall so state.
§ 223-51 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-51
221:866
ARTICLE XI
Environmental Requirements
§ 223-52. General provisions.
§ 223-53. Sanitation.
All exterior property areas and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe
and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
§ 223-54. Containers.
The operator of every establishment producing garbage, vegetable wastes
or other putrescible materials shall provide and at all times cause to be
used leakproof approved containers provided with close-fitting covers for
the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal.
§ 223-55. Grading and drainage.
All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon or within any structure located
thereon. Stagnant water shall be determined as any accumulation that has
not dispersed within seven days of the last recorded local rainfall.
§ 223-56. Loading areas.
Except as otherwise permitted by resolution of the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Chapter 190, Land Use and Development,
of the Ridgewood Village Code, all loading areas shall be paved with
bituminous, concrete or equivalent surfacing and shall be free from dirt and
other litter and kept in good repair. When lighted for nighttime use, lights
shall not be permitted to cast directly upon dwellings nearby.
§ 223-57. Insect and rat control.
A. Scope. The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum
conditions for maintenance of exterior property, premises and
structures. Premises shall comply with the conditions herein prescribed
insofar as they are applicable.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain such
structures and premises in compliance with these requirements. A
person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for
occupancy or use premises which do not comply with the following
requirements of this article.
C. Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof
or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.
§ 223-52 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-57
221:867
§ 223-58. Public areas.
All sidewalks, steps, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved areas for
public use shall be kept in a proper state of repair and free of all snow, ice,
mud and other debris and shall be maintained free of hazardous conditions.
If any sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof by virtue of its state of
repair shall constitute a danger to public health and safety, the sidewalk or
driveway or portion thereof shall be replaced. Steps shall comply with the
requirements for exterior stairs.
§ 223-59. Weeds. [Amended 1-12-1993 by Ord. No. 2392]
All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds
or plant growth in excess of 10 inches. All "noxious weeds," which are
hereby defined as poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac and ragweed, shall
be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, that this term
shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
§ 223-60. Storage areas.
All open salvage yards and open storage areas shall be completely obscured
from surrounding property by a solid screen not less than six feet (1,829
millimeters) in height.
§ 223-61. Exhaust vents.
A person shall not construct, maintain or operate pipes, ducts, conductors,
fans or blowers discharging gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke,
odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes so as to discharge directly
upon abutting or adjacent public and private property or that of another
tenant.
A. An owner of a structure or property shall be responsible for the
extermination of insects, rats, vermin or other pests in all exterior areas
of the premises, except that the occupant shall be responsible for such
extermination in the exterior areas of the premises of a single-family
dwelling. Whenever infestation exists in the premises of other than a
single-family dwelling, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner.
B. No Village Building Department demolition permit shall be issued for
any project resulting in the demolition or alteration of more than 40% of
the footprint of the primary or secondary structure(s) on the property
without satisfactory evidence that the premises have been treated for
or are free from insects and rodents. [Added 11-12-2014 by Ord. No.
3440]
§ 223-57 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-62
221:868
§ 223-62. Accessory structures.
All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls,
shall be maintained structurally sound and in compliance with Article XII,
Exterior Structure.
§ 223-63. Open fires.
Open fires shall be prohibited except as specifically approved by the Fire
Official.
§ 223-64. Motor vehicles. [Added 11-11-1986 by Ord. No. 2069]
Motor vehicles shall be subject to the following requirements:
A. Residential areas. No unregistered or uninspected motor vehicle shall
be parked ungaraged on any property in a residential district
delineated in Chapter 190, Land Use and Development, of the
Ridgewood Village Code. No motor vehicle shall be parked ungaraged
in a residential district, as defined in Chapter 190, Land Use and
Development, of the Ridgewood Village Code, which motor vehicle is in
a state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being
stripped or dismantled. No motor vehicle shall at any time undergo
major overhaul, including body work, in a residential district as defined
in Chapter 190, Land Use and Development, of the Ridgewood Village
Code unless such work is performed inside a structure designed and
approved for such purposes.
B. Nonresidential areas. No unregistered or uninspected motor vehicle,
with the exception of new and used cars displayed for sale by new car
dealers, shall be permitted on any property in a nonresidential district
unless the same is garaged or properly screened so that said vehicle is
not visible from the public street or from adjoining properties. No motor
vehicle in a nonresidential district shall at any time be in a state of
major disassembly or disrepair nor in the process of being stripped or
dismantled unless the same is garaged or properly screened so that
said vehicle is not visible from the public street or from adjoining
properties.
§ 223-62 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-64
221:869

ARTICLE XII
Exterior Structure
§ 223-65. General provisions.
The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally
sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the health, safety or welfare
of the occupants and so as to protect the occupants from the adverse effects
of the environment.
§ 223-66. Display of street numbers.
Each structure to which a street number has been assigned shall have the
number so assigned displayed in a position easily observed and readable
from the public right-of-way.
§ 223-67. Supporting structural members.
All supporting structural members of all structures shall be kept
structurally sound, free of deterioration and maintained capable of safely
bearing the dead and live loads imposed upon them.
§ 223-68. Exterior surfaces.
Every foundation, exterior wall and roof and all other exterior surfaces shall
be maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and shall
be kept in such condition as to exclude rats.
§ 223-69. Foundation walls.
All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to carry the safe design and
operating dead and live loads and shall be maintained plumb and free from
open cracks and breaks, so as not to be detrimental to public safety and
welfare.
§ 223-70. Exterior walls.
Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or
timbers and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to
the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building.
All exterior surface materials, including wood, composition or metal siding,
shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be properly surface-coated
when required to prevent deterioration.
§ 223-71. Roofs and drainage.
The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and not have defects which might
admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from
causing dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
building. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a
§ 223-65 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-71
221:871
nuisance to owners or occupants of adjacent premises or that creates a
public nuisance.
§ 223-72. Decorative features.
All cornices, entablatures, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall
facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair
with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
§ 223-73. Signs, marquees and awnings.
All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes,
standpipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions shall be
maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a
safe and sound condition. They shall be protected from the elements and
against decay and rust by the periodic application of a weather-coating
material such as paint or other protective treatment.
§ 223-74. Chimneys.
All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks and similar appurtenances shall
be maintained structurally safe, sound and in good repair. All exposed
surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against
decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials such as
paint or similar surface treatment.
§ 223-75. Stairs and porches.
§ 223-76. Window and door frames.
Every window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in such
relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely
A. Every stair, porch, fire escape or balcony and all appurtenances
attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and
capable of supporting the anticipated loads and shall be maintained in
sound condition and good repair. Every stair, porch and fire escape shall
be maintained free of hazardous conditions such as snow, ice, mud and
other debris.
B. Every flight of stairs which is more than four risers high shall have a
handrail on at least one side of the stair, and every open portion of a
stair fire escape, porch, landing or balcony which is more than 30
inches (762 millimeters) above the grade below shall have guardrails.
Handrails shall be not less than 30 inches (762 millimeters) nor more
than 34 inches (864 millimeters) high, measured vertically above the
nosing of the treads. Guardrails shall be not less than 30 inches (762
millimeters) high above the floor of the porch, landing or balcony. Every
handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of bearing
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
§ 223-71 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-76
221:872
as possible and to substantially exclude wind from entering the dwelling or
structure.
§ 223-77. Windows and doors to be fitted and weathertight.
Every window and exterior door shall be fitted reasonably in its frame and
be weathertight. Weather stripping shall be used to exclude wind or rain
from entering the dwelling or structure and shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair.
§ 223-78. Glazing of window sashes.
Every required window sash shall be fully supplied with approved glazing
materials which are without open cracks and holes.
§ 223-79. Windows to be operable.
Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be capable of being easily
opened and shall be held in position by window hardware.
§ 223-80. Insect screens.
§ 223-81. Door hardware.
Every exterior door and its hardware shall be maintained in good condition.
Door locks on all doors entering dwelling units shall be in good repair and
capable of tightly securing the door.
§ 223-82. Basement hatchways.
Every basement hatchway shall be so constructed and maintained as to
prevent the entrance of rats, rain and surface drainage water into the
structures.
A. During the period from April 1 to December 1, every door and window
or other outside opening used for ventilation purposes serving any
building containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas or any areas where products used in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be
supplied with approved tight-fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh
per inch, and every swinging screen door shall have a self-closing
device in good working condition.
B. Exception. Screen doors shall not be required for out-swinging doors or
other types of openings which make screening impractical, provided
that other approved means such as air curtains or insect repellent fans
are employed.
§ 223-76 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-83
221:873
§ 223-83. Guards for basement windows.
Every basement window which is openable shall be supplied with rat-proof
shields or storm windows or other material affording protection against the
entry of rats.
§ 223-83 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-83
221:874
ARTICLE XIII
Interior Structure
§ 223-84. General provisions.
The interior of a structure and its equipment shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition so as not to pose a
threat to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or visitors and to
protect the occupants from the environment.
§ 223-85. Structural members.
§ 223-86. Interior surfaces.
Floors, walls (including windows and doors), ceilings and other interior
surfaces shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling
paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface
conditions shall be eliminated.
§ 223-87. Lead-based paint.
Lead-based paint with a lead content of more than 0.5% shall not be
applied to any interior or exterior surface of a dwelling, dwelling unit
or child-care facility, including fences and outbuildings at these locations.
Existing interior and exterior painted surfaces of dwelling units and childcare
facilities that contain in excess of 0.5% lead shall be removed or
covered with paneling or other suitable covering approved by the Code
Official.
§ 223-88. Bathroom and kitchen floors.
Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit
such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
A. The supporting structural members of every building shall be
maintained structurally sound, not showing any evidence of
deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the
imposed loads.
B. In every existing building used for business, industrial, mercantile or
storage occupancy in which heavy loads or concentrations occur or in
which machinery is introduced, the owner or occupant shall cause the
weight that each floor will safely sustain to be calculated by a
registered architect or engineer and to be filed with the Building
Official and, after such acceptance by the Building Official, to be posted
on each floor in a conspicuous place.
§ 223-84 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-89
221:875
§ 223-89. Dampness.
In every building, basements and crawl spaces shall be maintained
reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or
deterioration of the structure.
§ 223-90. Sanitation.
The interior of every structure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition free from any accumulation of rubbish, refuse or garbage.
Rubbish, garbage and other refuse shall be properly kept inside temporary
storage facilities as required under Section ES-801.0.158
§ 223-91. Storage of garbage and refuse.
Garbage or refuse shall not be allowed to accumulate or be stored in public
halls or stairways.
§ 223-92. Extermination of insects and rodents.
All structures shall be kept free from insect and rat infestation, and where
insects or rats are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved
processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination,
proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
§ 223-93. Exit doors.
Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being opened easily from
the inside and without the use of a key.
§ 223-94. Stairs, porches and railings.
Stairs and other exit facilities shall be adequate for safety as provided in the
building code.
§ 223-95. Maintenance of exit stairs.
All interior stairs and railings and other exit facilities of every structure
shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair by replacing treads
and risers that evidence excessive wear or are broken, warped or loose.
Every inside stair shall be so constructed and maintained as to be safe to
use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads.
§ 223-96. Handrails and guardrails.
Every flight of stairs which is more than four risers high shall have handrails
which shall be located as required by the building code, and every open
portion of a stair, landing or balcony which is more than 30 inches (762
millimeters) above the floor or grade below shall have guardrails. Handrails
158. Editor's Note: See the BOCA Basic/National Existing Structures Code/1984.
§ 223-89 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-96
221:876
shall be not less than 30 inches (762 millimeters) nor more than 34 inches
(864 millimeters) high, measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or
above the floor of the landing or balcony. Guardrails shall be not less than
30 inches (762 millimeters) high above the floor of the landing or balcony.
Every handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of bearing
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
§ 223-96 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-96
221:877

ARTICLE XIV
Light, Ventilation and Space
§ 223-97. General provisions.
§ 223-98. Lighting requirements.
A. Scope. The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for the light, ventilation and space for the
occupancy of a structure. All light, ventilation and space conditions
shall comply with the requirements herein prescribed insofar as they
are applicable.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
such light and ventilation and space conditions in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not let to another for occupancy or
use any premises which does not comply with the following
requirements of this article.
C. Access to public property. All structures shall be provided access to
public property. Such access means shall be maintained and
unobstructed.
D. Open space. An open space, when used for the origin of light and
ventilation, shall be maintained and unobstructed.
E. Alternative devices. In place of the means for natural light and
ventilation herein prescribed, alternative arrangements of windows,
louvers or other methods and devices that will provide the equivalent
minimum performance requirements shall be permitted when
complying with the building code.
A. General. All spaces or rooms shall be provided sufficient light so as not
to endanger health and safety.
B. Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window
of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court or some
other approved means of ventilation. The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable space shall be 8% of the
floor area of such room, except in kitchens when artificial light may be
provided in accordance with the provisions of the building code.
Whenever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any
room and such obstructions are located less than three feet (914
millimeters) from the window and extend to a level above that of the
ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly
to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing
to the required minimum total window area for the room.
C. Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in every
building, other than one- and two-family dwellings, shall be adequately
lighted at all times with an illumination of at least a sixty-watt standard
incandescent light bulb or equivalent for each 200 square feet (18.60
§ 223-97 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-98
221:879
§ 223-99. Ventilation requirements.
square meters) of floor area, provided that the spacing between lights
shall not be greater than 30 feet (9,144 millimeters). Every exterior
stairway shall be illuminated with a minimum of one footcandle (10.76
lux) at floors, landings and treads.
D. Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provide with natural or artificial
light of sufficient intensity and so distributed as to permit the
maintenance of sanitary conditions and the safe use of the space and
the appliances, equipment and fixtures.
A. General. All spaces or rooms shall be provided sufficient natural or
mechanical ventilation so as not to endanger health and safety. Where
mechanical ventilation is provided in lieu of the natural ventilation,
such mechanical ventilating system shall be maintained in operation
during the occupancy of any structure or portion thereof. When part of
the air provided by a mechanical ventilation system is recirculated, the
portion or volume of air recirculated shall not be recirculated to a
different residential space or occupancy of dissimilar use from which it
is withdrawn.
B. Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window
which can be easily opened or such other device as will adequately
ventilate the room or shall have an approved method of ventilation. The
total openable window area in every room shall be equal to at least 45%
of the minimum window area size required by this code.
C. Toilet rooms. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall
comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable spaces
as required by this code, except that a window shall not be required in
bathrooms or water closet compartments equipped with an approved
mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical
ventilation system from a bathroom or water closet compartment must
be exhausted to the exterior and may not be recirculated to any space,
including the space from which it is withdrawn.
D. Cooking facilities. Cooking shall not be permitted in any sleeping room
or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be
permitted to be present in a sleeping room or dormitory unit.
E. Process ventilation. Where any process permits and where injurious,
toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated
by said process, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to
remove the contaminating agent at the source so that it is not allowed
to permeate the general atmosphere of the workroom. Air so exhausted
shall be exhausted to the exterior and may not be recirculated to any
space, including the space from which it is withdrawn.
§ 223-98 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-99
221:880
§ 223-100. Privacy and access for dwelling units.
§ 223-101. Space requirements.
F. Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer venting systems shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be vented in accordance with
the manufacturer's recommendations.
A. Separation of units. Dwelling units shall be separate and apart from
each other. Sleeping rooms shall not be used as the only means of
access to other sleeping rooms or habitable spaces.
B. Privacy. Hotel units, lodging units and dormitory units shall be designed
to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.
C. Common access. A habitable space, bathroom or water closet
compartment which is accessory to a dwelling unit shall not open
directly into or be used in conjunction with a food store, barber or
beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's examination or treatment room or
similar room used for public purposes.
D. Below-grade rooms. Rooms partially or completely below grade shall
not be used as a habitable space unless:
(1) Floors and walls are watertight so as to prevent entry of moisture.
(2) Total window area, total openable window area and ceiling height
are in accordance with this code.
(3) Required minimum window area of every habitable space is
entirely above the grade adjoining such window areas.
(4) Means of egress and emergency escape are provided in accordance
with this code.
A. Area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes
by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.51 square
meters) of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.65 square
meters) of floor area for each occupant thereof.
B. Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants
than permitted by the minimum occupancy area requirements of this
section.
C. Prohibited use. It shall be prohibited to use for sleeping purposes any
kitchen, nonhabitable space or public space.
§ 223-99 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-101
221:881
Minimum Occupancy Area Requirements
Minimum Occupancy Area in Square Feet
(square meters)
Space
1 to 2
occupants
3 to 5
occupants
6 or more
occupants
Living
room*
No requirements 120 (11.16) 150 (13.95)
Dining
room*
No requirements 80 (7.44) 100 (9.30)
Kitchen 50 (4.65) 50 (4.65) 60 (5.58)
Bedrooms** Must comply with Section ES-404.1159
NOTES:
* Combined living room/dining room spaces will be construed as
meeting the requirements of this table if the total area is equal to
that required for separate rooms and if the space is so located that
it may function as a combination living room/dining room.
** Every room used as a bedroom shall have access to at least one
water closet without passing through another room used as a
bedroom. Every room used as a bedroom shall have access to at
least one water closet located on the same floor as the bedroom,
except that this requirement shall not apply to the only bedroom on
a floor.
D. Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces shall have a clear ceiling
height over the minimum area required by this code at not less than 7 1/
3 feet (2,235 millimeters), except that in attics or top half-stories the
ceiling height shall be not less than seven feet (2,134 millimeters) over
not less than 1/3 of the minimum area required by this code when used
for sleeping, study or similar activity. In calculating the floor area of
such rooms, only those portions of the floor are of the room having a
clear ceiling height of five feet (1,524 millimeters) or more may be
included.
E. Correctional institutional occupancies. It is not intended that this code
regulate the space requirements of correctional institutions.
F. Minimum room widths. Every habitable space shall have a clear room
width of not less than seven feet (2,134 millimeters) at the narrowest
point.
G. Exception. Kitchens require a clear passageway of not less than three
feet (914 millimeters) between counters, appliances and/or walls.
159. Editor's Note: See the BOCA/National Existing Structures Code/1984.
§ 223-101 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-101
221:882
ARTICLE XV
Plumbing
§ 223-102. General provisions.
§ 223-103. Dwelling units.
Every dwelling unit shall include its own plumbing facilities which are
in proper operating condition, can be used in privacy and are adequate
for personal cleanliness and the disposal of human waste. The following
minimum plumbing facilities set forth in this code shall be supplied and
maintained in sanitary, safe, working condition.
§ 223-104. Water closet and lavatory.
Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room separate from
habitable spaces which affords privacy and a water closet supplied with cold
running water. A lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water
closet or located in another room in close proximity to the door leading
directly into the room in which said water closet is located. The lavatory
shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.
§ 223-105. Bathtub or shower.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person
in said room and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower supplied with
hot and cold running water.
§ 223-106. Kitchen sink.
Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart from the lavatory
required hereunder, and such sink shall be supplied with hot and cold
running water.
§ 223-107. Rooming house requirements.
At least one water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower properly
connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working
condition shall be supplied for each four rooms within a rooming house,
A. Scope. The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum
plumbing facilities and fixtures to be provided. All plumbing facilities
and fixtures shall comply with the requirements herein prescribed
insofar as they are applicable.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
such plumbing facilities and fixtures in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not let to another for occupancy or use
any structure or portion thereof or premises which does not comply
with the following requirements of this article.
§ 223-102 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-107
221:883
wherever said facilities are shared. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times.
§ 223-108. Hotel requirements.
Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one
water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub accessible from a public hallway
shall be provided on each floor. Each lavatory, bathtub or shower shall be
supplied with hot and cold water at all times.
§ 223-109. Other structures.
In nonresidential structures, the requirements for sanitary facilities shall
comply with the minimum requirements of the plumbing code for such
facilities for such use and occupancy.
§ 223-110. Toilet rooms.
§ 223-111. Plumbing fixtures.
A. Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall be designed and arranged to
provide privacy.
B. Direct access. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall not be used as a
passageway to a hall or other space or to the exterior. A toilet room or
bathroom in a dwelling unit shall be accessible from any sleeping room
without passing through another sleeping room.
C. Same story. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, lodging
houses or dormitory units, unless located within such respective units
or directly connected thereto, shall be provided on the same story with
such units and be accessible only from a common hall or passageway.
D. Employee facilities. Toilet rooms for employees shall be readily
accessible to such employees and shall not open directly into any public
kitchen or other public space used for the cooking or preparation of
food.
E. Floors. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with floors of
moisture-resistant material.
F. Partitions. Every nonresidential structure shall requires or supplies a
water closet shall provide within the toilet room partitions, enclosures
or compartments for privacy and shall comply with fixture clearance
requirements of the plumbing code for such installations.
A. General. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe and usable
condition. All plumbing fixtures shall be of approved nonabsorbent
material.
B. Connections. Water supply lines, plumbing fixtures, vents and drains
shall be properly installed, connected and maintained in working order
§ 223-107 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-111
221:884
§ 223-112. Water system.
§ 223-113. Sewage system.
and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and capable
of performing the function for which they are designed. All repairs and
installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the
building code or plumbing code.
C. Maintained clean and sanitary. All plumbing facilities shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the occupant so as not
to breed insects and rats or produce dangerous or offensive gases or
odors.
D. Access for cleaning. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed to permit easy
access for cleaning both the fixture and the area about it.
E. Water conservation. Plumbing fixtures which are replaced shall be of
water-saving construction and use as may be required by local energy
and plumbing codes.
A. General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other facility shall be properly connected to either a
public water system or to an approved private water system. All sinks,
lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot and cold
running water.
B. Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained in accord with
state and federal standards, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures
shall be located above the overflow rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin
faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which
hoses are attached and left in place shall be protected by an approved
atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently
attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
C. Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to
provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and
appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable
them to function satisfactorily.
D. Water-heating facilities. Where hot water is provided, water-heating
facilities shall be installed in an approved manner, properly maintained
and properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required to
be supplied with the hot water. Water-heating facilities shall be capable
of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate
amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory
basin, bathtub, shower and laundry facility or other similar units at a
temperature of not less than 110° F. (43° C.).
A. General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other facility shall be properly connected to either a
public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
§ 223-111 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-113
221:885
§ 223-114. Storm drainage generally.
An approved system of stormwater disposal shall be provided and
maintained for the safe and efficient drainage of roofs and paved areas,
yards and courts and other open areas on the premises.
B. Maintenance. Every plumbing stack and waste sewer line shall be so
installed and maintained as to function properly and shall be kept free
from obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent structural deterioration
or health hazards. All repairs and installations shall be made in
accordance with the provisions of the building code or plumbing code.
§ 223-113 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-114
221:886
ARTICLE XVI
Mechanical and Electrical Facilities
§ 223-115. General provisions.
§ 223-116. Heating facilities.
A. Scope. The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided. All
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment shall comply with
the requirements herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
such mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance
with these requirements. A person shall not let to another for
occupancy or use any premises which does not comply with the
following requirements of this article.
A. Residential buildings. Every owner of any structure who rents, leases or
lets one or more dwelling units or guest rooms on terms, either express
or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
sufficient heat during the period from September 15 to April 15 to
maintain a room temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.) in all
habitable spaces, bathrooms and toilet rooms during the hours between
6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and to maintain a temperature of
not less than 60° F. (16° C.) during other hours. The temperature shall
be measured at a point three feet (914 millimeters) above the floor and
three feet (914 millimeters) from exterior walls.
B. Other structures. Every owner of any structure who rents, leases or lets
the structure or any part thereof on terms, either express or implied, to
furnish heat to the occupant thereof and every occupant of any
structure or part thereof who rents or leases said structure or part
thereof on terms, either express or implied, to supply its own heat shall
supply sufficient heat during the period from September 15 to April 15
to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.) during all
working hours in all enclosed spaces or rooms where persons are
employed and working. The temperature shall be measured at a point
three feet (914 millimeters) above the floor and three feet (914
millimeters) from the exterior walls. Exceptions are as follows:
(1) Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
(2) Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
C. Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating equipment,
components and accessories in every heating, cooking and waterheating
device shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions and
kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health and accident
§ 223-115 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-116
221:887
§ 223-117. Electrical facilities.
hazards of the building code or other laws or ordinances applicable
thereto. Portable cooking equipment employing flame is prohibited,
except for approved residential-type food trays or salvers which are
heated by a candle or alcohol lamp.
D. Installation. All mechanical equipment shall be properly installed and
safely maintained in good working condition and shall be capable of
performing the function for which it was designed and intended.
E. Flue. All fuel-burning equipment shall be connected to an approved
chimney, flue or vent.
F. Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be
maintained.
G. Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be
maintained in effective operation.
H. Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and
for ventilation of the space shall be provided for the fuel-burning
equipment.
I. Unauthorized devices. Devices purporting to reduce gas consumption
by attachment to a gas appliance, to the gas supply line thereto or to
the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom shall not be used unless labeled
for such use and the installation is specifically approved.
J. Fireplaces. Fireplaces and other construction and devices intended for
use similar to a fireplace shall be stable and structurally safe and
connected to approved chimneys.
K. Climate control. When facilities for interior climate control (heating,
cooking and/or humidity) are integral functions of structures used as
dwelling units or other occupancies, such facilities shall be maintained
and operated in a continuous manner in accordance with the designed
capacity.
A. Facilities required. Every building or part thereof used for human
occupancy shall be adequately and safely provided with an electrical
system in compliance with the requirements of this section. The
provisions of this code shall be considered absolute minimum
requirements. The size of the unit and the usage of appliances and
equipment shall be used as a basis for determining the need for
additional facilities in accordance with the electrical code adopted by
the Village.
B. Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling unit and every guest
room shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets.
Every laundry area and bathroom shall contain at least one groundedtype
receptacle. Every bathroom shall contain at last one receptacle.
§ 223-116 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-117
221:888
§ 223-118. Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters.
C. Lighting fixtures. Every public hall, interior stairway, water closet
compartment, bathroom, laundry room and furnace room shall contain
at least one electric lighting fixture.
D. Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be
installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all
applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type.
E. Defective system. Where it is found, in the opinion of the Code Official,
that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the
occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper
fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation,
deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the Code Official shall
require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
A. General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained to
safely sustain the loads to which they are subject, to operate properly
and to be free of physical and fire hazards.
B. Elevators. In all buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least
one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the
building is occupied.
C. Exception. Buildings equipped with only one elevator may have the
elevator temporarily out of service for testing and servicing.
§ 223-117 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-118
221:889

ARTICLE XVII
Firesafety Requirements
§ 223-119. General provisions.
§ 223-120. Means of egress.
A. Scope. The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum
firesafety facilities and equipment to be provided. All structures shall
be constructed and maintained to prevent and avoid fire hazards and in
a manner conducive to fire safety. All firesafety facilities and equipment
shall comply with the requirements herein prescribed insofar as they
are applicable.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
such firesafety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements and the fire prevention code. A person shall not let to
another for occupancy or use any premises which does not comply with
the following requirements of this article.
A. General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed means of egress shall be
provided from the interior of a structure to the exterior at a street or to
a yard, court or passageway leading to a public open area at grade.
B. Direct exit. Every dwelling unit or guest room shall have access directly
to the outside or to an exit access corridor that leads directly to the
outside.
C. Locked doors. All doors in the required means of egress shall be readily
openable from the inner side without the use of keys. Exits from
dwelling units, hotel units, loading houses and dormitory units shall not
lead through other such units or through toilet rooms or bathrooms.
D. Fire escapes. All required and all existing fire escapes shall be
maintained in working condition and structurally sound.
E. Exit signs. All exit signs shall be maintained illuminated and visible.
F. Duel egress. Every residential building exceeding two stories in height
above grade, not counting basements, shall be provided with not less
than two approved independent exits from each floor above the second
floor, fully accessible from each occupancy on the floor. One- and twofamily
dwellings shall be excepted.
G. Emergency escape. Every sleeping room located in a basement shall
have at least one openable window or exterior door approved for
emergency egress or rescue or shall have access to two approved
independent exits.
H. Aisles. In all mercantile occupancies, the minimum clear aisle width
shall be not less than 44 inches (1,118 millimeters), except that in
§ 223-119 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-120
221:891
§ 223-121. Accumulation and storage of materials.
§ 223-122. Fire-resistance ratings.
Floors, walls, ceilings and other elements and components required to
develop a fire-resistance rating shall be maintained so that the respective
fire-resistance rating of the enclosure, separation or construction is
preserved.
§ 223-123. Fire-protection systems.
occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or less, the clear aisle width
shall be not less than 36 inches (914 millimeters.)
A. Accumulations. Waste, refuse or other materials shall not be allowed to
accumulate in stairways, passageways, doors, windows, fire escapes or
other means of egress.
B. Flammable matter. Highly flammable or explosive matter, such as
paints, volatile oils and cleaning fluids, or combustible refuse, such as
wastepaper, boxes and rags, shall not be accumulated or stored on
residential premises except in reasonable quantities consistent with
normal usage.
C. Residential unit. A dwelling unit or rooming unit shall not be located
within a structure containing an establishment handling, dispensing or
storing flammable liquids with a flash point of 110° F. (43° C.) or lower,
except as provided for in the building code.
D. Nonresidential structures. Nonresidential structures shall be permitted
to store combustible or flammable materials, provided that they are
confined to approved storage areas and comply with applicable
requirements of the building and fire codes for the appropriate use
group classification.
A. General. All fire-protection systems and equipment shall be maintained
in proper operating condition at all times.
B. Fire alarms. Fire alarms and detecting systems shall be maintained and
be suitable for their respective purposes.
C. Fire-suppression system. Fire-suppression systems shall be maintained
in good condition, free from mechanical injury. Sprinkler heads shall be
maintained clean, free of corrosion and paint and not bent or damaged.
D. Standpipe system. Hose stations shall be identified and accessible. The
hose shall be in proper position, ready for operation, dry and free of
deterioration.
E. Fire extinguishers. All portable fire extinguishers shall be visible and
accessible and maintained in an efficient and safe operating condition.
§ 223-120 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-124
221:892
§ 223-124. Fire doors.
All required fire-resistance-rated doors or smoke barriers shall be
maintained in good working order, including all hardware necessary for
the proper operation thereof. The use of door stops, wedges and other
unapproved hold-open devices is prohibited.
§ 223-124 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-124
221:893

ARTICLE XVIII
Responsibility of Occupant/Owner
§ 223-125. Scope.
§ 223-126. Sanitary conditions.
A. Scope. The provisions of this article shall govern the responsibilities of
persons for the maintenance of structures and the equipment and
premises thereof.
A. Cleanliness. Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall keep
that part of the structure or premises thereof which that occupant
occupies, controls or uses in a clean and sanitary condition. Every
owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of
the dwelling and premises thereof.
B. Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall
dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
rubbish containers equipped with tight-fitting covers as required by this
code.
C. Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall
dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
garbage disposal facilities or, if such facilities are not available, by
removing all nonburnable matter and securely wrapping such garbage
and placing it in tight garbage storage containers as required by
applicable laws or ordinances.
D. Garbage storage facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with an
approved garbage disposal facility, which may be any adequate
mechanical food waste grinder, in each dwelling unit or an incinerator
unit, to be approved by the Code Official, in the structure for the use of
the occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage
can or cans as required by this code. Such facilities shall be sufficient to
meet the needs of the occupants.
E. Rubbish storage facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with
approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish, and the owner,
operator or agent in control of such dwelling shall be responsible for
the removal of such rubbish.
F. Food preparation. All spaces used or intended to be used for food
preparation shall contain suitable space and equipment to store,
prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate
facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and
refuse, including facilities for temporary storage when necessary.
G. Supplied fixtures and equipment. The owner or occupant of a structure
or part thereof shall keep the supplied equipment and fixtures therein
clean and sanitary and shall be responsible for the exercise of
§ 223-125 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-126
221:895
§ 223-127. Extermination.
reasonable care in their proper use and operation. The owner shall
maintain the equipment and fixtures in good and proper operating
condition.
H. Furnished by occupant. The equipment and fixtures furnished by the
occupant of a structure shall be properly installed and shall be
maintained in good working condition and kept clean and sanitary and
free of defects, leaks or obstructions.
A. Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting, leasing or selling
the structure.
B. Tenant-occupant. The tenant-occupant of any structure shall be
responsible for the continued rat-proof condition of the structure, and if
the tenant-occupant fails to maintain the rat-proof condition, the cost of
extermination shall be the responsibility of the tenant-occupant.
C. Single occupancy. The occupant of a structure containing a singledwelling
unit or of a single nonresidential structure shall be responsible
for the extermination of any insects, rats or other pests in the structure
or on the premises.
D. Multiple occupancy. Every owner, agent or operator of two or more
dwelling units or multiple occupancies or nonresidential structures and
rooming houses shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rats or other pests in the public or shared areas of the structure
and premises. When infestation is caused by failure of an occupant of a
unit of the two or more dwelling units or by an occupant or lessee of a
nonresidential structure to prevent such infestation in the area
occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for such extermination.
E. Continued rat infestation. Continuing or repeated incidents of rat
infestation determined from the official records as provided by this
code shall require the installation of rat- and vermin-proof walls. The
rat- and vermin-proof walls shall be installed in accordance with the
building code.
§ 223-126 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-127
221:896
ARTICLE XIX
Hazard Abatement
§ 223-128. Scope.
The provisions of this article are to provide a reasonable degree of safety to
persons occupying existing buildings that do not conform with the minimum
requirements of the building code by requiring the following alterations to
such existing buildings.
§ 223-129. Applicability of other codes.
All alterations to an existing building which are caused directly or indirectly
by the enforcement of this code shall be done in accordance with the
applicable procedures and provisions of the building, plumbing, mechanical
and electrical codes.
§ 223-130. Continued maintenance.
All service equipment, means of egress devices and safeguards which are
required by this article or which were required by a previous statute or
another code in a building or structure when erected, altered or repaired
shall be maintained in good working order. The requirements of this article
are not to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire-protection and
firesafety systems and devices in existing buildings. These requirements
are intended to require that existing buildings which do not comply with
these provisions be altered to provide a minimum level of safety as required
herein.
§ 223-131. Alternative methods and systems.
The provisions of this article are not to exclude the acceptance and approval
of alternative methods and systems if such alternative methods and systems
provide equivalent safety to the occupant of the existing building.
§ 223-132. Compliance.
The owner of the existing building or structure shall provide and maintain
such facilities, equipment and systems in compliance with these
requirements and the fire prevention code.160
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Fire Prevention.
§ 223-128 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-132
221:897

ARTICLE XX
Means of Egress
§ 223-133. Number of exits; exceptions.
§ 223-134. Exit enclosures.
All interior exits shall be enclosed with approved assemblies except as
provided in the following table:
Enclosure Exceptions
Building Use Group Exception Conditions*
Business When connecting not more than 2 floor
levels and less than 3,500 square feet per
floor
When connecting not more than 3 floor
levels and the building is equipped with an
automatic fire suppression system
Education When connecting not more than 2 floor
levels and the building is equipped with an
automatic fire suppression system
Factory-industrial, storage When connecting not more than 2 floor
levels
When connecting not more than 3 floor
levels and the building is equipped with an
automatic fire suppression system
Mercantile When connecting not more than 2 floor
levels and less than 2,000 square feet per
floor
A. Every story used for human occupancy more than six stories above
grade shall be provided not less than two independent exits. Every story
used for human occupancy totally below grade greater than 2,000
square feet (186 square meters) shall be provided not less than two
independent exits.
B. Exceptions. A single exit is acceptable when:
(1) The building is provided an automatic fire suppression system and
an automatic fire alarm system with smoke detectors located in all
corridors, lobbies and common areas;
(2) The building is provided an automatic fire alarm system and the
exit is a smokeproof enclosure or pressurized stairway; or
(3) An existing fire escape or slidescape conforming to the building
code is provided in addition to the single exit.
§ 223-133 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-134
221:899
Enclosure Exceptions
Building Use Group Exception Conditions*
When connecting not more than 2 floor
levels and the building is equipped with an
automatic fire suppression system
Residential, hotels When connecting not more than 2 floor
levels and the building is equipped with an
automatic fire suppression system
Residential, apartment When connecting not more than 2 floor
levels with not more than 4 dwelling units
per floor
When connecting not more than 3 floor
levels with not more than 4 dwelling units
per floor and the building is equipped with
an automatic fire suppression system
Residential one- and twofamily
dwellings
In every case
*NOTE: One square foot = 0.093 square meters.
§ 223-135. Enclosure rating.
Enclosures connecting not more than six floor levels shall have a fireresistance
rating of not less than one hour with approved opening
protectives. Enclosures connecting more than six floor levels shall have a
fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours with approved opening
protectives.
§ 223-136. Exit capacity.
The capacity of the exits serving a floor shall be sufficient for the occupant
load thereof as determined by the building code.
§ 223-137. Corridor enclosure.
All corridors serving an occupant load of greater than 30 and openings
thereof are to provide an effective smoke barrier. All transoms, louvers,
doors and other openings are to be closed or be self-closing.
§ 223-138. Dead-end corridors.
A. All corridors which serve more than one exit shall provide direct
connection to such exits. The length of a dead-end corridor shall not
exceed 35 feet (10,668 millimeters).
B. Exception. The dead-end travel distance limit shall be increased to 70
feet (21,336 millimeters) when the building is equipped with an
automatic fire alarm system.
§ 223-134 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-138
221:900
ARTICLE XXI
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 223-139. Shafts; enclosure.
Enclosure. All shafts shall be enclosed as required by sections of this
code for exits, except elevator and supplemental stairway shafts which are
immediately adjacent to and not separated from floor openings connecting
the same floors served by the shaft. The opening protectives shall provide a
substantial barrier to fire penetration. Building service shafts such as trash
chutes, utility and duct shafts shall be enclosed as required by this code.
§ 223-140. Illumination of means of egress.
All means of egress shall be equipped with artificial lighting in accordance
with the building code. Emergency lighting shall be provided in accordance
with the building code.
§ 223-141. Exit signs.
All exits shall be indicated with exit signs in accordance with the building
code.
§ 223-142. Information signs.
A sign shall be provided at each floor landing in all interior stairways more
than three stories above grade, designating the floor level above the floor
of discharge. All elevator lobby call stations on all floor levels in buildings
more than 75 feet (22,860 millimeters) above grade shall be marked with
approved signs reading as follows: "Use Stairways in Case of Fire — Do Not
Use Elevators."
§ 223-143. Fire protection systems.
A. High-hazard use. All buildings and portions thereof of high-hazard use
shall be equipped with an approved automatic fire suppression system.
B. Commercial range hoods. All range hoods and connecting duct systems
when used in conjunction with frying and cooking operations, except
domestic range hoods not used for commercial purposes, shall be
equipped with an approved automatic fire suppression system.
C. Fire standpipes. All buildings having floors used for human occupancy
located more than six stories above grade shall be provided with
standpipes according to the building code, except that an automatic
water supply, hose and cabinets are not required. The standpipes shall
have an approved fire department connection with hose connections at
each floor level.
D. Smoke detectors. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accord with the
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act161 or the Village ordinance
governing the installation of smoke detectors.162
§ 223-139 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-143
221:901
§ 223-144. Elevator recall required.
All buildings having floors used for human occupancy served by elevators
shall have at least one elevator equipped with emergency controls, and all
elevators shall be equipped with car recall activated by a smoke detector in
each lobby in accordance with the building code.
§ 223-145. Smoke- and heat-detection devices.
Smoke and heat detection. Each recirculating air or exhaust system which
serves more than one floor in buildings which exceed six stories in height
shall be equipped with approved smoke and heat detection devices in
accordance with the mechanical code. The devices shall stop the fan(s)
automatically and shall be of the manual reset type. Automatic fan
shutdown is not required when the system is part of an approved smoke
removal or control system.
E. Fire alarm system. All buildings of educational use shall be equipped
with a manual fire alarm system in accordance with the requirements of
the Uniform Fire Safety Act.
161. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
162. Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Fire Prevention, Art. II.
§ 223-143 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-145
221:902
ARTICLE XXII
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters: Covers and Prevention of
Leakage
[Added 8-12-2009 by Ord. No. 3206]
§ 223-146. Purpose.
An ordinance requiring dumpsters and other refuse containers situated
outside or otherwise exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and
prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids,
semiliquids or solids from containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
systems operated by the Village of Ridgewood and/or the waters of the State
of New Jersey so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 223-147. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that are owned or operated by the Village of Ridgewood or other
public body and are designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste or recycling container that a person
controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash
cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY — The ocean and its estuaries,
all springs, streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 223-148. Prohibited conduct.
§ 223-146 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-148
221:903
§ 223-149. Exceptions to prohibition.
§ 223-150. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Village of Ridgewood Police
Department and/or Health Department and/or the Director of the
Department of Public Works or his/her designated representative.
§ 223-151. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a minimum fine of $250 per violation, not to exceed
$2,000.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse, garbage, debris, litter, and
such from spilling out or overflowing. This shall mean to also include
containers or dumpsters at multifamily dwelling units.
B. Any person who owns, leases, or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Village of Ridgewood.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual (single-family) homeowner trash, recycling, and yard waste
containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (i.e., furniture, bound carpeting and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 223-148 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 223-151
221:904
ARTICLE XXIII
Shopping Carts
[Added 7-13-2011 by Ord. No. 3302]
§ 223-152. Prohibited acts; fee; violations and penalties.
§ 223-153. Enforcement.
The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility
of the Director of Operations, Property Management Officer, any duly sworn
member of the Village of Ridgewood Police Department, and any other
officer and/or Village employee duly appointed by the Village Manager.
A. It shall be unlawful to locate, place, leave, or otherwise abandon
shopping carts in or upon any of the streets, parking lots, gutters,
curbs, sidewalks or on any property owned by the Village of Ridgewood
or any private property without the permission of the owner. Any such
shopping carts shall be removed to the Village Recycling Center. The
apparent owner of the cart will be notified in writing by the Village of
any shopping cart(s) that have been so removed and relocated to the
recycling center. The apparent owner will have a period of five days
from the date of the notice to make claim and/or otherwise recover the
shopping cart. Failure to respond within the specified time frame will be
interpreted as a release of ownership.
B. A fee of $25 will be charged to the apparent owner for each separate
shopping cart retained or captured by the Village of Ridgewood.
Pursuant to the terms of this section, payment of the fee must be made
to the Department of Finance, and a receipt for the payment of same
must be presented at the Recycling Center for release.
C. Each shopping cart that is located, placed, left or abandoned in
violation of this section shall be considered a separate violation. The
person responsible for the locating, placement, leaving or abandoning
of the shopping cart shall be punishable by a minimum fine of $50.
§ 223-152 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 223-153
221:905
Chapter 232
SCHOOL ENROLLMENT
§ 232-1. Purpose.
To prohibit and penalize any parent or other person enrolling a student
in the Ridgewood Public School District seeking free-of-charge education
when such student is ineligible for free-of-charge education.
§ 232-2. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of 18 to:
§ 232-3. Requirements.
Upon the request of the Ridgewood Public School District, the parent or
guardian of a student registered in the Ridgewood Public School District
shall be required to complete a questionnaire intended to determine the
student's eligibility to attend school in the Ridgewood Public School District
free of charge in accordance with N.J.S.A. Title 18A. All residents hosting
other families, with a student enrolled in the Ridgewood Public School
District in their residence, must register with the Ridgewood Public School
District and must notify the Ridgewood Public School District when such
other families no longer reside with the resident.
A. Knowingly register or enroll a student in the Ridgewood Public School
District seeking free-of-charge education or maintain the enrollment of
a student receiving free-of-charge education when the student is
ineligible for free-of-charge education pursuant to N.J.S.A. Title 18A;
B. Knowingly assist, aid or permit a student to register or enroll in the
Ridgewood Public School District seeking free-of-charge education
when the student is ineligible to attend free of charge pursuant to
N.J.S.A Title 18A;
C. Knowingly permit his or her name, address or other residencedesignating
documentation to be utilized in the registration or
enrollment of any student seeking free-of-charge education in the
Ridgewood Public School District when the student is ineligible to
attend free of charge pursuant to N.J.S.A Title 18A; or
D. Not notify or fail to inform the Ridgewood Public School District when a
student is no longer a resident in the household of that person who had
previously knowingly permitted his or her name, address or other
residence-designating documentation to be utilized in the registration
or enrollment of the student in the Ridgewood Public School District.
§ 223-153 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 232-4
221:906
§ 232-4. Enforcement.
Sections 232-1 through 232-3 may be enforced by the administrative
officials of the Ridgewood Public School District in their sole discretion.
§ 232-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of §§ 232-1 through 232-3 shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $2,000 and to
the maximum lawful extent make restitution to the Ridgewood Board of
Education. In determining the amount of restitution, the Municipal Court
of the Village of Ridgewood, Bergen County shall include amounts incurred
by the Ridgewood Board of Education, including but not limited to tuition
costs, investigation expenses and attorneys' fees.
§ 232-6. Restitution.
Restitution ordered by the Municipal Court of the Village of Ridgewood,
Bergen County, shall be paid to the Ridgewood Board of Education within 30
days of such an order being final and not subject to further appeal. Unpaid
restitution and fines may, upon the petition of the Ridgewood Board of
Education to the Municipal Court of the Village of Ridgewood, be converted
into liens against the properties of the offending parties.
§ 232-7. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to be
unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not affect
any other portion of this chapter.
Chapter 238
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145. Water — See Ch. 269.
§ 232-4 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 232-7
221:907

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 238-1. Connection required. [Amended 9-8-1998 by Ord. No.
2640]
Along all streets, roads, avenues and lanes where sewers are now
constructed or may hereafter be constructed for the purpose of carrying off
sewage, the owners of property bordering upon such street, road, avenue,
lane or sections thereof, in which are or may hereafter be constructed
such sewers, or situated within 200 feet of any street wherein there is a
sewer shall connect the plumbing and drainage system with such sewers in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Division of Health within
30 days from the date of service of a notice from such Division or its proper
officials so to do. Responsibility for installation, operation, maintenance and
repair of said sever connection shall be and remain an obligation of the
owners of such property. All installations, maintenance or repairs shall be
carried out in accord with the regulations developed by the Division of
Water Pollution Control and the Division of Health, as applicable, and as
approved by the Village Manager.
§ 238-2. Connection to be made by licensed plumber.
No person shall make any connection with any public or private sewer,
cesspool or septic tank, except a duly licensed plumber.
§ 238-3. Unlawful uncoverings and connections.
§ 238-4. License not required for certain activities. [Added
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, no individual or
corporation shall be required to obtain a permit or license in order to
engage in the occupation of laying or installing pipe or conduit of any nature
outside of buildings and inside property lines.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person not an agent or an employee of the
Division of Health to uncover or cause to be uncovered or made or
caused to be made any connection with any public or private sewer,
cesspool or septic tank for any purpose whatsoever, except under the
supervision of the Inspector and without having first obtained a permit
from the Division of Health.
B. No person shall make or cause to be made any connection with any
stormwater drain of the Village or with any brook or watercourse within
the limits of the Village for the purpose of the removal of the sewage
from any premises.
§ 238-1 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-4
221:909

ARTICLE II
House Drains and Sewers
§ 238-5. Separate system for each building; exception.
The drainage system of each new building and of new work installed in
an existing building shall be separate from and independent of that of any
other building, and every building shall have an independent connection
with a public or private sewer when available; except that where one
building stands in the rear of another building on an interior lot and no
private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through
adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the house drain from the front of
the building may be extended to the rear building and the whole will be
considered as one house drain.
§ 238-6. Old sewers and drains.
Old house sewers and drains may be used in connection with new buildings
or new plumbing only when they are found, on examination and test, to
conform in all respects to the requirements governing new sewers or drains
as prescribed in this article. If the old work is found to be defective, the
Division of Health shall notify the owner to make the necessary changes to
conform to this chapter.
§ 238-7. Excavations.
§ 238-8. Location of house drains.
Whenever possible, all house drains shall be brought into the building below
the basement or cellar floor.
§ 238-9. Material specifications.
A. Each system of piping shall be laid in a separate trench, provided that
drainage trenches may be benched not less than 18 inches for lighter
piping. Where a double system of drainage is installed, the sanitary and
surface house sewers or drains may be laid side by side in one trench.
B. Tunneling for distances not greater than six feet is permissible in yards,
courts or driveways of any building site. When pipes are driven, the
drive pipe shall be at least one size larger than pipe to be laid.
C. All excavations required to be made for the installation of a house
drainage system or any part thereof within the walls of a building shall
be open trench work. All such trenches and tunnels shall be kept open
until the piping has been inspected, tested and approved.
A. The house sewer beginning three feet outside the building shall be of
cast iron or vitrified clay pipe.
B. The house drain, when underground, shall be of lead, brass or cast iron.
§ 238-5 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-9
221:911
§ 238-10. Distance from bearing well; depth.
No house sewer or underground house drain shall be laid parallel to or
within three feet of any bearing well, which might be thereby weakened.
The house sewer and drains shall be laid at sufficient depth to protect them
from frost.
§ 238-11. Required size.
C. The house drain, when above ground, shall be of cast iron, galvanized
wrought iron or steel, lead or brass, approved standards.
D. The house sewer, when laid in made or filled-in ground, shall be of
vitrified clay pipe, laid on a bed of approved grillage or concrete, or of
cast-iron pipe, American Society for Testing and Materials approved
standards.
A. The required size of sanitary house drains and sanitary house sewers
shall be determined on the basis of the total number of fixture units
drained by them in accordance with the following table:
Sanitary System Only
Fixture
Units
1/8 inch to
1 foot
(diameter
in inches)
1/4 inch to
1 foot
(diameter
in inches)
1/2 inch to
1 foot
(diameter
in inches)
Number of
Water
Closets or
Equivalent
6 to 12 4 3 — 1 to 2
13 to 24 4 4 3 3 to 4
25 to 72 6 5 4 5 to 12
73 to 300 8 6 5 13 to 50
301 to 720 8 8 6 51 to 120
721 to 1,080 10 10 8 121 to 180
1,081 to
1,920
12 12 10 181 to 320
B. The required sizes of stormwater house drains and house sewers and
other lateral storm drains shall be determined on the basis of the total
drained area in horizontal projection in accordance with the following
table:
§ 238-9 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-11
221:912
§ 238-12. Drainage below sewer level.
§ 238-13. Sumps and receiving tanks. [Amended 12-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 3321]
All subhouse sanitary waste flow drains shall discharge into an airtight
sump or receiving tank so located as to receive the sewage by gravity, from
which sump or receiving tank the sewage shall be lifted and discharged
into the house sewer by pumps, ejectors or any equally efficient method.
Stormwater System Only
Number of
Square Feet
Drained Area
1/8 inch to 1
foot
(diameter in
inches)
1/4 inch to 1
foot
(diameter in
inches)
1/2 inch to 1
foot
(diameter in
inches)
Up to 90 1 1/2 1 1/2 1 1/2
91 to 400 3 2 2
401 to 660 3 3 2
661 to 1,200 4 3 3
1,201 to 1,800 4 4 3
1,801 to 2,500 5 4 4
2,501 to 4,100 5 5 4
4,101 to 4,600 6 5 5
4,601 to 5,300 6 6 5
5,301 to 7,500 8 6 6
7,501 to 11,100 8 8 6
11,101 to 15,700 10 8 8
15,701 to 19,500 10 10 8
19,501 to 24,800 12 10 8
24,801 to 31,000 12 12 10
31,001 to 44,000 14 12 10
44,001 to 60,000 14 14 12
A. In all buildings in which the whole or part of the house drainage and
plumbing system thereof lies below the crown level of the main sewer,
sewage or house wastes shall be lifted by approved artificial means and
discharged into the house sewer.
B. When subsoil catch basins are installed below the sewer level,
automatic water ejectors provided with a ball float attached to the main
water supply shall be used. Such ejectors or any device raising subsoil
water shall discharge into a properly trapped fixture or into a
stormwater drain.
§ 238-11 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-13
221:913
Such sumps shall be either automatically discharged or be of sufficient
capacity to receive the house sewage and wastes for not less than 24 hours.
Groundwater sumps shall not be connected to a discharge point connected
to the sanitary sewage collection system.
§ 238-14. Size of vent pipes.
The soil or vent pipe leading to an ejector or other appliance for raising
sewage or other waste matter to the street sewer shall, where a water
closet or closets are installed, be provided with a vent pipe not less than
four inches in diameter, and where fixtures other than water closets are
installed, the waste vent pipe shall be the same diameter as the waste pipe.
§ 238-15. Inspection of motors, air compressors and air tanks.
All motors, air compressors and air tanks shall be located where they
are open for inspection and repair at all times. The air tanks shall be so
proportioned as to be of equal cubical capacity to the ejectors connected
therewith, in which there shall be maintained an air pressure of not less
than two pounds for each foot of height that the sewage is to be raised.
§ 238-13 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-15
221:914
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Drains
§ 238-16. Drainage into stormwater system.
All roofs and paved areas, yards, courts and courtyards shall be drained
into the stormwater sewerage system but not into sewers intended for
sewage only. Where there is no sewer accessible, such connections shall be
discharged into the public gutter, unless otherwise permitted by the proper
authorities, and in such case need not be trapped.
§ 238-17. Size of gutters and leaders.
§ 238-18. Composition of conductors or roof leaders.
When placed within the walls of any building or run in an inner or interior
court or ventilating pipe shaft, all conductors or roof leaders shall be
constructed of cast iron or galvanized wrought iron or steel pipe.
§ 238-19. Replacement of defective conductor pipes.
Where an existing sheet metal conductor pipe within the walls of any
building becomes defective, such conductor shall be replaced by one which
conforms to this article.
A. No gutter or inside leader shall be of less size than the following:
Area of Roof
(square feet)
Gutter
(inches)
Leader
(inches)
Up to 90 3 1 1/2
91 to 270 4 2
271 to 810 4 2 1/2
811 to 1,800 5 3
1,801 to 3,600 6 4
3,601 to 5,500 8 5
5,501 to 9,600 10 6
B. Outside leaders to the frost line shall be one size larger than required in
the above table.
C. Gutters eight inches or over in width on new buildings shall be hung
with wrought iron hangers of approved type.
D. The above sizes of rain leaders are based on diameter of circular rain
leaders, and gutters based on semicircular sheet metal gutters with the
top dimension given and other shapes shall have the same sectional
area.
§ 238-16 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-20
221:915
§ 238-20. Unlawful use of pipes.
Conductor pipes shall not be used as soil, waste or vent pipes, nor shall any
soil, waste or vent pipes be used as conductors. House or intercepting traps
and fresh air inlets are prohibited in connection with house drains.
§ 238-21. Indirect connection of overflow pipes.
Overflow pipes from cisterns, supply tanks, expansion tanks and drip pans
shall connect only indirectly with any house sewer, house drain or soil,
waste or vent pipe.
§ 238-22. Subsoil drains.
Where subsoil drains are placed under the cellar floor or used to encircle
the outer walls of a building, the same shall be made of open-jointed drain
tile or earthenware pipe, not less than four inches in diameter, and shall be
properly trapped and protected against back pressure by an automatic back
pressure valve accessibly located before entering the storm sewer or drain.
They may discharge through a cellar drain.
§ 238-20 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-22
221:916
ARTICLE IV
Connection of Outside Premises
§ 238-23. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE163 —
DWELLING UNIT — A unit compromising living accommodations designed
and used for occupancy by only one family.[Added 7-1-2006 by Ord. No.
3004]
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — One equivalent dwelling unit
(EDU) shall equal an average daily flow rate into the Village of Ridgewood
sanitary sewer collection system of approximately 300 gallons per day (or
110,000 gallons per year) from a premises, discharger, dwelling, entity or
property.[Amended 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3102; 4-15-2009 by Ord.
No. 3175]
A sum as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
A.
In cases where the premises to be serviced shall lie partly in the Village
and partly in an abutting municipality, the annual service charge, as
above computed, shall be reduced by the amount which shall be paid
annually to the Village to cover sewer operations for that portion of the
premises upon which the Village levies real property taxes.
B.
EDUs shall be calculated from the readings of a premise's, dwelling's,
discharger's, entity's or property's Ridgewood Water Company Account
(or applicable Water Utility Account). EDUs shall be calculated for
each premises/discharger/dwelling/entity/property by dividing the total
metered water consumption (in gallons) during the fourth quarter and
first quarter of a year (the months October, November, December,
January, February and March) by 55,000 gallons [approximately 300
gallons per day (gpd) X 182.5] for the subject property. This value shall
then be doubled to represent a full year's average daily flow. Fractional
EDUs shall be round up to the next highest whole number.
A.
An alternate method that a premises/discharger/dwelling/property/
entity can elect to use for determining their EDU of flow is to install
at their cost a flow meter, acceptable to the Village of Ridgewood
Engineering Division, on their sanitary sewer discharge line prior to
the flow's entry into the sanitary sewer main. For meter readings to
be considered for equivalent dwelling unit billing, any and all readings
submitted to the Village of Ridgewood Finance Department shall
contain a statement from a State of New Jersey licensed professional
B.
163. Editor's Note: The definition of "annualized flow charge," added 12-13-2006 by Ord. No.
3031, which immediately preceded this definition, was repealed 3-12-2008 by Ord. No.
3102.
§ 238-23 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-23
221:917
INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT — An agreement made by and between the
Village of Ridgewood and an adjacent municipality for providing sanitary
sewage collection and treatment. The agreement shall be by an authorizing
resolution pursuant to the provisions of the N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et
seq.164[Added 4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 3049]
NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any commercial, industrial,
institutional, tax-exempt, or nonresidential development that creates
additional gross floor area square footage to a property located within the
service area of the Village of Ridgewood sanitary sewer collection system
shall be assessed a connection fee based upon the gross floor area square
footage created.[Added 8-12-2009 by Ord. No. 3205]
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any commercial, residential, tax-exempt
or institutional development that creates additional or new dwelling units
on a property located within the service area of the Village of Ridgewood
sanitary sewer collection system.[Added 8-12-2009 by Ord. No. 3205]
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — The pipes, mains, connections, sewage
disposal plant and appurtenances of the sanitary sewer system maintained
and operated by the Village within and without the boundary limits of the
Village.
SIGNIFICANT DISCHARGER — A significant discharger shall be defined as
any premises, entity or property located in the service area of the Village of
Ridgewood sanitary sewer collection system that has an annual discharge
greater than one equivalent dwelling unit (EDU).[Added 3-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 3102; amended 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3175]
SIGNIFICANT DISCHARGER ANNUALIZED FLOW CHARGE — For each
commercial/industrial premises, entity, dwelling unit, user, or property
located within the service area of the Village of Ridgewood sanitary sewer
collection system deemed a significant discharger, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, shall be assessed an annualized flow charge per
1,000 gallons discharged in excess of one EDU. The annual flow charge
rate shall be determined by the Village Council of the Village of
Ridgewood.[Added 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3102; amended 4-15-2009
by Ord. No. 3175]
TAX EXEMPT SIGNIFICANT DISCHARGER — For any premises, entity,
dwelling unit, user, or property located within the service area of the
Village of Ridgewood sanitary sewer collection system that qualifies as, or is
deemed as a property that is, exempt from real estate taxes, that is deemed
a significant discharger, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
shall be assessed an annualized flow charge per 1,000 gallons discharged
in excess of one EDU. The annual flow charge rate shall be determined by
engineer attesting to the accuracy of the meter readings and the results
presented.
164. Editor's Note: The former definitions of “minor discharger” and “minor discharger flat
rate charge,” added 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3102, were repealed 4-15-2009 by Ord. No.
3175.
§ 238-23 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-23
221:918
the Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood.[Added 4-15-2009 by Ord.
No. 3175]
§ 238-24. Annual service charges. [Added 1-9-1990 by Ord. No.
2237; amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375; 2-8-2006 by Ord. No.
2974; 7-1-2006 by Ord. No. 3004
A. Annual service charge (user fee). [Amended 12-13-2006 by Ord. No.
3031; 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3102; 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3175]
(1) There is hereby established in the calendar year 2009, and for
subsequent years to come, an annual service charge (user fee), as
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, for each commercial/industrial/
institutional premises, entity, dwelling unit, user, or property
located outside the municipal boundaries of the Village of
Ridgewood discharging into the Village of Ridgewood sanitary
sewage collection system.
(2) There is hereby established in the calendar year 2009, and for
subsequent years to come, a significant discharger annual service
charge (user fee), as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, for each
commercial/industrial/institutional premises, entity, dwelling unit,
user, or property located outside the municipal boundaries of the
Village of Ridgewood discharging into the Village of Ridgewood
sanitary sewage collection system.
(3) All annual service charges shall be considered as a municipal lien
subject to tax sale if not paid in the time due for the purposes of this
chapter. Installment payments will be accepted by the Village Tax
Office, however all bills shall be paid in full by October 15 of each
year.
B. Connection fee.
(1) There is hereby established a connection fee to be paid to the
Village of Ridgewood per dwelling unit(s) created by any
residential development situated within the service area of the
Village of Ridgewood sanitary sewer collection system desiring to
utilize the Ridgewood sanitary sewer system. The connection fee
shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, and shall be collected at
the time of application for service or issuance of temporary
certificate of occupancy for the created dwelling unit(s), as set
forth in Article IV of this chapter, Sewers and Sewage Disposal, of
the Ridgewood Village Code. [Amended 8-12-2009 by Ord. No.
3205]
(2) There is hereby established a connection fee to be paid to the
Village of Ridgewood by all nonresidential development on
properties situated within the service area of the Village of
Ridgewood sanitary sewer collection system desiring to utilize the
Ridgewood sanitary sewer system. The connection fee shall be as
§ 238-23 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-24
221:919
§ 238-25. Permit required; filing fee. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, and shall be collected at the time
of application for service or issuance of temporary certificate of
occupancy for the created additional gross floor area square
footage of nonresidential development, as set forth in Article IV
of this chapter, Sewers and Sewage Disposal, of the Ridgewood
Village Code. [Amended 8-12-2009 by Ord. No. 3205]
(3) There is hereby established a connection fee to be paid to the
Village of Ridgewood per dwelling unit(s) situated in a municipality
adjacent to the Village of Ridgewood that has executed an
interlocal agreement with the Village of Ridgewood for collection
and treatment services for domestic sanitary sewage flow. [Added
4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 3049]
C. Annual flow charges. [Amended 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3102;
4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3175]
(1) Significant discharger annual flow charge. There is hereby
established in the calendar year 2009, and for subsequent years to
come, an annual flow charge for each commercial/industrial/
institutional premises, entity, dwelling unit, user, or property
located within the service area of the Village of Ridgewood sanitary
sewer collection system deemed a significant discharger. The
annual flow charge shall be per 1,000 gallons discharged in excess
of one EDU per year, as determined by the provisions of this
chapter.
(2) Tax exempt and tax credited users annual flow charge There is
hereby established in the calendar year 2009, and for subsequent
years to come, an annual flow charge for each tax exempt and tax
credited user or property located within the service area of the
Village of Ridgewood sanitary sewer collection system. The flow
charge shall be per 1,000 gallons discharged, as determined by the
provisions of this chapter.
(3) All annual flow charges shall be considered as a municipal lien
subject to tax sale if not paid in the time due for the purposes of this
chapter. Installment payments will be accepted by the Village Tax
Office, however all bills shall be paid in full by October 15 of each
year.
A. No person who shall own premises situated wholly or partly outside the
boundaries of the Village shall be allowed to connect such premises to
the sanitary sewer system without first satisfying all statutory
requirements necessary thereto and obtaining a permit therefor to be
issued by the Village Clerk after approval thereof by the Director of the
Department of Public Works. Such permit and the application therefor
shall be in such form as shall be approved by the Director of the
§ 238-24 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-25
221:920
§ 238-26. Conditions for issuance of permit. [Amended 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375]
No permit shall issue under this article until the person applying therefor
shall have paid to the Village a sum equal to 1/2 the total annual service
charge for such connection to the sanitary sewer system and until a contract
shall have been entered into by such person agreeing to pay for the cost
of installation and maintenance of the connection and to pay the annual
service charge for his premises for so long a period of time as his premises
shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system. In cases where the Village
shall have paid for all or a part of the cost of installation of the main to
which the applicant desires to connect, an additional lump sum payment
Department of Public Works, and they shall show the name and address
of the applicant, his nature and status (whether an individual or
corporation in good standing and the like), the address of the premises
to be connected to the sanitary sewer system, the estimated cost of
the connection, the estimated amount of sewage to be serviced and
disposed of therefrom and thereby and the distance of such premises
from the nearest sewer main of the sanitary sewer system. Such
application shall be accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in Chapter
145, Fees, and no permit shall issue until such filing fee and the
requirements of § 238-26 shall have been met by the applicant.
B. When a person who shall own premises situated wholly within the
boundaries of the Village shall desire connection to the sanitary sewer
system, they shall satisfy all statutory requirements necessary thereto
and obtain a permit therefor to be issued by the Village Clerk after
approval thereof by the Director of the Department of Public Works. A
connection permit shall be issued upon payment of a connection fee as
shall be set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, and shall be collected from the
applicant at the time of application. [Added 12-10-2003 by Ord. No.
2855]
C. When a person who shall own premises situated wholly within the
boundaries of the Village shall desire connection to the sanitary sewer
system and they have a documented privy vault or septic tank for
sewage disposal, they shall be exempt from the aforementioned
connection fee. [Added 12-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2855]
D. When an entity which shall own premises situated outside of the
boundaries of the Village desires connection of said premises to the
sanitary sewer collection system, the entity shall provide a collection
system capacity analysis upon the Village Engineer’s request to do so.
The capacity analysis shall be performed by a New Jersey licensed
professional engineer and determine if the existing collection system
has sufficient capacity for the proposed flow. If insufficient capacity is
determined, the entity desiring connection to the collection system
shall provide for all necessary upgrades to the collection system to
accommodate the additional flow, in addition to the requisite fees.
[Added 12-13-2006 by Ord. No. 3031]
§ 238-25 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-26
221:921
may be required of the applicant, which shall be as nearly as possible equal
to an amount which could properly be assessed against the property of the
applicant on a benefit assessment basis if the whole premises were situate
in the Village. Such contract shall be in a recordable form approved by the
Director of the Department of Public Works and the attorney for the Village,
which contract may provide that the main contracting and liable party shall
be the municipality in which the premises shall be located, provided that
such municipality shall consent thereto. Failure to pay the annual service
charge as provided for in the contract entered into between the person and
the Village for a period of 30 days shall be deemed an abandonment of all
rights of such person under the permit and contract, and thereafter the
Village may discontinue the connection at its sole pleasure without further
notice to such person and may charge for any reconnection of the same a
new and additional filing fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, and the entry
into a new contract therefor at a revised annual service charge not in excess
of 1 1/2 times the initially established annual service charge.
§ 238-27. Vested right prohibited; permits and contracts
terminable.
No person shall by virtue of this article or any of its provisions have
any vested right to any connection to the sanitary sewer system, and all
permits issued and contracts entered into pursuant to this article shall be
terminable as of right by the Village upon 90 days' notice to such person,
to be issued to such person, in writing, by the Clerk of the Village after
approval thereof by the Director of the Department of Public Works.
§ 238-28. Compliance required; applicability.
Any person who shall hereafter make any connection to the sanitary sewer
system shall do so in conformity with the terms of this article. Any person
who has heretofore made any connection to the sanitary sewer system shall
pay all the fees and charges, including the annual service charge, required
hereunder, except that any person who has contracted with the Village for
any such connection which shall be validly in force as of June 2, 1964, shall
be governed by the terms of such contract until the same shall for any
reason validly terminate or expire, upon which termination or expiration,
the terms of this article shall govern such connection as fully and effectively
as if it had been made after June 2, 1964.
§ 238-26 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-28
221:922
ARTICLE V
Private Sewer Systems
§ 238-29. Required conditions.
Wherever a private sewer is constructed for the use of one or several
buildings, it must conform to the following conditions:
§ 238-30. Construction.
§ 238-31. Separate connection with sewer.
Every house or building shall be separately and independently connected
with the street sewer or main drain on a private alley, and every house shall
be separately vented.
A. Its diameter must not be greater than the main sewer with which it
connects.
B. It must not be carried through any building.
C. It must not be laid along any sidewalk, and when laid under the
roadway, it must not occupy the probable line of any future main sewer.
D. It must contain a separate spur for each building.
E. It must be laid to the satisfaction of the Division of Health or its duly
authorized agent, in accordance with Village ordinances governing
construction of private sewers and, upon completion, must be exposed
for its entire length for examination and approval by the Division.
A. On the outside of buildings where the soil is not of sufficient solidity for
a proper foundation, cylindrical extra-heavy-weight cast-iron pipe of the
best quality must be used. It must be laid on a smooth bottom with a
special groove cut in the bottom of trench for each hub (in order to give
the pipe a solid bearing its entire length) and the soil well rammed on
each side of the pipe. Such pipes must be laid with the joints properly
caulked with lead. The spigot end and hub ends shall be concentric.
B. Where vitrified pipe is used, it must conform in all respects to the
requirements of the plumbing code.
C. In the laying of all sewer pipes, a straight edge shall be used and the
different sections shall be laid in perfect line on the bottom and sides,
but in no case shall terra-cotta pipes be permitted within three feet of
any foundation wall.
D. When tile pipe is used, it shall be connected with the soil or waste pipe
only where provided with a flange to admit of the proper connection
being made. The connection between iron and tile pipes shall be made
as provided in the plumbing code.
§ 238-29 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-32
221:923
§ 238-32. Plans required to be filed.
It shall be unlawful to lay any sewer in any street or highway of the Village
or on any private property to be connected with the sewer system of the
Village without first filing plans and specifications for the laying of such
sewer with the Village Engineer and obtaining from him the approval of
such plans and specifications and a permit, in writing, for the doing of such
work.
§ 238-33. Compliance with plans; supervision and inspection.
Such sewer shall be laid in accordance with the plans and specifications so
approved by the Village Engineer, and the work of the laying of such sewer
shall be done under the inspection and supervision of such Engineer.
§ 238-34. Permit fee; payment of costs. [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth
in Chapter 145, Fees. Upon the issuance of a permit, an inspector shall
be appointed by the Village Engineer, and the cost of inspection and
supervision of such work shall be paid by the person obtaining such permit
to the collector of the Village on demand.
§ 238-35. Unlawful connections.
It shall be unlawful to connect any sewer laid in any public street or in any
private property in the Village for which a permit was not obtained or which
was not laid under plans approved by the Village Engineer or which was laid
without being inspected and supervised by the Village Engineer.
§ 238-36. Connection with septic tank authorized.
When a sewer is not available, drain pipes from buildings shall be connected
with an approved private septic tank with approved seepage runouts.
§ 238-32 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-36
221:924
ARTICLE VI
Septic Tanks
§ 238-37. Where prohibited; exception.
No privy vault or septic tank for sewerage shall hereafter be constructed
or maintained within the Village on any premises where the main drain
emerges within 200 feet of any street wherein there is a sewer and wherein
the city water is laid; nor shall privy vaults or septic tanks for sewerage
be hereinafter permitted or continued in use in any part of the Village
where water closets can be connected with the public sewer in the streets,
provided that the Division of Health may, however, issue written permits
for the toleration, during a period not exceeding 12 consecutive months
(renewable), of vaults or septic tanks, or both, for sewerage where the
nature of the case would make the rigid enforcement of this section a
detriment to the public health.
§ 238-38. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to install, construct or reconstruct any septic tank,
sewage disposal device or a subsurface drainage system in the Village
without first having obtained a permit to do so as hereinafter provided.
§ 238-39. Separate permit for each installation; conditions for
issuance; fees.
A. A separate permit shall be issued for each installation described in
§ 238-38, for which a fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, shall be paid,
and no permit shall be issued until: [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
(1) The applicant has first submitted to the Division of Health a signed
written application, setting forth the information as to plot, plan,
address, boundaries, easements, if any, location of present and
proposed dwellings on subject plot, number of bedrooms in subject
dwelling, type and location of each plumbing fixture and location of
any well, stream or waters of the state, if any, on the subject plot.
(2) The applicant has first conducted at the site of the proposed
sewage disposal system percolation tests in the manner prescribed
by the Board of Health.
(3) The Division of Health has determined that the proposed sewage
disposal system meets the requirements of the Division of Health.
(4) All grading of the premises, except fine grading with hand tools,
shall have been completed in such a manner as will permit the
proper functioning of the sewage disposal system to be installed.
B. After issuance of a permit, no grading of premises shall be performed
by mechanized devices, such as power shovels, bulldozers, trucks and
like equipment. No person shall operate or cause or permit to be
§ 238-37 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-39
221:925
§ 238-40. Responsibility of builder.
As a condition in granting the permit to construct a sewage disposal device,
it is understood that any faulty workmanship, damage or displacement of
any part of the facilities by backfilling, whether observed at the time or
observed some time afterwards, remains the responsibility of the builder
and his contractor receiving the permit, and that the necessary repairs will
be made at the builder's expense for a period of one year.
§ 238-41. Licensed plumber to install; certificate of registration;
fees.
operated any such mechanical device over or upon any completed
or partially installed sewage disposal system or subsurface drainage
system.
A. No person other than a licensed plumber shall install any private
sewage disposal system unless, in addition to complying with all other
requirements of this article, such person shall, at the time of such work,
be the holder of a valid and outstanding certificate of registration
therefor.
B. A certificate of registration may be obtained from the Division of Health
or its authorized representative upon payment of a fee as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees, and upon proof of the applicant's knowledge and
experience in the installation of sewage disposal devices and upon filing
of a cash or corporate surety bond to the Village in the principal sum of
$500. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the proper and workmanlike
performance of all sewage disposal system installation work and further
conditioned upon indemnification of the Village and the person for
whom such work is done for loss resulting from damage or injury to the
Division of Health, the Village or such person for whom the work is
done and for any money necessarily expended or cost paid by them or
replacement of such work, provided that such damage, injury or
expenditure is occasioned by the improper workmanlike performance of
such work or by the failure to comply with all applicable provisions of
all ordinances, regulations and orders of the Division of Health and of
the Village relating to sewage disposal systems. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
C. A certificate of registration shall not entitle the holder to construct,
alter or repair any plumbing system or to make any connection to such
system, except an outside connection with a building drain, or do any
work for which a plumber's license is required.
D. Such certificate shall be valid only during the calendar year for which it
is issued and may be renewed not later than December 31 of the
calendar year next following the year of issuance, upon the payment of
a renewal fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, and the renewal of the
bond required by this section. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
§ 238-39 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-42
221:926
§ 238-42. Concrete floors.
Floors for settling (septic) tanks and distribution boxes shall be made
of poured concrete five inches in thickness and shall project two inches
beyond the outside of the sidewalls. Floors shall be provided with a suitable
slot or keyway to which the sidewalls may be firmly fixed. Under special
circumstances, the right is reserved to require a reinforced concrete floor
seven inches in thickness to a distance of one foot beyond the outside of the
sidewalls.
§ 238-43. Drainpipe.
The drain pipe from the foundation wall to the tanks shall be of heavy castiron
or wrought iron pipe, of approved diameter.
§ 238-44. Absorption system for settling tanks.
A. Each settling (septic) tank shall have an absorption system consisting of
one or more lines of drainage tile not less than four inches in diameter,
laid at a slope of not more than 1/2 to 1 1/2 inches in greatest dimension
in trenches not less than 12 inches deep below the bottom of the tile.
The depth of the trench shall not be more than 36 inches. The gravel or
crushed stone layer shall extend at least 12 inches below and four
inches above the tile and shall be covered first with a layer of
impervious paper and then with loam to the top of the trench. Ends of
drainage tile sections shall be spaced 1/2 to 3/4 of an inch apart and
shall be protected against the entrance of obstructions by means of
tarred felt strips not less than four inches wide placed over the top and
around the sides of the tile at the joints. The bottom of the file shall not
be less than 14 inches below the surface of the ground, and in no case
shall the bottom of the trench be less than 24 inches above the normal
groundwater table.
B. The total length of absorption tile and the width and spacing of
drainage trenches shall be suitable to the soil, based upon percolation
tests, subject to the approval of the Board of Health, but in no case shall
trenches be less than 12 inches wide nor less than six feet apart, center
to center. For single-family dwellings, there shall be not less than 150
linear feet of drainage tile or as much more as may be required by the
Inspector to properly drain the sewage from the house for which the
installation is being made.
C. No settling (septic) tanks shall be built within 10 feet of the line of any
street, road, lane or alley or within 10 feet of the property line or fence
of any adjacent property nor within 20 feet of the foundation wall of any
dwelling house nor within 50 feet of any well, stream or waters of the
state.
§ 238-42 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-45
221:927
§ 238-45. Finished surface grading.
Finished surface grading shall be done in such a way that no surface water
will stand over the absorption area. A minimum surface grade of not less
than 2% will be permitted.
§ 238-46. Required changes.
The Division of Health shall have the right to require any change in type,
size, elevation or capacity of any of the units comprising the sewage
disposal system by reason of conditions found during its construction.
§ 238-47. Permit to pump out tank required. [Added 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
It shall be unlawful to pump out any septic tank within the Village without
first having obtained a permit, in writing, from the Division of Health.
Applications for such permit are available at the Division of Health and
when filed with the Division shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees.
§ 238-45 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-47
221:928
ARTICLE VII
Waste Discharge
§ 238-48. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
SEWAGE SYSTEM — All the facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
VILLAGE — Any one or all of the duly authorized officers and employees of
the Village empowered to act in the matter involved.
§ 238-49. Prohibited substances.
Except as otherwise authorized and regulated, either by the subsequent
provisions of this article or by other ordinances or regulations of the Village,
no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sanitary sewer
or storm sewer within the Village any of the following described liquids or
substances:
A. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, wood shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics or any other solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage system.
B. Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
C. Any garbage, fat, oil or grease. The term "garbage" shall not include
remnants of food that has been used for consumption in a private home
and which has been ground to such a degree as to allow a free flow in
the sewage system.
D. Any waters or wastes containing toxic, corrosive or poisonous
substances or suspended solids of such character and quantity as to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process or which
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to the structure or
equipment of the sewage works.
E. Any septic tank contents, pumpings or residues therefrom, any
stormwater, surface or ground water, industrial process water of any
kind, any waste or other waters originating from or being drained from
any car-washing installation or establishment, air-conditioning or
refrigeration unit, commercial process of any kind or from any
plumbing fixture or other device which is in need of repair and is
discharging water unnecessarily into the sanitary sewer system.
§ 238-48 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-50
221:929
§ 238-50. Industrial or commercial waste discharge prohibited.
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sanitary sewer
any industrial or commercial waste.165
§ 238-51. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
§ 238-52. Preliminary treatment of certain wastes.
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million
by weight or containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of
suspended solids or containing any quantity of substance having the
characteristics described in § 238-49 or having an average daily flow
greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the Village shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Village. Where necessary, in
the opinion of the Village, the owner shall provide at his expense such
preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce the biochemical
oxygen demand to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350
parts per million by weight or reduce objectionable characteristics or
constituents to within maximum limits or control the quantities and rates
of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other
pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities
shall be submitted for the approval of the Village, and no construction of
such facilities shall be commenced until such approvals are obtained in
writing.
§ 238-53. Maintenance of treatment facilities at owner's expense.
Whenever required by the Village, if preliminary treatment facilities are
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
reasonably effective operation by the owner at his expense.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors may be required and shall be provided
wherever, in the opinion of the Village, they are necessary for the
proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease or flammable
substances. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by
the Village and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. They shall be of substantial construction,
capable of withstanding extreme changes of temperature and equipped
with easily removable covers which shall be gastight and watertight.
B. When required by the Village, where installed, all grease, oil and sand
interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in
reasonably efficient operation at all times.
165. Editor's Note: Former Sections 25-51 through 25-55 of the 1974 Code, which immediately
followed this section, were deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
§ 238-50 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-54
221:930
§ 238-54. Installation of control manhole.
When required by the Village, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Village. The manhole shall be installed by the owner
at his expense and shall be maintained by him.
§ 238-55. Testing of samples.
All measurements, tests and analyses shall be taken by the Village of the
characteristics of waters and wastes and shall be determined in accordance
with American Public Health Association Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage and shall be determined upon suitable
samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole
has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.
§ 238-56. Authority to enter for inspection.
The Village and its duly authorized officers and employees bearing proper
credentials and identifications shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 238-57. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
The owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of any premises where violation
of any provision of this article is found to exist, which violation for its
abatement shall be of such a nature as to involve a physical change in any
building or other structure, piping or appurtenances, either above or below
the ground, shall be served by the Village with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit (not less than
10 days) for the satisfactory correction thereof. The violator shall, within
the period of time stated in such notice or any lawfully issued extension
thereof, permanently cease all violations; otherwise, the penalty provisions
of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, shall govern.
§ 238-58. Liability for expense, loss or damage.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable
to the Village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the Village by
reason of such violation.
§ 238-54 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-58
221:931

ARTICLE VIII
Sewer User Rates
[Added 4-26-1983 by Ord. No. 1886]
§ 238-59. User charges. [Amended 7-1-2006 by Ord. No. 3004;
4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3175]
Each user of wastewater collection and treatment services provided by
the Village of Ridgewood shall pay his proportionate share of the cost of
operation and maintenance (including replacement, and further including
extraneous flows such as groundwater and stormwater which enter the
system) of such works as set forth in this article as follows:
§ 238-60. Review of system.
The user charge system shall be reviewed biennially to assure that all users
are paying their proper proportionate share of the cost of the operation
and maintenance of the system and otherwise to comply with the rules and
regulations now or hereafter promulgated by the Environmental Protection
Agency.
§ 238-61. Increased costs of toxic pollutants.
Any increased cost which may result to the system because of toxic
pollutants discharged into the system shall be paid entirely by the toxic
discharger responsible therefor.
A. Residential users and small nonresidential users with waste flows of no
more than one equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) of domestic sanitary
wastewater shall continue to pay for their use of the system based on ad
valorem taxation.
B. Industrial, institutional, and commercial users which discharge more
than one equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) of flow shall pay for their use
of the system based on the annual volume discharged, in addition to
parameters such as biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), suspended
solids (SS), chemical oxygen demand (COD), and the quantity of fats,
oils and greases per unit volume of the flow.
C. Tax exempt and tax credited users, including users who make a
payment in lieu of taxes but excluding municipally owned properties of
the Village of Ridgewood, shall pay for their actual use of the sanitary
sewage collection system as determined by taking the total metered
water consumption (in gallons) during the fourth quarter and first
quarter of a year (the months October, November, December, January,
February and March) and doubling it as equal to actual annual water
consumption for the calendar year. The flow charge shall be per 1,000
gallons discharged, as determined by the provisions of this chapter.
§ 238-59 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-62
221:933
§ 238-62. Notification of users.
Each user of the system shall be notified at least annually of the rate and
portion of overall taxes paid attributable to the wastewater collection and
treatment service system.
§ 238-63. Effect on preexisting contracts or agreements.
A system of costs and payments set forth in this article shall take
precedence over any preexisting agreement or contract which terms are
inconsistent with the aforementioned Act and regulations enacted pursuant
thereto.
§ 238-64. Costs of pretreatment program.
In the event that a pretreatment program is required to be installed by the
Village, the costs of such a pretreatment program shall be included in the
user charge system cost.
§ 238-65. Recordkeeping.
The Village Manager is hereby directed to develop and implement a detailed
system of recordkeeping for wastewater flows and user rates for each user
class, to prepare and issue separate billings or notification to indicate sewer
user rates and charges for each class herein established and to implement a
detailed recordkeeping system for bills issued and payments received based
on the sewer user charge system.
§ 238-66. Determination of rates. [Added 12-13-2006 by Ord. No.
3031]
A. The annual service charge rates for the different user classes for the
current fiscal year, and subsequent years, shall be determined by the
Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood.
B. The significant discharger annual flow charge rate shall be per 1,000
gallons discharged, in excess of one EDU per year, as determined each
fiscal year by the Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood based
upon the operating costs of the Village of Ridgewood Water Pollution
Control Facility. [Amended 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3102; 4-15-2009
by Ord. No. 3175]
C. Tax exempt and tax credited users rate shall be per 1,000 gallons
discharged, as determined each fiscal year by the Village Council of the
Village of Ridgewood based upon the operating costs of the Village of
Ridgewood Water Pollution Control Facility. [Added 3-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 3102; amended 4-15-2009 by Ord. No. 3175]
§ 238-62 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-67
221:934
§ 238-67. Tax exempt or tax credited users. [Amended 4-15-2009 by
Ord. No. 3175]
All dischargers to the Village of Ridgewood sanitary sewer collection system
that are classified as tax exempt or tax credited users shall pay for their
wastewater discharge. The rate charged shall be in accordance with the
provisions of § 238-59C.
§ 238-67 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-67
221:935

ARTICLE IX
Improper Disposal of Waste into Storm Drains
[Added 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2962]
§ 238-68. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish prohibitations on the spilling,
dumping, or disposal of any materials other than stormwater to the Village
of Ridgewood municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) operated by
the Village of Ridgewood so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 238-69. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CATCHBASIN — A cistern, vault, chamber, or well that is usually built along
a street as part of the storm sewer collection system, designed to accept
stormwater runoff into it.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that are owned or operated by the Village of Ridgewood or other
public body, and are designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.
§ 238-70. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Village of
Ridgewood is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 238-68 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-71
221:937
§ 238-71. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions to prohibition include:
§ 238-72. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Village of Ridgewood Police
Department, and/or Health Department Sanitation, and/or the Director of
the Department of Public works or his/her designated representative.
§ 238-73. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a minimum fine of $250
per violation, not to exceed $2,000.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities, including the washing of fire-fighting
vehicles.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water: beach
maintenance equipment immediately following their use for their
intended purposes; and equipment used in the application of salt and
de-icing materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing
materials must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the
maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g.,
shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to
storage for reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted
in the above situation, is limited to exterior undercarriage and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 238-71 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-73
221:938
ARTICLE X
Illicit Connections to Stormwater Sewer System
[Added 1-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2969]
§ 238-74. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish prohibitations on illicit connections
to the Village of Ridgewood municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
operated by the Village of Ridgewood so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 238-75. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Village of
Ridgewood, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are
not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that are owned or operated by the Village of Ridgewood or other
public body, and are designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollution Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. Chapter 7:14A.
§ 238-74 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-75
221:939
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperatures for
the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come in direct contact with any
raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished product.
Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or biocides
to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or corrosion
inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during the manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 238-76. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Village of Ridgewood any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 238-77. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Village of Ridgewood Police
Department and/or other designated municipal officials.
§ 238-78. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subjected to a fine not to exceed $500 per violation per day the
violation(s) exists.
§ 238-75 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-78
221:940
ARTICLE XI
Damage Claims for Backup Onto Certain Premises
[Added 1-16-2008 by Ord. No. 3092]
§ 238-79. Certain claims recognized.
The Village of Ridgewood will recognize certain claims for damages
resulting from the backup of sanitary sewage from the public sewage
system onto certain private residential premises occurring after the
effective date of this article and occurring under the certain specific
circumstances, all as hereinafter specified, notwithstanding the immunity
from such claims afforded by Title 59 of the Statutes of the State of New
Jersey but nevertheless without prejudice to any other specific defenses
which it may have beyond the limited circumstances specified herein and
also without prejudice to any defense whatsoever that the Village may have
as to any other similar claims not recognized hereunder.
§ 238-80. Basis for claims.
Claims recognizable hereunder shall be limited to only such claims for
actual damage to property directly caused by contact with public sanitary
sewage that has backflowed from the public sanitary sewage system as
the result of a blockage within a public sewage main into which such
private premises is connected. Specifically excluded are claims resulting
from blockages within the sewerage system of private premises and any
lateral or other type of connection which may be partially located in a public
right-of-way. For the purpose of this section, the lateral or other type of
connection shall include the collar or other devices by which connection
into the public main is made.
§ 238-81. Backflow preventer required.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no claim shall be recognized by the Village
in the event that the sanitary sewer system of a newly constructed private
residential premises, or such existing premises at which construction
renovations involve the replacement of the sewer lateral to the residence,
or such premises that has previously incurred damage from the backup of
sanitary sewage from the public sewer system which includes any drains
or other appurtenances or other openings or receptacles below the highest
point of the grade level of the lateral or other device connecting that sewer
system into the main unless there is installed a backflow preventer in the
system at a point nearer to the connection to the public system than any of
those drains, appurtenances, openings or receptacles, with the exception of
one clean-out opening located closer to the connection to the public system
than the backflow preventer, which shall be securely sealed. Such backflow
preventer must be of such type as required for new construction under the
plumbing code in effect at the time of the adoption of this article. Such
required backflow preventer must be maintained in accordance with the
requirements of its manufacturer for the proper operation of such device,
§ 238-79 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-81
221:941
and any clean-out opening required in connection therewith shall be kept
securely sealed.
§ 238-82. Persons covered.
Only individual owners of single-family, two-family or three-family
residential dwelling premises who make such premises their primary
residence and who own such premises in their own individual name or
names, and from whose insurance coverage the claim is either fully or
partially excluded, shall be qualified to make a claim under this article.
§ 238-83. Extent of recognizable claim.
The Village will recognize such claims which otherwise qualify under this
article only to the extent of such actual and direct compensatory damage
against which the claimant exercised a reasonable effort in mitigation.
Nominal, prospective, anticipated, speculative, remote, consequential and
exemplary damages are excluded herefrom. Any claim partially covered by
private insurance shall be excluded from coverage under this article to the
extent of such private insurance coverage.
§ 238-84. Extent of compensation.
The Village will compensate a qualifying claim of any of the aforesaid
recognizable damages only as follows: cost of removal of sanitary sewerage
and of cleaning and sanitizing premises, fixtures and salvageable
personalty, 100%, to a limit of $1,500; the cost of repair to or replacement
of damaged structure, fixtures or personalty, 100%, to a limit of $2,500.
§ 238-85. Notice required.
Any covered persons must notify the Water Pollution Control Facility
(WPCF) in the Village immediately upon discovery of any backups into the
residential structure to identify whether a backup has occurred, the cause,
if any backup, to assist in minimizing any damage and start the restoration
and clean-up process.
§ 238-86. Procedures for claim and satisfaction.
Any claimant qualifying hereunder may seek to recover as herein provided
by filing in writing an application signed and certified as to truthfulness by
the qualifying owner or owners of the premises. Such application shall be
filed with the Village Manager upon such form as he or she may hereafter
require within five days of the discovery of the damage for which recovery
is sought. Any claim made after the five-day period shall be barred. The
Village Manager shall determine whether and to what extent such claim is
recognizable in accordance with the conditions and limitations hereinbefore
provided. The Village Manager may thereupon forward the claim to a
licensed claims adjuster of the State of New Jersey to be designated by
the governing body for investigation and a determination as to the amount
of compensation to be payable under this article if the Manager deems
§ 238-81 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-86
221:942
necessary. Both the Village Manager and the claims adjuster may require,
as they or either of them deem in their own discretion reasonably necessary,
such further proof and inspection; any applicant refusing such request for
the same shall be disqualified for recovery hereunder. Such payment as
determined to be payable shall not be paid to the claimant or claimants until
each of them has duly executed a full and complete release from any and all
further liability of the Village.
§ 238-86 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-86
221:943

ARTICLE XII
Liquid Waste Acceptance Program
[Added 12-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3233]
§ 238-87. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a liquid waste acceptance program
at the Village of Ridgewood operated Water Pollution Control Facility
(WPCF), 561 Prospect Street, Glen Rock. The liquid waste acceptance
program will help further the goals of providing environmental benefits
by directing effluent from septic systems to modern, up-to-date, properly
permitted treatment facilities. This article provides the requirements and
conditions for the acceptance of trucked-in liquid wastes at the WPCF.
§ 238-88. Definitions and word usage.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED LIQUID WASTE — Any liquid waste meeting the criteria
established by the Village for acceptance by the Village of Ridgewood
wastewater treatment facility, as measured by gallon for billing purposes.
FOG — An acronym for the waste stream containing Fats, Oils, and Grease.
Said waste stream to be of a type and composition accepted by the Village of
Ridgewood wastewater treatment facility.[Added 9-18-2013 by Ord. No.
3389]
HOURS OF LIQUID WASTE ACCEPTANCE — The following schedule for the
acceptance of trucked-in liquid wastes shall be adhered to:
LIQUID WASTE ACCEPTANCE BILLS — Bills for wastes received by the
Village shall be prepared monthly or at the discretion of the Superintendent
of WPCF. Payment shall be made within 30 calendar days of the date of
the bill. Failure to pay within the thirty-calendar-day period shall subject
a liquid waste transporter to revocation of permission to discharge at the
WPCF and a violation of this article.
LIQUID WASTE TRANSPORTER — A tanker truck with a valid NJDEP
annual registration, of known volume, and approved by the Village to
discharge at the Village's WPCF, transporting liquid wastes. Each truck
shall meet the following criteria:
A. Normal hours: Monday through Friday, 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.
Emergency hours: only upon prior approval of the Superintendent of
the WPCF. Excessive emergency requests may be grounds for
revocation of permission to discharge.
B.
Each truck shall be equipped with a dump valve and a minimum of 15
feet of controlled discharge hose.
A.
§ 238-87 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-88
221:945
MASTICATED FOOD WASTE — A flowable waste stream comprised of
ground food and suitable organic matter that can be pumped by the
Village's wastewater treatment facility. Said waste stream shall be of a
type and composition acceptable to the Village of Ridgewood wastewater
treatment facility.[Added 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3583]
§ 238-89. Acceptable liquid wastes. [Amended 9-18-2013 by Ord.
No. 3389]
The Village of Ridgewood Water Pollution Control Facility (WPCF) will
accept trucked-in liquid wastes meeting the following criteria:
§ 238-90. Quality control of liquid wastes. [Added 9-18-2013 by Ord.
No. 3389166]
The Village of Ridgewood Water Pollution Control Facility (WPCF) shall
employ the necessary means to confirm load quality and classification. In
Each truck shall have its capacity clearly marked on the side of the
truck visible from the ground.
B.
Each truck shall have been properly registered with the Village prior
to discharging at the WPCF. All registrations must be completed and
approved one week prior to initiating discharge.
C.
D. Each truck shall be readily identifiable.
A. Liquid commonly classified as "grey water" from a domestic leachate
field.
B. Liquid from the pumping out or draining of a residential/domestic
septic system tank.
C. Wastewater free of hydrocarbon or chemical product contamination.
D. Pumpout FOG: viscous fats/oil/grease, only if the materials are from an
animal or vegetable source, commonly from restaurant grease traps.
Nonaqueous content to be less than 25% of the load.
E. Concentrated FOG: viscous fats/oil/grease, mechanically concentrated
prior to delivery, with the load having a nonaqueous content between
26% and 50% of the volume delivered.
F. Super-concentrated FOG: viscous fats/oil/grease, mechanically
concentrated prior to delivery, with the load having a nonaqueous
content greater than 50% of the volume delivered.
G. Masticated food waste. Ground food or organic waste in a flowable
slurry that can be pumped by the equipment at the plant. [Added
3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3583]
166. Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former §§ 238-90 through 238-92 were
renumbered as §§ 238-92, 238-92.1 and 238-92.2, respectively.
§ 238-88 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-90
221:946
the event the WPCF's contract laboratory is required to provide quality
determinations for a liquid waste load received at the plant, said cost of the
laboratory analytical analysis shall be the responsibility of the liquid waste
transporter delivering the load to the plant.
§ 238-91. Establishment of liquid waste acceptance rates. [Added
9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 3389; amended 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3583]
§ 238-92. Prohibited conduct.
No person or entity shall discharge or cause to be discharged via a liquid
waste transporter to the WPCF the following:
A. The Village Manager, in consultation with the Village Chief Financial
Officer, WPCF Plant Superintendent, and the Village Engineer shall
have the authority to establish and adjust the Liquid Waste Acceptance
Rates. Rates will be established according to the ranges presented in
Chapter 145, Fees. The Village Manager shall be able to adjust rates
according to market conditions as warranted.
B. All liquid waste transporters delivering loads of FOG shall be billed
according to the tank volume stated on the truck.
C. All liquid waste transporters delivering loads of grey water, domestic
septage, or wastewater meeting requirements shall be billed for actual
volume of the load on the truck.
D. All liquid waste transporters delivering loads of flowable masticated
food waste meeting requirements shall be billed for the actual volume
of the load on the truck.
E. Volume discount: For individual transporter/hauler firms that deliver
more than 1,000,000 gallons of liquid waste per month to the plant, the
Village shall grant them a discount of 15% from the total charges for
that specific month. The discount shall not carry over to subsequent
months if the subsequent month's volume does not exceed 1,000,000
gallons of liquid waste delivered.
A. Any effluent or waste containing hydrocarbon compounds, volatile
organic compounds, semivolatile compounds, wastes with a pH less
than five or greater than nine.
B. Any product, compound or substance found to be detrimental to the
treatment process at the Village's WPCF.
C. Any product or substance that causes an NJPDES permit violation to the
facility.
D. Any waste containing regulated substances.
E. No mineral or hydrocarbon source materials will be accepted. [Added
9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 3389]
§ 238-90 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-92.1
221:947
§ 238-92.1. Enforcement. [Amended 9-18-2013 by Ord. No. 3389]
The conditions of this article shall be enforced by the Director of Public
Works or his/her designated subordinate, the Superintendent of the Water
Pollution Control Facility or his/her designated subordinate.
§ 238-92.2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2013 by Ord.
No. 3389]
Any person(s) or entities that are found to have violated any of the
provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not less than $500 per
violation, per charge, in addition to being liable for any actions initiated
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or the United
States Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 238-92.1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-92.2
221:948
ARTICLE XIII
Sump Pumps
[Added 12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3321]
§ 238-93. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to implement a program to reduce and
minimize the inflow of additional water into the Village's sanitary sewage
collection and treatment system. This article prohibits the discharge of
water from any roof, surface, ground, storm drain, swimming pool water,
sump pump or other source of collection of natural precipitation into the
Village's sanitary sewage collection system to reduce the costs and protect
against other damaging effects. The Village's sanitary sewer system has, on
occasion, been overloaded to the extent it has bypassed effluent creating
the potential for property damage and public health hazards. Additionally,
all liquid that enters the sanitary sewage collection system must be treated
at the Village's Water Pollution Control Facility at a cost. Reduction and
elimination of liquids (i.e., stormwater runoff) that do not require treatment,
reduces the expense to the Village and assists in protecting the health,
safety, and welfare of the residents.
§ 238-94. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMNESTY PERIOD —
ILLEGAL/ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any connection (pipe) to the sanitary
sewage collection system that does not convey sanitary wastes.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGES — No person or entity shall discharge or cause
to be discharged or released any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, yard
drainage runoff, landscaping irrigation runoff, pond overflow, or any other
liquid other sanitary sewage into the sanitary sewage collection system. No
On or before June 1, 2012, any person, business, or other entity who
voluntarily reports an illicit connection on or at their premises to the
Village's Water Pollution Control Division, so that it can be remedied
in a proper and acceptable manner according to the Village's Building
Codes, shall have any and all permit fees waived by the Village. This
waiver of fees shall only apply to Village Water Pollution Control
Division fees, not Building Department fees nor cover the actual cost of
the remediation.
A.
After June 1, 2012, any person, business, property owner, or other
entity who is found to have or maintain a illegal/illicit connection,
as described above, and who fails to report such connection to the
Village's Water Pollution Control Division, shall be liable for any and all
permit fees, inspection fees, penalties, and connection fees as required
by the Village, to remediate the illegal/illicit connection.
B.
§ 238-93 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-94
221:949
person, business, or other entity shall cause to be discharged any hazardous
substances into the Village's collection system.
§ 238-95. Prohibited conduct.
No person, property owner, business, or entity shall discharge or cause to
be discharged via a liquid waste transporter to the WPCF the following:
§ 238-96. Inspections.
§ 238-97. Surcharge.
A. Any effluent or waste containing hydrocarbon compounds or volatile
organic compounds.
B. Any product, compound or substances found to be detrimental to the
treatment process at the Village's WPCF.
C. Any product or substance that causes a NJPDES permit violation.
D. Any waste containing regulated substances.
A. Inspection of premises, buildings, structures, and facilities connected
to the Village's sanitary sewage collection system for illegal/illicit
connections shall be performed by the Building Inspector, Plumbing
Subcode Official, Fire Code Official, Village Engineer, Superintendent
of Water Pollution Control, or their designated representatives, as long
as they present a current identification card issued by the Village of
Ridgewood identifying the said representative when requesting entry
or access to any property within the Village's Water Pollution Control
Division service area for the purpose of inspecting, observing, testing,
and sampling to confirm that there is no sump pump or other prohibited
discharge into the sanitary sewage collection system in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
B. Any person, business, property owner, or other entity with interest in a
particular property that refuses entrance to a premises by the
designated inspection officials, upon presentation of proper
identification or within 14 calendar days of the mailing of a written
notice, shall become immediately subject to the monthly surcharge
noted and described in § 238-97 of this article. Said surcharge will
become applicable within 10 calendar days following the mailing of an
official notice to the person, business, property owner, or other entity
with interest in a particular property that denied entry. The monthly
surcharge shall remain assessed to the property until such time that an
inspection is conducted by the Village to ensure compliance and the
illegal/illicit connection has been satisfactorily terminated.
C. Any premises, buildings, structures, and facilities connected to the
Village's sanitary sewage collection system that requires a reinspection
for compliance to eliminate any imposed monthly surcharge shall be
liable for a reinspection fee as detailed in Chapter 145, Fees.
§ 238-94 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-97
221:950
§ 238-98. Violations and penalties.
Any person, business, property owner, or other entity with interest in a
particular property found to have reinstituted an illegal/illicit connection
after the inspection of premises shall be subject to a fine not less than
$500 per violation, per charge, in addition to being liable for the monthly
surcharge.
§ 238-99. Village assistance for compliance.
§ 238-100. Waiver.
A. Any person, business, property owner, or other entity with interest in a
particular property that refuses a request for an inspection, as
described in § 238-96, shall be liable for a monthly surcharge for the
month part thereof as described in Chapter 145, Fees. The assessed
surcharge will be billed to the property owner of record, on a biannual
basis by the Village Tax Collector. Any surcharges not received by the
Village Tax Collector within 30 calendar days of being billed, shall be
converted into a lien on the subject property in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:14B-42.
B. All imposed surcharges shall remain in place on the subject property
until such time as the Village Engineer or Superintendent of Water
Pollution Control certifies to the Village Tax Collector that the person,
business, property owner, or other entity with interest in a particular
property that is subject of a surcharge has satisfactorily demonstrated
full compliance with the provisions of this article.
A. The Village of Ridgewood will assist and provide technical guidance to
any person, business, property owner, or other entity with interest in a
particular property in remediating illegal/illicit connections as it
involves a matter of public safety, health, and welfare of the Village.
Said assistance is limited to technical information and advice, and does
not or will not include any actual construction effort. Said assistance
shall not be grounds for the staying of any surcharge, violations, or
penalties.
B. All costs associated with the effort to comply with the provisions of this
article shall be borne by the person, business, property owner, or other
entity with interest in a particular property.
A. Any person, business, property owner, or other entity with interest in a
particular property, who shall by inspection or voluntary reporting be
determined to be in violation of the provisions of this article, shall be
permitted to file for a waiver of the surcharge requirement of § 238-97.
The waiver is predicated upon satisfactorily demonstrating that the
person, business, property owner, or other entity with interest in a
particular property has exhausted all possible measures for the
discharge of nonsanitary wastes from his or her property in a manner so
as to not negatively affect adjacent properties or the public right-of-way.
§ 238-97 POLITICAL FUND-RAISING § 238-100
221:951
The waiver will be granted only upon the Village Engineer or the
Superintendent of Water Pollution Control certifying the above
conditions have been met.
B. In the event a person, business, property owner, or other entity with
interest in a particular property is granted a waiver, the property's
discharge flow quantity to the sanitary sewer shall be monitored, at the
sole cost and expense of the person, business, property owner, or other
entity with interest in a particular property. The quantity of flow
discharged shall be billed to the person, business, property owner, or
other entity with interest in a particular property at the rates
established for the significant discharger program, as described in
§ 238-24C.
§ 238-100 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 238-100
221:952
Chapter 239
SIDEWALK SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and special sales — See Ch. 107.
Garage sales — See Ch. 163.
Newsracks — See Ch. 199.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 218.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 249.
§ 239-1. Applicability.
There are hereby established procedures, rules and regulations governing
the licensing of Ridgewood sidewalk sales during Ridgewood Sale Days in
the Central Business District of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 239-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERMITTED SIDEWALK SALES — Sidewalk sales are permitted only during
Ridgewood Sale Days and by any retail or commercial establishment where
goods or services are sold upon the public right-of-way, namely the
sidewalks immediately in front of any place of business where the goods
or services are sold; or where permitted on public property with specific
written permission of the Village Manager or on private property with
written permission of the owner of record. Sidewalk sales are only
permitted during Ridgewood Sale Days and only to the retail or commercial
licensees who have obtained a license pursuant to this chapter.
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way reserved for the
pedestrian traffic from the curb to the front line of the building housing the
retail or commercial establishment.
§ 239-3. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or organization of any kind (hereinafter collectively referred to
as "person") to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged
in the business of conducting a sidewalk sale during Ridgewood Sale Days
upon the sidewalks of the Village of Ridgewood, or on private property,
unless such person shall hold a currently valid permit issued pursuant to
the terms of this chapter.
§ 239-4. Unobstructed sidewalk area to be maintained.
No permit shall be issued hereinunder unless the permittee shall
demonstrate that a minimum of four feet of unobstructed sidewalk surface
§ 238-100 SIDEWALK SALES § 239-4
239:953
will be available for pedestrian traffic around or through such sidewalk
sale and that such sale be directly in front of a retail or commercial
establishment. The term "directly in front of" shall be construed to mean
the area represented by an extension of each side of the store occupied
by the retail or commercial establishment projected directly to the curbline
immediately in front thereof.
§ 239-5. Application for permit.
Application for the permit shall be made to the Building Department and
shall be signed by the applicant. The application shall contain the following
information:
§ 239-6. Review of permit application.
The Building Department will review the application for completeness and
compliance with the terms of this chapter. If the application is complete, the
Building Department will act upon the same and within five business days
of the submittal of the application. If the application is not complete, the
Building Department will so notify the applicant within five business days
of the submission and specifically detail the area in which the application
lacks compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 239-7. Issuance of permit.
If the application complies with this chapter, the Building Department shall
issue a permit strictly subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 239-8. Indemnification.
No permit required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate a sidewalk sale until such person shall have filed with the Building
Department a statement agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the
Village of Ridgewood, its agents, servants, representatives or employees
from any or all claims, damages, judgment costs or expenses, including
attorneys fees, which they or any of them may incur or be required to
A. The name, residence address and telephone number of each individual,
owner, partner or, if a domestic corporation, the names, residences,
addresses and telephone numbers of the directors and officers owning a
ten-percent or greater interest in the corporation and the chief
operating executive of the corporation and, if a nondomestic
corporation, the name, residence address and telephone number of the
managing officer for service of process within the State of New Jersey.
B. A copy of the trade, corporate, business or fictitious name upon which
the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this chapter.
C. The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other than
the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to the
application.
§ 239-4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 239-8
239:954
pay because of any personal injury, including death, or property damage
suffered by any person or persons as a result of or related in any way to
the operation and maintenance of the sidewalk sale for which the permit is
issued.
§ 239-9. Liability insurance requirement.
§ 239-10. Sidewalk sale days.
Sidewalk sale days shall constitute only those days which are approved
specifically by the Village Manager.
§ 239-11. Vending machines.
No vending machines of any kind are permitted on the exterior of any
building operating a sidewalk sale.
§ 239-12. Removal of property from sidewalk.
The permittee agrees, at the end of the permit period or in the event that
the permit is revoked, that the permittee, of his own cost and expense,
will vacate the sidewalk space and promptly remove the property placed
thereon. Failure to do so shall immediately grant to the Village the right
to remove any property on the sidewalk, and the permittee agrees to
reimburse the Village for the cost of removing and storing the same.
A. No permit required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate a sidewalk sale until such person shall have first filed with the
Building Department a certificate of insurance evidencing a general
liability insurance policy issued to such person by a public liability
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey
affording the coverage set forth below in the amounts specified for the
entire period of the sidewalk sale. Such insurance policy shall name the
Village of Ridgewood, 131 North Maple Avenue, Ridgewood, New
Jersey, its agents, officers, servants, representatives and employees as
additional insured with respect to the operation of the sidewalk sale in
the following amounts:
(1) Bodily injury:
(a) Each person: $10,000.
(b) Each accident: $1,000,000.
(2) Property damage:
(a) Each person: $300,000.
(b) Each accident: $3,000,000.
B. Such insurance policy shall also hold harmless the Village of Ridgewood
from any and all claims that may be filed as a result of said sidewalk
sale. The Village of Ridgewood shall be a named insured thereon.
§ 239-8 SIDEWALK SALES § 239-12
239:955
Chapter 240
SILLY STRING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 212.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 215.
Poppers — See Ch. 221A.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 249.
§ 240-1. Discharge in public prohibited.
No person, including any individual or entity, shall discharge or permit the
discharge of a product called "Silly String" in or along the public streets,
sidewalks, parks or public places in the Village of Ridgewood at any time.
§ 240-2. Restrictions on sales.
No person, including any individual or entity, shall sell a product called
"Silly String" in or along the public streets, sidewalks, parks, public places
or from any business conducted in the Village of Ridgewood from May 15 to
July 15, both inclusive, and in December of any year.
§ 240-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK — Any area in the Village of Ridgewood dedicated as a public park or
used for park, recreation or conservation purposes.
PUBLIC PLACES — Any place owned, leased or utilized for the benefit of
the public by or on behalf of the Village of Ridgewood or any governmental
agency.
SIDEWALK — The area within the public right-of-way adjoining streets in
the Village of Ridgewood.
SILLY STRING — A putty-like substance which is shot and/or propelled by
use of an aerosol can and/or similar dispenser and which, when so shot/
propelled, emerges from said can/dispenser in a string-like form, the same
being sold under the product name of "Silly String" and/or other product
names.
STREETS — Any street laid out and used as a public thoroughfare in the
Village of Ridgewood.
§ 240-4. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the penalties provided
in § 1-15, Violations and penalties, of the Ridgewood Code.
§ 239-12 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 240-4
240:956
Chapter 240A
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAG REDUCTION
§ 240A-1. Definitions.
FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment, business, store
or commercial property, properly licensed where required and inspected,
which serves made-to-order food or beverages for dine-in, takeout or
delivery, including food trucks and mobile carts.
GOODS AND PRODUCTS — Things and items that are prepared and made
to be sold, including, but not limited to, groceries, prepared food, foodstuffs,
meat, dairy, beverages, alcohol and any and all other related items sold at
retail by businesses and stores.
PRODUCE BAG or PRODUCT BAG — Any bag without handles that is used
exclusively to segregate produce, meats, seafood, nuts, other food items
and merchandise to carry them inside the store to the point of sale or to
prevent such items from coming into direct contact with other purchased
items, where such contact could damage or contaminate other food or
merchandise when placed together in a reusable or recycled bag.
RECYCLABLE PAPER CARRY-OUT BAG — A paper bag that is able to be
recycled.
RETAIL — The sale of goods and products for use and/or consumption.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT or RETAIL STORE — For the purpose of this
section, retail establishment shall mean any commercial establishment,
whether or not operated for profit, including, but not limited to, mercantile
establishment or store that engages in the sale of goods and products.
The definition includes, but is not limited to, pharmacies, supermarkets,
grocery stores, convenience stores, clothing stores, food marts, food service
establishments, seasonal and temporary businesses, home-based
businesses, indoor or outdoor markets, and street fairs, which utilize singleuse
plastic carry-out bags for the conveyance of merchandise.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag that is designed and manufactured to withstand
repeated uses, is machine washable or made from a material that can be
cleaned and disinfected regularly and meets the following criteria: i) has a
minimum lifetime of 125 uses, ii) is capable of carrying a minimum of 22
pounds, andiii) does not contain lead, cadmium or any other heavy metal
in toxic amounts (as defined by applicable state and federal standards and
regulations), and iv) has handles.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRY-OUT BAG — Any bag made predominantly of
plastic derived from either petroleum or a biologically based source, such
as corn or other plant sources, that is provided by an operator of a retail
establishment or store to a customer at the point of sale. The term also
includes bags that are compostable or biodegradable, but does not include
reusable bags, produce bags or product bags (as defined above). This
§ 240-4 SILLY STRING § 240A-1
240:957
definition specifically exempts the following from the category of "singleuse
plastic carry-out bag":
§ 240A-2. Regulation of single-use plastic carry-out bags.
§ 240A-3. Allowing reusable and recyclable paper carry-out bags;
fees.
§ 240A-4. Fees for providing reusable bags and recyclable paper
carry-out bags.
Bags provided by operators and used by consumers inside retail
establishments or stores to: (1) package bulk items, such as fruit,
vegetables, nuts, grains, candies, or small hardware items; (2) contain
or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether packaged or not; (3)
contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where dampness
may be an issue; (4) contain unwrapped prepared foods or bakery
goods; or (5) contain prescription drugs.
A.
Newspaper bags, door-hanger bags, laundry and/or dry-cleaning bags,
or bags sold in packages containing multiple bags intended for use as
food storage bags, garbage bags, yard waste bags, or pet waste bags.
B.
A. No retail establishment or store shall provide to any customer a singleuse
plastic carry-out bag provided for the purpose of transporting
products or goods out of the business or store at the checkout stand,
cash register, point of sale or other point of departure, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
B. These prohibitions apply to single-use plastic carry-out bags used for
take-out and/or deliveries from retail establishments or stores within
the Village of Ridgewood. The point of sale in such transactions is
deemed to be at the retail establishment or store, regardless of where
payment for the transaction physically occurs.
A. All retail establishments or stores may make available to customers, for
an optional fee, reusable bags and recyclable paper carry-out bags for
the purpose of carrying goods or other materials away from the point of
sale, subject to the provisions of this chapter. The fee charged shall be
reflected in the sales receipt. The retail establishment or store may
charge a fee for recyclable paper carry-out bags as it sees fit.
B. Nothing in this chapter prohibits customers from using bags of any type
that they choose to bring to retail establishments or stores themselves,
in lieu of using bags available for a fee from the retail establishment or
store, or from carrying away purchased goods that are not placed in a
bag.
A. Any fee shall be separately stated on the receipt provided to the
customer at the time of sale and shall be identified as the "checkout bag
charge" or use similar identifying language. Small recyclable paper
§ 240A-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 240A-4
240:958
§ 240A-5. Use of reusable bags encouraged.
§ 240A-6. Exempt customers.
All retail establishments or stores must provide at the point of sale, free
of charge, compliant bags of the retail establishment's or store operator's
choice to any customer who participates in or is the beneficiary of any
United States government federal welfare program, or any local or Bergen
County welfare assistance program, or any New Jersey State welfare
program, including but not limited to the New Jersey Supplemental
Nutritional Assistance Program (SNAP) or the New Jersey State
Supplemental Security Income Program (SSI).
§ 240A-7. Enforcement.
bags without handles and measuring eight inches by 16 inches or less
are exempt from any fee.
B. All monies collected by retail establishments or stores under this
chapter shall be retained by the store.
A. A retail establishment or store may choose, in its discretion, to provide
a credit to customers that choose to bring their own bags.
B. Each retail establishment or store is strongly encouraged to educate its
staff to promote the use of reusable bags and to post signs encouraging
customers to bring their own reusable bags.
C. If a retail establishment or store makes available reusable plastic bags
made of plastic film, the retail establishment or store is strongly
encouraged to educate customers about plastic film recycling.
D. Each retail establishment or store that provides takeout or delivery
services is encouraged to provide customers with a choice to avoid use
of reusable bags made of plastic.
A. After the issuance of an initial written warning, any food-handling
establishment, retail establishment or retail store found with
subsequent violations of this chapter shall be subject to the following
penalties:
(1) For a first cited offense: a fine of $50.
(2) For a second cited offense: a fine of $100.
(3) For a third cited offense: a fine of $200.
(4) Upon conviction of a fourth cited offense and all subsequent cited
offenses: a fine not to exceed $1,000, at the discretion of the Court.
B. Violations shall be issued to, and be the responsibility of, the foodhandling
establishment, retail establishment or retail store or its owner
and shall not be levied against the end user or consumer.
§ 240A-4 SILLY STRING § 240A-7
240:959
§ 240A-8. No conflict with federal or state law.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to create any requirement, power or
duty that is in conflict with any federal or state law.
§ 240A-9. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict or inconsistent with this chapter
are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict or inconsistency.
§ 240A-10. Conflict with other provisions.
All other parts, portions and provisions of the Village Code of the Village
of Ridgewood, be and the same are hereby ratified and confirmed, except
where inconsistent with the terms thereof. In the event of any such
inconsistency, the terms of this chapter shall be deemed to govern.
§ 240A-11. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable and if any
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof for any reason be
held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter, but shall
remain in effect; it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall stand
notwithstanding the invalidity of any part thereof.
§ 240A-12. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on January 1, 2020.
Chapter 241
SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 112. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 249.
§ 241-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SKATEBOARD — A platform or board with rollerskate wheels or other
similar wheels affixed to the underside, designated to be ridden by a person
or persons. The board has no steering device or mechanism to steer or
C. The regulations shall be enforced by employees of the Department of
Buildings and Inspections and the Health Department.
§ 240A-7 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 241-1
241:960
control the direction thereof while being used or ridden even though the
direction may be controlled by the rider by shifting the feet or weight during
the use or operation.
§ 241-2. Prohibited acts.
§ 241-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the general penalties of Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
of the Ridgewood Village Code.
Chapter 244
SMOKING
A. No person shall use, operate or ride any skateboard on any public
street, sidewalk or other public property or on any private property to
which the public is invited, namely sidewalks, driveways, entrances and
exits to and from parking lots and parking lots.
B. The area of prohibition is described on Schedule A attached hereto and
made a part hereof.167
167. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 241-1 SKATEBOARDS § 241-3
241:961

ARTICLE I
Tobacco Sales to Minors; Vending Machines
[Adopted 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 2538]
§ 244-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOBACCO and TOBACCO PRODUCTS[Amended 8-8-2018 by Ord. No.
3655] —
VENDING MACHINES — Any automated, self-service device which, upon
insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
cigarettes or other tobacco products.
§ 244-2. Tobacco sales to minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give, furnish or permit to be sold,
given or furnished, to any person under the age of 18 years, tobacco in any
form.
§ 244-3. Vending machine restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, or to give or furnish, any
tobacco through a vending machine, unless the vending machine meets the
following requirements of operation:
Any product containing tobacco leaf including, but limited to,
cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing
tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco;
A.
Any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active
amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or
otherwise distributed with the exception that the product or matter will
be introduced into the human lungs or mouth in smoke or vapor form,
using any tobacco paraphernalia, but does not include any product
specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependency.
B.
A. The vending machine shall be located within a premises in one of the
commercial zones of the Village.
B. The operation of the vending machine to dispense tobacco products is
possible only by the activation of an electronic switch or electronic
device, which device is controlled by the proprietor of the
establishment or an employee designated by the proprietor, which
employee is over the age of 18 years. The electronic switch or device,
which activates the machine, shall operate in such a fashion that the
vending machine shall remain in the "off" position until activated for
each individual sale.
§ 244-1 SKATEBOARDS § 244-3
241:963
§ 244-4. Tampering with vending machines prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with a tobacco vending
machine in any manner, including removal, disconnecting or otherwise
disabling the electronic limiting device.
§ 244-5. Violations and penalties.
A violation of any section of this article shall, upon conviction, result in a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90
days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. A minimum
fine of $100 shall be assessed for each violation of this article.
C. The proprietor or employee shall, before activating the machine, have
made the determination by examination of two forms of identification,
including a photo identification, that the person wishing to use the
tobacco vending machine is 18 years of age or older.
§ 244-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 244-5
241:964
ARTICLE II
Use or Possession of Tobacco by Minors
[Adopted 8-12-1997 by Ord. No. 2611]
§ 244-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTRONIC VAPOR DEVICE — Any device with a heating element, a
battery, or an electronic circuit that provides nicotine or other vaporized
liquids to the user in a manner that simulates tobacco products, shisha,
herbs, or any other product that produces smoke.[Added 8-8-2018 by
Ord. No. 3655]
ELECTRONIC/VAPOR INHALATION SUBSTANCE PRODUCTS — Any
cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tanks, tips, atomizers,
vaporizers, electronic smoking device batteries, electronic smoking device
chargers and any other item specifically designed for the preparation,
charging, or use of electronic vapor devices.[Added 8-8-2018 by Ord. No.
3655]
NONPUBLIC PLACE — Any place that is not a public place.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any building or enclosed structure, open to the public
and any street, road, sidewalk, walkway, park or open space located within
the Village and which is open to the public.
TOBACCO and TOBACCO PRODUCTS[Amended 8-8-2018 by Ord. No.
3655] —
§ 244-7. Use or possession prohibited; exceptions. [Amended
8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 3655]
Any product containing tobacco leaf including, but limited to,
cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing
tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco;
A.
Any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active
amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or
otherwise distributed with the exception that the product or matter will
be introduced into the human lungs or mouth in smoke or vapor form,
using any tobacco paraphernalia, but does not include any product
specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependency.
B.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to smoke
or use a tobacco product, electronic vapor device or electronic/vapor
inhalation substance product in or on any public place or nonpublic
place or to possess in open view an opened pack, opened carton,
opened box or other opened container used for holding or packaging
those items in any public or nonpublic place.
§ 244-6 SKATEBOARDS § 244-7
241:965
§ 244-8. Violations and penalties.
B. This article shall not apply to a minor smoking or using any such item
described in Subsection A above in a nonpublic place which constitutes
the residence of the minor and/or the residence of his or her parent or
parents or guardian.
A. A violation by a minor of this article shall be enforced as follows:
(1) First offense.
(a) A verbal warning will be given to the offender by the officer
observing the violation. The officer will take the offender's
name, age, address, telephone number and name and address
of parents or guardians. The information will be placed on a
juvenile record card maintained at the Department of Police,
which said card shall also contain the date and place of the
offense.
(b) Unless there are other violations outstanding or the offender is
uncooperative, he or she will not be taken to Police
headquarters for a first violation. The information from the
juvenile record card will be transmitted to the Detective
Bureau Commander who will file it and advise the parent or
guardian of the incident and information contained on the
card.
(2) Second offense. The officer observing the violation will take the
offender's name, age, address, telephone number, parent's or
guardian's name and address (the information will be placed on a
juvenile record card). The card will also contain the date and place
of the offense. The Detective Bureau Commander will arrange a
station house adjustment with the offender and the offender's
parents or guardians. The station house adjustment will involve
discussion of the third phase of enforcement, and antitobacco use
literature will be provided. Unless there are extenuating
circumstances, the officer does not have to take the offender into
custody.
(3) Third offense.
(a) The information described above for the juvenile record card
will be verified and given to the Detective Bureau Commander.
The card will also contain the date and place of the offense.
The Detective Bureau Commander will take appropriate
action, which will be a referral to a two-hour education
program currently conducted by the Valley Hospital
Community Education Department. In the event that such
program is not available, the Bureau Commander will assign
attendance at a similar education program. Attendance at this
program is required, both by the offender and a minimum of
§ 244-7 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 244-8
241:966
§ 244-9. Intent.
This article is intended to implement N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51 et seq.168 and
Ordinance No. 2538169 of the Village of Ridgewood.
one parent or guardian. Unless there are extenuating
circumstances, the officer does not have to take the offender
into custody.
(b) If a period of two years or more passes after the commission of
the third offense, the next offense will not be considered a
fourth offense, but the procedure for a third offense will be
repeated.
(4) Fourth offense. The information on the juvenile record card will be
implemented and verified and given to the Detective Bureau
Commander. The card will also contain the date and place of the
offense. The Detective Bureau Commander will take appropriate
action, which will include a referral to a six-session smoke stop
program offered by the Community Education Program at Valley
Hospital, or equivalent. Any costs involved for these programs shall
be paid by the offender. Unless there are extenuating
circumstances, the officer does not have to take the offender into
custody.
(5) Fifth offense. A juvenile complaint will be issued to the offender for
appearance in Juvenile Court or Municipal Court.
B. In the event that the offender does not comply with any of the
requirements set forth in first, second, third or fourth offenses, a
juvenile complaint will be issued to the offender for the initial and any
subsequent violations.
168. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51 was repealed by P.L. 1999, c. 90. See now N.J.S.A.
2C:33-13.1.
169. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2538 is included as Art. I, Tobacco Sales to Minors; Vending
Machines, of this chapter.
§ 244-8 SKATEBOARDS § 244-9
241:967

ARTICLE III
Smoke-Free Zones and Areas
[Adopted 8-13-2008 by Ord. No. 3133; amended in its entirety
5-8-2013 by Ord. No. 3382170]
§ 244-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF EDUCATION FACILITIES — Any and all property, structures
or other areas owned or leased by the Ridgewood Board of Education
or operated by employees and agents of and/or persons authorized by
the Ridgewood Board of Education and used for official business of the
Ridgewood Board of Education.
ELECTRONIC VAPOR DEVICE — Any device with a heating element, a
battery, or an electronic circuit that provides nicotine or other vaporized
liquids to the user in a manner that simulates tobacco products, shisha,
herbs, or any other product that produces smoke.[Added 8-8-2018 by
Ord. No. 3655]
ELECTRONIC/VAPOR INHALATION SUBSTANCE PRODUCTS — Any
cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tanks, tips, atomizers,
vaporizers, electronic smoking device batteries, electronic smoking device
chargers and any other item specifically designed for the preparation,
charging, or use of electronic vapor devices.[Added 8-8-2018 by Ord. No.
3655]
ENCLOSED AREAS — All areas between a floor and a ceiling, extending to
the outer perimeter walls of a structure.
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES — All structures, improvements, property and
enclosed areas owned, leased, rented and/or operated by the Village of
Ridgewood, and/or occupied by employees and agents of and/or persons
authorized by the Village of Ridgewood and used for official business of the
Village of Ridgewood, including the plaza area located between the Village
Hall and the Village Library, at or near the entrance to the Community
Center in the Village Hall. This definition shall not include any area adjacent
to the Village Municipal Building that may from time to time be designated
by the Village Manager as a Village staff smoking area.
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — All public parks, playgrounds,
sport fields publicly owned or leased by the Village of Ridgewood and all
such property within the boundaries of the Village of Ridgewood upon which
the public is invited or upon which the public is permitted and where
individuals gather for recreational activities. This definition excludes the
seating areas along East Ridgewood Avenue on the north side of Memorial
Park at Van Neste Square and all other parking lots, sidewalks and public
streets within the Village.
170. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also amended the title of this article, which was formerly No
Smoking Zones, Village Hall and Library.
§ 244-10 SKATEBOARDS § 244-10
241:969
TOBACCO and TOBACCO PRODUCTS[Added 8-8-2018 by Ord. No.
3655] —
§ 244-11. Smoking prohibited. [Amended 2-19-2014 by Ord. No.
3403]
§ 244-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) observed to be in violation of this article who is not a minor
or otherwise subject to Article II of this chapter shall be issued a summons
and may be subject to, at the discretion of the court, the following penalties:
Any product containing tobacco leaf including, but limited to,
cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing
tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco;
A.
Any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active
amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or
otherwise distributed with the exception that the product or matter will
be introduced into the human lungs or mouth in smoke or vapor form,
using any tobacco paraphernalia, but does not include any product
specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependency.
B.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or use any tobacco or
tobacco product, electronic vapor device, and/or electronic/vapor
inhalation substance product as defined in this chapter in or on any of
the following areas: [Amended 8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 3655]
(1) Any area defined in § 244-10;
(2) In or on the area between the edge of the pavement of any street/
roadway line and the property boundary of any Board of Education
Facility as defined in § 244-10, inclusive of the sidewalk and open
or grass area adjacent to the property boundary.
B. "No smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol may be
clearly and conspicuously posted in or on any area defined in §§ 244-6,
244-10, above, and 244-11 at the discretion of the Village, except in or
on the Board of Education facilities, which signage may be posted at the
discretion of the Board of Education. It shall not be a defense to a
violation of this section that "no smoking" signs were not conspicuously
posted as they are not required by this article.
A. A warning by the court or a fine of not less than $50 but not more than
$100 for conviction of a first offense;
B. A fine of not less than $100 but not more than $150 for conviction of a
second offense;
C. A fine of not less than $150 but not more than $500 for conviction of a
third and/or any subsequent offense.
§ 244-10 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 244-12
241:970
D. For any conviction, the court shall assess court administration fees and
costs and may sentence the offender to community service, for a period
of time and type of service to be determined by the court.
§ 244-12 SKATEBOARDS § 244-12
241:971

ARTICLE IV
Tobacco, Cannabis and Electronic Vapor Substance Inhalation
Shops
[Adopted 10-24-2018 by Ord. No. 3673]
§ 244-13. Purpose.
§ 244-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISING — Printed and/or electronic matter or communication matter
that calls the public's attention to things or items for sale.
BUSINESS — Any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other
business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail
establishments where goods and/or services are sold, as well as professional
corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering,
architectural or other professional services are delivered or performed.
CANNABIS — For the purposes of this article, all parts of the plant cannabis
sativa linnaeus, cannabis indica, or cannabis ruderalis, that contain the
compound or chemical tetrahydrocannabinol, or "THC," whether growing
or not, including the seeds, resin, thereof, whether extracted or not from
any part of the plant. This includes every compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, concentrate, or preparation of the plant, its seeds,
resin, and including edible or topical products containing any of the
above.[Amended 4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 3714]
CANNABIS RETAILER, WHOLESALER, DISTRIBUTOR AND
MANUFACTURER — Any person or entity that operates any facility,
business entity, property, store, stand, booth, concession or other place
at which the growing, preparation, assemblage, packaging, delivery, sales,
rentals, or other distributions including giveaways of cannabis and cannabis
products are made to entities or persons for the purpose of introducing
cannabis or cannabis products into the consumer market in any manner for
the eventual consumption or use by people.
A. The purpose of this article is to regulate the location and operation of
retail purveyors of tobacco and tobacco products, cannabis and
cannabis products, electronic vapor devices, electronic vapor inhalation
substances, hookahs, and electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops
in the Village of Ridgewood, Bergen County, in order to maintain the
Village's character, diversity and vitality of the Village's Central
Business District and commercial areas and the quality of life for its
residents and visitors. This is considered part of a strategy to preserve
and enhance the economic health of the Village's Central Business
District and promote its continued positive development.
B. These regulations will rely on all definitions in this chapter and the
Code of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 244-13 SKATEBOARDS § 244-14
241:973
CREATION OF CANNABIS, TOBACCO, OR SMOKE SHOP
ESTABLISHMENT —
ELECTRONIC/VAPOR SUBSTANCE INHALATION LOUNGES — Those
businesses or locations where customers can smoke or inhale vapor from
electronic/vapor substance inhalation products, commonly known as
"electronic cigarettes," "e-cigarettes," "e-cigars," "e-cigarellos," "e-pipes,"
"e-hookahs," "electronic nicotine delivery systems" and other similar
devices.
ELECTRONIC/VAPOR SUBSTANCE INHALATION SHOPS — Those
businesses where customers can purchase electronic/vapor substance
inhalation products, commonly known as "electronic cigarettes," "ecigarettes,"
"e-cigars," "e-cigarellos," "e-pipes," "e-hookahs," "electronic
nicotine delivery systems" and other similar devices.
HOOKAH — A pipe commonly, but not always, made of glass, used for
vaporizing and smoking tobacco, flavored tobacco, nonflavored tobacco,
shisha, dried fruits, cannabis, or other substances in which vapor or smoke
is passed through a water basin or contained source before inhalation.
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT CODE — Chapter 190 of the Code of the
Village of Ridgewood, County of Bergen, New Jersey, as it may be amended
from time to time.
TOBACCO OR SMOKE SHOP — Any store, stand, booth, concession or other
place that either devotes a substantial portion of its display area (15% or
more floor space) to tobacco products, hookahs, electronic vapor devices,
electronic inhalation substances or drug paraphernalia to purchasers for
consumption or use.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person or entity that operates a store, stand,
booth concession or other place at which sales rentals, or other
distributions including giveaways of tobacco or tobacco products are made
to persons for the purpose of consumption or use by such persons.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF TOBACCO OR SMOKE
SHOP —
The opening of any such establishment as new when it did not exist
before;
A.
The conversion of an existing establishment to a tobacco, or smoke
shop establishment as defined in this chapter;
B.
C. The relocation of any such establishment from one location to another.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of such establishment;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in such
establishment, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers ownership or control of such establishment, except for the
C.
§ 244-14 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 244-14
241:974
§ 244-15. Conditional use permit required.
No person or business shall cause or permit the creation, substantial
enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of any tobacco or smoke
shop, a cannabis retailer or establishment, or electronic/vapor inhalation
shop without first obtaining and maintaining a conditional use permit as
provided in this chapter.
§ 244-16. Development standards; general and specific.
An application for a conditional use permit shall be approved by the
Planning Board upon a determination that all of the following standards
have been met:
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing such ownership or controlling interest.
A. The tobacco or smoke shop or electronic/vapor substance inhalation
shop will be located within the permitted zone. Tobacco or smoke shops
or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shops may be located within
the OB-2 Zone. No such establishment shall be permitted to be located
on any parcel outside of this zoning district.
B. The tobacco or smoke shop or electronic/vapor substance inhalation
shop will meet the following minimum spacing and proximity
requirements:
(1) No such use or establishment shall be located within one mile of
any other such shop;
(2) No such use or establishment shall be located within 100 feet of
any parcel of land zoned for residential use and/or public parkland;
(3) No such use or establishment shall be located within 300 feet of
any house of worship or religious facility;
(4) No such use or establishment shall be located within 400 feet of
any school and any facility used for the education of children;
(5) No such use or establishment located in a building sharing one or
more common walls with another retail or commercial
establishment, or sharing common attic space with any other use,
shall permit smoking anywhere on the premises.
C. The tobacco or smoke shop or electronic/vapor substance inhalation
shop is in substantial compliance with the requirements of all health
and safety codes, including, but not limited to, the building code, fire
code, electrical code, mechanical code and plumbing code. Unless delay
is caused by refusal of applicant to schedule or permit timely
inspection, substantial compliance shall be verified no later than 30
days following the application or the applicant shall be deemed to be in
§ 244-14 SKATEBOARDS § 244-16
241:975
substantial compliance with such requirements for the purposes of
permit issuance.
D. The tobacco or smoke shop or electronic/vapor substance inhalation
shop is in substantial compliance with the development standards for
the commercial zone in which the establishment is to be located, and
with the general provisions of Chapter 190 relating to development
standards and of Chapter 190 relating to sign regulations, except that,
to the extent that provisions of this chapter may conflict or be more
restrictive, Chapter 190 shall control.
E. The tobacco or smoke shop or electronic/vapor substance inhalation
shop meets the following minimum specific standards:
(1) No person or business shall engage in the sale of tobacco or
electronic vapor device products without first posting a plainly
visible sign at the point of purchase of tobacco products that has
wording similar to "THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS,
CANNABIS, HOOKAHS, AND ELECTRONIC VAPOR DEVICES AND
PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW AND SUBJECT TO PENALTIES. PHOTO
IDENTIFICATION IS REQUIRED OF PURCHASERS APPEARING
TO BE 21 YEARS OF AGE AND YOUNGER."
(a) The letters of the sign shall be at least 1/4 inch high.
(2) No person, business, retailer, or owner, manager or operator of any
establishment subject to this article shall sell, offer to sell or permit
to be sold any products to an individual without requesting and
examining identification of customers appearing to be 21 years and
younger for the purpose of establishing the purchaser's age as 21
years or greater, unless the seller has some other clear or
convincing basis for determining the buyer's age.
(3) No person, business, retailer or other establishment shall sell or
offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products not in
the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all
required health warnings.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person, business or retailer to sell,
permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale any product by
means of self-service merchandising or by means other than
vendor-assisted sales.
(5) No person, business or retailer shall locate, install, keep, maintain,
use, or permit the location, installation, keeping, maintenance, or
use on his, heror its premises, any tobacco vending machine or
other type of vending machine for the sale of these restricted
products for the purpose of selling or distributing any such
product.
§ 244-16 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 244-16
241:976
§ 244-17. Measure of distance.
Distance, without regard to intervening structures, shall be a straight line
measured from the closest exterior structural wall of a tobacco or smoke
shop or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop to the closest property
line of a religious facility, courthouse, day nursery, public playground/park/
recreation area, school, residential zone, vocational or professional
institution, institution of higher education, including community or junior
college, college, university, other tobacco shops or smoke shops.
§ 244-18. Prohibited in all districts.
§ 244-19. Violations and penalties.
§ 244-20. License.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person, business or retailer to distribute
free tobacco or electronic/vapor substance inhalation products or
promotional items, except in enclosed areas where minors are not
permitted.
(7) In addition to the standards in this chapter, each tobacco or smoke
shop or electronic/vapor substance inhalation shop shall comply
with each and every provision of this Code.
A. Cannabis, marijuana shops, wholesaler, distributor and/or retailers
selling cannabis and cannabis products are prohibited in all districts.
B. This article shall not be construed to limit any privileges or rights of
persons who are qualified patients, primary caregivers, registered or
otherwise, or registered dispensaries pursuant to the New Jersey
Compassionate Use Medical Marijuana Act, N.J.S.A. 24:61-1.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to the issuance of a summons and complaint and
may be charged with either an infraction or a disorderly persons
offense.
B. Each person found guilty of a violation shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for every day during any portion of which a violation of
any section of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such
person, and shall be punishable as provided for in the Village Code. Any
use or occupation of any building or structure maintained contrary to
the provisions of this title, shall constitute a public nuisance.
A. No person shall conduct, maintain, or operate an establishment that
sells, furnishes, or distributes electronic/vapor substance inhalation
products or devices without first obtaining a permit from the Village
Department of Health.
B. A license fee of $1,200 shall be paid to the Department of Health before
any license shall issue.
§ 244-16 SKATEBOARDS § 244-20
241:977
§ 244-21. Enforcement.
Enforcement of the provisions of this article may be enforced by the Village
Health Officer, members of the Police Department, the Village Building
Department, the Village Code official and any other person so designated by
the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 244-22. Conflicts with other applicable laws.
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit tobacco vending
machines and distribution of tobacco product samples where they are
otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. Nor shall this chapter be
construed to be cause for breach of any preexisting private contract, or
cause for interference with regulations imposed by state or federal law or
related to interstate commerce.
C. Licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be an annual license which
shall expire on the 31st of December of each calendar year, regardless
of when issued.
D. Licenses purchased pursuant to this article that are purchased after
July 1 of the calendar year will be sold for $600 and expire on the 31st
of December of that calendar year.
E. Licenses issued pursuant to this article are nontransferrable and
nonassignable by sale or otherwise.
F. Any person or entity found to be in violation of this section shall be
ordered to cease and desist the operation, sale, furnishing and/or
distribution of such products and/or devices.
§ 244-20 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 244-22
241:978
Chapter 246
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145. Land use and development — See Ch. 190.
§ 246-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to prevent the continuation of the
unregulated and uncontrolled relocation, filling, excavation and removal
of soil resulting in serious and irreparable damage to the public welfare
by reason of consequent soil erosion by water and wind, inadequate and
improper surface water drainage, the decrease or destruction of the fertility
of soil, the removal of lateral support of abutting streets, lands and
premises, the creation of dust storms and places for the breeding of
mosquitoes, the creation of dangerous depressions or pits rendering land
unfit or unsuitable to its most appropriate uses, with a consequent
deterioration in property values and the preservation of trees, natural
herbage and woody plants, and to effectuate the general purpose of sound
municipal planning.
§ 246-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DEVELOPER — Any person who directly or indirectly or through an agent or
independent contractor engages or intends to engage in land subdivision or
in the construction of two or more dwelling houses or business or industrial
buildings in any subdivision for the purpose of sale to or occupancy by any
other person.
EXCAVATOR — Any person who, within any period of 12 consecutive
months, shall move soil in or upon more than 10,000 square feet of land
area situate in the Village.
MAJOR SOIL PERMIT — Any soil permit other than a ministerial or minor
permit for the moving of soil within any period of 12 consecutive months.
Upon review of any soil permit, the Planning Board may classify the
application as one for a "major soil permit" and require the applicant to
meet the provisions of this chapter applicable thereto.
MINISTERIAL PERMIT — A permit for the moving of more than 100 and
less than 501 cubic yards of soil within any period of 12 consecutive months.
MINOR SOIL PERMIT — A permit for the moving of 501 to 2,000 cubic
yards of soil within any period of 12 consecutive months.
OWNER — Any person having title to any lot or having such other interest
or stake therein as will permit exercise of effective possession thereof or
§ 244-22 SOIL REMOVAL § 246-2
246:979
dominion thereover, including such dominion as may be exercised by a
lessee.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, without
regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
TO MOVE — To dig, to excavate, to remove, to deposit, to place, to fill, to
grade, to regrade, to level or otherwise to alter or change the location or
contours of land, to transport and to supply. Nevertheless, nothing in this
definition shall be construed to apply to the digging, excavating or moving
of 100 cubic yards or less of soil or of soil which may be made necessary in
connection with the construction or alteration of any building or structure
on any lot pursuant to validly issued building permits, or to normal grading
incidental thereto or in connection with other work to be performed under
the authority of any validly issued permit under any other ordinance of
the Village, or to the plowing, spading, cultivating, harrowing or discing of
soil or other operations usually and ordinarily associated with the tilling
of soil for horticultural purposes, all of which shall be exempted from the
provisions of this chapter.
TOPSOIL — Any soil that in its natural state constitutes the top layer of
earth and is composed of 2% or more, by weight, of organic matter and has
the ability to support vegetation.
§ 246-3. Permit required. [Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2818]
No owner, developer or excavator of any lot in the Village shall cause,
allow, permit or suffer any soil in and upon any lot in the Village to be
moved unless and until there has been obtained therefor a soil permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The issuance of a soil permit
involving the construction or alteration of a retaining wall shall not relieve
any person of the requirement to also obtain a retaining wall permit in
accordance with the provisions of § 190-97J.
§ 246-4. Permit fees. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
The fee to accompany an application for a ministerial soil permit shall be
as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. The fee to accompany an application for
a minor soil permit and the fee to accompany an application for a major
soil permit shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. For the purpose of
computing the fee, but only for such purpose, the statements set forth in
the application of the number of cubic yards to be moved shall be deemed
prima facie correct. No part of the fee filed with a ministerial or minor soil
permit application shall be refundable, but in the case of a major soil permit
application, if a permit is refused, the amount of the fee in excess of $100
shall be refunded.
§ 246-5. Application for ministerial soil permit.
Applications for ministerial soil permits shall be filed with the Village
Engineer and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in § 246-4.
Applications shall be made, in duplicate, on forms prescribed by the Village
§ 246-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 246-5
246:980
and supplied by the Village Engineer. In addition to any other requirements
which the Village, acting through the Village Engineer, may require on data
pertinent to the application, the application shall show the following:
§ 246-6. Issuance of ministerial permit.
The Village Engineer shall, if satisfied that the application for a ministerial
soil permit meets the purposes of § 246-1, issue a permit therefor and shall
forward duplicates thereof to the Village Clerk, the Planning Board of the
Village and to the Director of the Department of Building and Inspections of
the Village.
§ 246-7. Application for minor soil permit.
Applications for minor soil permits shall be filed with the Village Engineer
and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in § 246-4. Application shall
be made, in duplicate, on forms prescribed by the Village and supplied
by the Village Engineer. In addition to any other requirements which the
Village, acting through the Village Engineer, may require on data pertinent
to the application, the application shall show the following:
A. The identity and location of the applicant.
B. The lot and block number of the lot or lots involved.
C. The identity and location of the owner of the lands.
D. The purpose or reason for the moving of the soil.
E. The estimated quantity in cubic yards of soil to be moved.
F. The proposed date of completion of the work.
G. A statement as to how the moving of the soil will affect all trees with a
diameter of six inches or more.
A. The identity and location of the applicant.
B. The lot and block number of the lot or lots involved.
C. The identity and location of the owner of the lands.
D. The purpose or reason for the moving of the soil.
E. The estimated quantity in cubic yards of soil to be moved.
F. The proposed date of completion of the work.
G. A statement as to how the moving of the soil will affect all trees with a
diameter of six inches or more.
§ 246-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 246-8
246:981
§ 246-8. Issuance of minor permit.
The Village Engineer shall forward all applications for minor soil permits to
the Planning Board of the Village for its approval, and upon approval thereof
by the Board, the Village Engineer shall, and he is hereby authorized to,
issue a permit therefor and shall forward duplicates thereof to the Village
Clerk, the Planning Board of the Village and to the Superintendent of
Buildings of the Village.
§ 246-9. Application for major soil permit.
Applications for major soil permits shall be filed with the Village Engineer
and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in § 246-4 and shall be
made, in duplicate, on forms prescribed by the Village and supplied by the
Village Engineer and, in addition to the information required under § 246-5,
shall be accompanied by a topographical map, in duplicate, of the lot or
lots in question, which map shall be prepared and certified by a licensed
professional engineer of the state or a licensed land surveyor, shall be at a
scale of 100 feet to the inch and shall show the following:
§ 246-10. Referral of major soil permit application to Planning
Board.
A. The present grades on a one-hundred-foot grid layout.
B. The proposed grades at said points when the work has been completed.
C. The grades of all streets and lots within 100 feet of the lot or lots
involved.
D. The proposed slopes and lateral supports involved in the moving of the
soil.
E. The present and proposed surface water drainage.
F. Any easements or restrictions which might affect the lot or lots
involved.
G. The names and addresses of all property owners owning land within
200 feet of the extreme limits of the lot or lots involved, as their names
and addresses appear on the Village tax records.
A. Every major soil permit application shall be referred by the Village
Engineer to the Planning Board of the Village for its consideration and
recommendations to the Council of the Village as to whether or not a
major soil permit should be granted.
B. No such recommendation shall be made by the Planning Board to the
governing body until there shall have been held by the Planning Board a
public hearing on the application. Every applicant for a major soil
permit shall give all property owners within 200 feet of the extreme
limit of the lot or lots involved, as their names appear on the Village tax
records, at least 10 days' written notice of the public hearing to be held
§ 246-8 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 246-10
246:982
§ 246-11. Hearing on major soil permit application; approval or
refusal.
§ 246-12. Action by Council on major soil permit. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
At the second regular meeting of the Village Council after receipt of the
recommendation of the Planning Board with respect to whether or not a
major soil permit should issue, or sooner if the Council shall decide to
act sooner, the governing body may grant or deny the requested major
soil permit with or without modifying conditions. Failure of the Council to
act within the time limit above set forth shall be deemed a denial of the
requested permit. In making its determination, the Council shall satisfy
itself that the purposes of this chapter are complied with and that any
on such application. The notice shall be delivered in person or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, at the option of the applicant,
and shall state the time, date and place of the hearing as fixed by the
Secretary of the Planning Board, a brief description of the property
and a statement that a copy of the application and of the map filed
in conjunction therewith is on file in the office of the Village Engineer
for public inspection. No date for public hearing shall be set by the
Secretary of the Planning Board sooner than 20 days from the date
of filing of the application for a major soil permit. In addition to the
foregoing notification requirements, the Secretary of the Planning
Board shall also cause notice of the public hearing to be published
in the official newspaper of the Village at least 10 days prior to the
hearing.
A. At the public hearing on an application for a major soil permit, the
applicant shall produce proofs of service upon all property owners as
required under this chapter by a sworn affidavit and the Secretary of
the Planning Board shall file proof of the publication of the newspaper
notice required by § 246-10.
B. The Planning Board shall, at the public hearing, and thereafter in its
deliberations on whether or not a major soil permit shall issue, hear
proofs and determine whether the issuance of such a permit will comply
with the purposes of this chapter and can be granted without
impairment to the intent and purpose of the zone plan, Chapter 190,
Land Use and Development, and the Master Plan of the Village.
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
C. The recommendation of the Planning Board, after public hearing, shall
be forwarded to the governing body of the Village within 45 days from
the date of such hearing and, in any event, within 90 days from the date
of filing of the application for a major soil permit or such further time as
the applicant may agree to, in writing, for action by the Council. Failure
of the Planning Board to act within such time or times shall be deemed
a refusal to recommend the issuance of such a permit.
§ 246-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 246-12
246:983
permit, if issued, will not impair the intent or purpose of the zone plan,
Chapter 190, Land Use and Development, or the Master Plan of the Village.
In addition, the Council shall, before granting any permit, take into account
the effect of the grant upon the sources of water supply available to the
Department of Water Supply and upon any sewage collection and disposal
system servicing the Village.
§ 246-13. Grant or denial of major soil permit by Council.
If the Village Council shall grant a major soil permit, the Clerk of the
Village shall forthwith issue such a permit to the applicant in accordance
with the decision of the Council, which permit shall be in such form as
may be prescribed by the Council and which permit shall contain any
special conditions, terms or restrictions imposed by the Council in the grant
thereof. Duplicates thereof shall be forwarded by the Clerk to the Village
Engineer, the Secretary of the Planning Board and the Director of the
Department of Building and Inspections of the Village. If a major soil permit
application shall be denied by the Council, the Clerk of the Village shall
refund any excess fee to the applicant in accordance with § 246-4.
§ 246-14. Bond or deposit required before issuance of major soil
permit.
Anything in § 246-13 to the contrary notwithstanding, no major soil permit
shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor shall have posted
with the Village a cash deposit or a performance bond in form and with
surety satisfactory to the Village Engineer and to the Village Attorney, in
such amount as the governing body shall determine. The deposit or bond
shall be conditioned upon full and faithful performance by the applicant, as
principal, within the time specified in the application, of all the proposed
work in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of the soil permit
to be issued pursuant thereto. Such cash deposit shall not be returned nor
shall such bond be deemed canceled or released until the requirements of
§ 246-17 have been met.
§ 246-15. Filing of topographical map.
Every holder of a major soil permit shall file with the Village Engineer
a topographic map, in duplicate, prepared and certified by a licensed
professional engineer, licensed by the state, or a licensed land surveyor,
licensed by the state, showing the contours of the lot or lots involved at
a point when approximately 1/3 of the soil has been moved and again at
a point when approximately 2/3 of the soil has been moved if the Village
Engineer shall, by notice in writing, require it. Failure to comply with
the notice shall entitle the Village Engineer to terminate all work and
suspend the permit forthwith, and the same shall not be reinstated until full
compliance with this section has been met to the satisfaction of the Village
Engineer.
§ 246-12 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 246-16
246:984
§ 246-16. Notice of completion.
Every holder of a major soil permit shall, upon completion of the work
for which the permit was issued, forthwith file with the Village Engineer
a written notice of the fact of such completion and the date thereof and
a topographical map, in duplicate, prepared and certified by a licensed
professional engineer licensed by the state or a licensed land surveyor
licensed by the state, which shall show the identity and location of the
applicant, a metes and bounds description of the lot or lots involved, the
identity and location of the owner of the lot or lots involved and the final
grades of the lot or lots involved following the completion of the moving of
all soil and replacing of all topsoil. Such map shall be drawn to a scale of
100 feet to the inch and shall show the final grades on a one-hundred-foot
grid layout.
§ 246-17. Cancellation or release of bond or deposit.
No performance bond or cash deposit posted pursuant to § 246-14 shall
be canceled or released until all the conditions set forth in the original
permit have been met to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer. The Village
Engineer shall notify the governing body of the Village within 31 days from
the date of filing of the documents required by § 246-16 and of his approval
or disapproval of such documents or of the work done or of the state of the
lot or lots involved. The governing body of the Village shall take into account
the recommendations or objections of the Village Engineer in granting or
refusing to grant a release of any performance bond or cash deposit.
§ 246-18. Moving and storage of topsoil.
No holder of any soil permit, whether major, minor or ministerial, shall
move topsoil in or upon any lot or lots unless provisions are made for
storage of the topsoil within the boundary lines of such lot or lots, as
set forth in the application for the permit. All topsoil so stored shall be
uniformly replaced over the entire area or surface of the lot or lots involved
on or before the completion date set forth in the permit so that the final
grade or grades of the replaced topsoil shall be in accordance with the
proposed final grades upon which the permit was issued. No topsoil shall be
removed to any point beyond the boundary lines of the lot or lots involved
unless and until topsoil shall first have been placed uniformly to a depth
of not less than six inches, measured from the proposed final grades upon
which the permit was issued, over the entire surface or area of the lot
or lots involved, but this requirement shall not apply to those areas of
any lot that shall be or shall have been, since the date of issuance of any
permit, permanently covered by a building, structure, street, pavement,
curb, sidewalk, driveway or by any permitted or approved body of water or
waterway. Anything in this section hereinabove notwithstanding, no holder
of any soil permit shall remove from the lot or lots involved more topsoil
than that comprising the surplus or excess remaining after the replacement
of the topsoil as aforesaid.
§ 246-16 SOIL REMOVAL § 246-19
246:985
§ 246-19. Excavation below proposed final grades.
No holder of a soil permit, whether major, minor or ministerial, shall at
any time in the course of the work permitted thereby dig or excavate more
than six inches below the proposed final grades upon which the permit was
issued without consent, in writing, from the Village Engineer.
§ 246-20. Retention of topsoil and trees.
No holder of any soil permit, whether major, minor or ministerial, shall
deposit soil upon, fill in or raise the grade of any lot or lots involved without
first making provision for use in the work of such soil or other materials as
will not result in deviation from the proposed final grades or the uniformity
thereof by reason of abnormal shrinkage, compaction or settlement, the
collection and storage upon the lot involved of the original topsoil so that
such topsoil shall not be buried beneath soil or other material of inferior
quality, the uniform replacement of the topsoil so stored over the entire area
or surface of the fill soil on the lot involved so that the final grades of the
replaced topsoil shall be in accordance with the proposed final grades, and
the trees on such premises six inches in diameter or more and designated by
the permit to be saved from destruction are adequately provide for by wells,
embankments or other works designed to save them from dying. In the
event that the storage of topsoil on the lot involved is found by the Village
Engineer not to be practicable, then the holder of any soil permit, whether
major, minor or ministerial, shall provide for the uniform placement over the
entire area or surface of the fill soil or other material placed upon such lot
of a layer of topsoil not inferior in quality to that of the original topsoil, to a
depth of not less than six inches measured from the proposed final grades,
excepting only therefrom those portions of the lot involved as shall be or
shall have become permanently covered by a building, structure, street,
pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway or by any permitted and approved body
of water or waterway.
§ 246-21. Use of designated streets.
When any soil is removed from the lot involved to any other lot, whether
within or without the boundaries of the Village, the holder of any soil permit,
whether major, minor or ministerial, shall use only such streets of the
Village as shall be designated for that purpose by the Village Engineer and
shall keep such streets free from dirt resulting from such soil removal work.
§ 246-22. Village right of entry.
For the purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, the Village
Engineer and his agents, employees and representatives shall have the right
to enter into and upon any lands in or upon which soil moving or removal
operations are being conducted to examine and inspect the same and to
assure full compliance with all the terms, conditions and restrictions under
which any permit may have been issued.
§ 246-19 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 246-22
246:986
Chapter 249
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 112.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 125.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Land and use development — See Ch. 190.
Newsracks — See Ch. 199.
Skateboards — See Ch. 241.
Soil removal — See Ch. 246.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 265.
§ 246-22 SOIL REMOVAL § 246-22
246:987

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 249-1. Snow and ice removal. [Amended 7-8-1975 by Ord. No.
1582; 3-10-1987 by Ord. No. 2084; 11-9-1993 by Ord. No. 2435]
A. The owner of any land abutting upon the streets or public highways in
the Village, if such land is owner-occupied or vacant, otherwise the
tenant or occupant of such land situate in all zones of the Village of
Ridgewood as shown on the 1990 Zoning Map, with the exception of the
B-1, B-2, P and P-2 Zones of the Village, shall remove all snow and ice
from the abutting sidewalks of such streets or highways within 24 hours
after the same shall fall or be formed thereon. No snow or ice so
removed, however, shall be deposited or placed in the street or highway
in such a manner or location so as to impede the flow of traffic. For
purposes of this section, such land shall be deemed owner-occupied if
occupied by either the owner or owners of record or any agent, servant
or employee thereof.
B. Owners, tenants and occupants of any land abutting the streets or
highways of the Village situate in the B-1, B-2, P and P-2 Zones of the
Village are subject to the following snow removal regulations. Special
regulations are adopted for the business and office zones in order to
maintain an attractive and safe environment in the business and
professional office zones of the Village by assuring that the snow will be
removed from the sidewalks in and around the central business district
on a timely basis.
C. Snow is required to be removed in the B-1, B-2, P and P-2 Zone Districts
from the sidewalks concurrently with its fall. To assure compliance with
this section, more than one clearing may be required to keep the
sidewalks as free of snow as is practical. The following specific
regulations are hereby adopted. Snowfalls commencing during the
evening, that is, after 6:00 p.m., will be cleared by no later than 9:00
a.m. the following morning, Sundays and holidays included. During
weekday storms, Monday through Saturday, occurring during business
hours, sidewalks shall be cleared to a five-foot minimum width to
provide access from the storefront to the curb, between meters, if
meters are installed. After 6:00 p.m. and on Sundays and holidays,
sidewalks will be completely cleared into the street.
D. A court appearance will be required to answer any summons issued for
a violation of this section occurring in the B-1, B-2, P and P-2 zones of
the Village. A court appearance will be required to answer any
summons issued for a second or subsequent violation of this section in
all zones of the Village. [Amended 7-11-1995 by Ord. No. 2533]
§ 249-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-2
246:989
§ 249-2. Removal of grass and weeds.
The owner or tenant of lands abutting or bordering upon the streets,
avenues or public highways of the Village shall remove all grass and weeds
and other impediments within three days after notice to remove the same.
§ 249-3. Village to remove upon default.
Upon the refusal or neglect of the owner or tenant to remove within the time
hereinabove provided such snow, ice, grass, weeds and other impediments,
the same may be removed by the Village, and the cost of removal thereof
shall be certified to the Village Manager by the person in charge of such
removal. Upon approval of such certificate, the Village Manager shall cause
such costs to be charged against the real estate so abutting upon such
sidewalk, and the amount so charged shall thereupon become a lien and tax
upon such real estate and be added to and be part of the taxes next to be
levied and assessed thereon and enforced and collected in the same manner
and at the same time as other taxes.
§ 249-4. Prohibited deposits.
It shall be unlawful to place or deposit any glass, ashes or refuse materials
on any streets or sidewalks of the Village.
§ 249-5. Maintenance of driveways.
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any driveway in the Village
so as to permit sand, ground, dirt or other materials to be carried onto or
across the sidewalks on any street in the Village.
§ 249-6. Materials falling from vehicles.
No person shall cause or permit any vehicle to be loaded with manure, sand,
earth, mud, clay or rubbish so that the contents or any part thereof shall be
scattered in any street.
§ 249-7. Sign, awning and lamp heights.
No person shall maintain, erect, place or construct any sign, awning, lamp
or other thing over any sidewalk in the Village unless the same shall be at
least seven feet above the sidewalk.
§ 249-8. Repair of motor vehicles in streets.
It shall be unlawful to repair any automobile or motor-driven vehicle on any
of the streets or public places of the Village, except such temporary repairs
as may be necessary in order to enable such automobile to be removed from
the place in the highway where the same has become disabled.
§ 249-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-9
246:990
§ 249-9. Animals at large in streets.
No person shall permit any goat, swine, horse, cow or other meat cattle
belonging to him or under his control to go at large or depasture in any
public street, lane or alley in the Village.
§ 249-10. Injuring guideposts or guide boards.
No person shall injure, deface, destroy or remove any guidepost or guide
board heretofore erected or which shall be erected in this Village without
the permission of the Village Council.171
§ 249-11. Construction barricades. [Amended 9-16-2015 by Ord. No.
3496]
§ 249-12. Village to provide street names and signs. [Added
12-9-1986 by Ord. No. 2073]
The Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood shall, by resolution, provide
for the naming and changing of names of streets and highways within the
Village of Ridgewood and further provide for the erection thereon of signs
showing the names thereof.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or bypass any construction
barricade in the public rights-of-way of the Village or portion thereof
undergoing construction or repair; or being so barricaded as a matter
of public safety; or to walk upon a portion of such street so barricaded
or to drive or ride on any bicycle, tricycle, motorcycle, motor vehicle,
horse or wagon thereon without the written permission of the Village
Manager or the Director of Public Works or their designee in charge of
the work or the event within the public right-of-way. Any and all
construction barricades placed within the Village's public rights-of-way
shall be subject to removal or relocation by Village of Ridgewood
personnel (Police, Fire, ES, or Public Works) for public safety reasons as
necessary.
B. The Village can provide barricades for Village-approved events, upon
the deposit of funds, which are refundable once barricades are returned
to the Village undamaged and intact. If barricades are damaged, lost or
stolen, the deposit shall be forfeited to the Village to replace the
barricades.
171. Editor's Note: Former Section 27-11 of the 1974 Code, which immediately followed this
section, regarding fires in streets, was repealed 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
§ 249-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-12
246:991

ARTICLE II
Obstructions
§ 249-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIDEWALK — Includes all of that space between the building line and the
curb of any street within the Village, and also that space between any
building and the building line which may have been dedicated by the owner
of such building to the public for sidewalk uses and purposes.
§ 249-14. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful to locate, place, suffer or permit any obstruction or
hazard in or upon any of the streets, gutters, curbs or sidewalks of the
Village of Ridgewood.
§ 249-15. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on or over any curb or sidewalk
of any street of the Village, except on a driveway, to break or dig up the
ground in any street or sidewalk in the Village, to erect any staging for
building thereon or in dangerous or inconvenient proximity thereto or to
place, deposit or keep any building or other materials on any street or
sidewalk of the Village without first obtaining a permit therefor, in writing,
from the Director of the Department of Building and Inspections.
§ 249-16. Application for and issuance of permit. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
§ 249-17. Railings and lighting required.
Whenever any street or sidewalk in the Village shall, under any permit
granted as provided in § 249-15, be dug up, obstructed, encumbered or
otherwise thereby rendered unsafe or inconvenient for travel, the person
holding such permit shall at all times keep up a suitable railing around the
A. A permit required by § 249-15 shall be issued by the Director of
Building and Inspections on application in writing, signed by the owner
of the land in front of which such street or sidewalk is located or by his
agent, and shall state the time when and the place where such material
shall be stored or the sidewalk crossed or driven on, and such
application shall contain an agreement to repair any and all damage
done to such streets, gutters, curbs or sidewalks by reason of such use
for which such permit is granted.
B. The fee for issuing any such permit shall be as set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees, to be paid by the applicant to the Department of Building and
Inspections at the time of application.
§ 249-13 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-17
246:993
place so obstructed, so long as the same shall remain unsafe or inconvenient
as aforesaid, and shall also keep one or more lighted lanterns fixed in some
proper manner every night from twilight in the evening and throughout the
whole night so long as such obstruction remains He shall also amend and
repair such street or sidewalk to the acceptance of the Superintendent of
the Division of Streets.
§ 249-18. Storage of materials.
All building or other materials stored on any street under any such permit
as required by § 249-15 shall be placed in a compact pile adjoining the curb
and shall not extend more than six feet from such curb into the street and
shall be properly guarded by lights and barriers at night and shall be so
piled as not to interfere with the flow of waters into the gutters.
§ 249-19. Revocation of permit.
The Director of the Department of Building and Inspections shall have the
right to revoke any permit when, in his judgment, the activities of the
permittee shall have caused or shall tend to cause damage to any street,
gutter, curb or sidewalk or shall interfere with the rights of the public
therein.
§ 249-20. Repair of damages before issuance of certificate.
If the premises for which any permit, as required by § 249-15, shall have
been issued shall further require the issuance of any certificate of
occupancy by the Director of the Department of Building and Inspections,
the Director shall have the power to withhold the issuance of such
certificate of occupancy until any damage caused to the street, gutters,
curbs and sidewalks, or any of them, shall have been either repaired in
accordance with this chapter and other ordinances of the Village and the
specifications required thereunder by the Village Engineer or a sum
sufficient to cause the repair of the same, as estimated by the
Superintendent of Buildings upon the advice of the Village Engineer, shall
have been paid to the Village.
§ 249-21. Driving on the sidewalk.
No person shall drive any vehicle upon any sidewalk in the Village or
otherwise unnecessarily occupy, obstruct or encumber any such sidewalk so
as to interfere with the convenient use of the same by pedestrians.
§ 249-22. Enclosure of street.
No person shall enclose any part of a highway or street in the Village
or erect any fence, terrace, building or other encroachment or make any
obstruction or put any nuisance on any street or highway of the Village
or continue any such enclosure, fence, terrace, building, encroachment,
obstruction or nuisance upon any such street or highway.
§ 249-17 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-22
246:994
ARTICLE III
Construction, Reconstruction and Repair
[Amended 7-8-1975 by Ord. No. 1582]
§ 249-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed:
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the Village or his duly
authorized representative.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence
of which constitute a clear and immediate danger to persons or properties.
§ 249-24. Duty of owner. [Amended 9-16-2015 by Ord. No. 3498]
§ 249-25. When construction required.
Sidewalks and/or curbs shall be required to be installed and constructed
when the Council of the Village shall, by resolution, determine that the
health, safety and welfare of the general public so requires and causes
notice to that effect, in writing, to be served upon the owner, owners or
occupant of said lands requiring the necessary specified work to said curb
or sidewalk to be done by said landowner or occupant within a period of
time stated in said resolution not less than 30 days from the date of service
of said notice.
§ 249-26. When repairs required. [Amended 3-10-1981 by Ord. No.
1790; 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 3332]
A. It shall be the duty of any owner of real property abutting any public
street or sidewalk in the Village of Ridgewood, at the owner's sole cost
and expense, to install, construct, repair, alter, relay, reconstruct and
maintain the sidewalks in front of or abutting such property whenever
such sidewalks are required as hereinafter provided or, being already
installed, shall be in such state of deterioration or disrepair as to
constitute a hazard to the general public using said sidewalks unless
they are repaired, altered, relaid or reconstructed. In addition to the
foregoing, it shall also be the duty of the owner, at the owner's sole cost
and expense, to install, construct, repair, alter, relay, or reconstruct
curbs where the deterioration or damage to the same has been caused
by the actions of such owner.
B. It shall be the duty of any owner of real property abutting any public
street or sidewalk in the Village of Ridgewood, at the owner's sole cost
and expense, to maintain the interior of the tree wells located in/on the
sidewalk in front of or abutting such property each year by weeding,
removing debris and maintain the overall clean appearance of the tree
wells and the interior of same.
§ 249-23 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-26
246:995
§ 249-27. Service of notice. [Amended 3-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1790;
3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 3332]
§ 249-28. Failure to comply; assessment of costs. [Amended
3-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1790]
In the event that the owner of such lands shall not comply with the
requirements of such notice, it shall be lawful thereupon for the Department
of Public Works of the Village, upon filing due proof of service of the
notice required or publication thereof with the Village Clerk, to cause said
installation, construction, repair, alteration, relaying or reconstruction to
be performed and paid for out of Village funds available therefor; the cost
of such work shall thereupon be certified by the Director, Department of
Public Works, to the Tax Collector, at which time the amount of such cost
shall be and become a lien upon such lands in front of which or abutting
A. Repairs, alterations, relaying or reconstruction of sidewalks and/or
curbs shall be required when the Director has determined by field
observations that the health, safety and welfare of the general public so
requires. The Director shall then issue an initial notice, in writing, to
that effect to be served upon the owner of such lands, which said notice
shall require the necessary work to the curb or sidewalk, as specified in
the notice, be performed by the property owner. The initial notice shall
set forth the date upon which the said work shall be completed, which
date shall be not less than 45 calendar days after the date of mailing of
said notice to the property owner.
B. In the event a property owner fails to make the repairs requested within
the timeframe of the initial notice, a second notice shall be issued to the
property owner with an additional 45 calendar days to complete the
requested for repairs.
A. The notice required by § 249-25 shall be served by both certified mail,
return receipt requested, and regular mail, postage prepaid, to the
property owner’s last known post office address according to the
Village’s tax assessment records.
B. The initial notice required by § 249-26 for repairs to a defective
sidewalk shall be served by regular mail to the property owner’s last
known post office address according to the Village’s tax assessment
records.
C. The second notice required by § 249-26 for repairs to a defective
sidewalk shall be served by regular mail and certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the property owner’s last known post office
address according to the Village’s tax assessment records.
D. Failure to comply with the second notice for repairs to a sidewalk and/
or curb shall be considered a violation of this article and shall subject
the violator to the penalty provisions set forth in the Village Code in
Chapter 1, § 1-15.
§ 249-26 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-28
246:996
which such work was done to the same extent that assessments for local
improvements are liens in the Village under general law and shall be
collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of such other
assessments bearing interest at the same rate.
§ 249-29. Other remedies.
Nothing herein shall deprive the Village of its right to bring an action to
recover said amount against the owner of said lands, and a certified copy of
the aforesaid certificate shall, in such action, be prima facie evidence of the
existence of the debt due from said owner to the Village.
§ 249-30. Account for moneys recovered.
All moneys recovered or paid to the Village under the provisions of this
article shall be credited to the account out of which the cost of such work
was paid.
§ 249-31. Permit required. [Amended 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3104;
3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 3332]
A. No person, firm, or corporation shall construct, replace or repair a
sidewalk, curb or driveway within the limits of any public street,
highway, or other public property without first obtaining a permit to do
the same from the Director of the Department of Public Works or his or
her designated representative. The entity obtaining the permit shall be
deemed the "permit holder" or "permittee" for the purposes of this
article. In the event a tree or its root system interferes with the
proposed work for which the permit is obtained, the person, firm or
corporation obtaining the said permit has the option of contacting the
Village of Ridgewood Parks and Shade Tree Division to request to have
the tree’s root system trimmed to permit the proposed work. In the
event the Village’s staff cannot perform the requested for root trimming
within 72 hours exclusive of weekends, upon receipt of the request, the
permit holder shall have the option of engaging the service, at their
cost, of a New Jersey certified tree expert to perform the root trimming.
Tree roots may be trimmed only by the Village’s staff or a certified tree
expert. For any tree roots not trimmed in the manner described above,
the permit holder shall bear responsibility for the health and condition
of the affected tree.
B. All work performed by a permit holder within the public right-of-way
shall comply with any and all requirements of the Americans with
Disability Act, including any subsequent updates and revisions.
C. Such permit shall be valid for an effective period not to exceed 30
consecutive calendar days. Such effective period may be extended, if so
requested by the permit holder prior to the expiration thereof, for such
additional period as the Director may authorize.
§ 249-28 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-31
246:997
§ 249-32. Notice of work; permitted days.
§ 249-33. Exhibit of permit.
The permit must be in possession of the parties actually doing the work and
must be exhibited to the Director or to any authorized representative of the
Village upon request.
§ 249-34. Revocation of permit.
The Director shall have the right to revoke or cancel the permit at any
time should the permittee fail to comply with any of the terms, agreements,
covenants and conditions thereof.
§ 249-35. Transferability.
The permit shall not be assigned or transferred except upon the prior
written consent of the Director.
§ 249-36. Cleanup.
D. Annual contractor permit. Any firm, person, or corporation, performing
sidewalk installation in the Village has the option to obtain an annual
contractor permit valid from January 1 of each year to December 31 of
each year for an annual fee, as prescribed in Chapter 145, Fees. The
annual contractor permit will permit the permit holder to construct/
reconstruct as many sidewalks in the Village as he/she desires. The
annual contractor permit holder must still file a permit for each location
of work prior to the start of any work with the Department of Public
Works, Engineering Division. If there are root issues with any adjacent
trees in the public right-of-way, the Engineering Division will coordinate
the root/tree work with the Village Parks and Recreation Department
and advise the annual permit holder when he/she may remove the old
sidewalk. All work areas must still call for the requisite form/subgrade
inspection prior to the placement of concrete. [Amended 3-11-2015
by Ord. No. 3462]
A. The permittee shall not begin or carry on any part of the work provided
to be done, except in the event of an emergency, without first notifying
the Director not less than 24 hours in advance and obtaining his
approval therefor.
B. No work provided to be done under said permit shall be performed on
Saturdays, Sundays or holidays except with the prior approval of the
Director or in the event of an emergency.
A. The permittee shall clean up and remove promptly from the site of the
work, upon completion thereof, all surplus excavated material and
debris and shall leave the site of the work in a neat and orderly
condition.
§ 249-31 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-36
246:998
§ 249-37. Work to be performed expeditiously. [Amended 3-11-2015
by Ord. No. 3462]
§ 249-38. Application for permit.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring a permit for such work shall make
application therefor to the Director upon forms provided for that purpose.
Said application shall show or include the following information:
B. Where topsoil, seeded areas or sod are disturbed in the course of the
work, the permittee shall restore such ground surface to its original
condition.
A. The permittee, at his own expense, shall carry out the work as
expeditiously as possible and in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience and to permit the use of the sidewalk by
pedestrians and the roadway by vehicles and the flow of water along the
gutters.
B. The permit holder for work to be performed shall be responsible for the
condition of the sidewalk work area at all times until such work has
been deemed complete and meeting the Village's standards by the
Village of Ridgewood Department of Public Works Engineering Division.
C. No sidewalk work areas shall be excavated, have slabs removed, be
barricaded or be caused to be unusable by the residents of the Village
for a period more than seven calendar days. All permit holders shall
coordinate any work to be done on adjacent trees in the public right-ofway
through the Village's Engineering Division via email or written
letter.
A. The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the
applicant (permit holder). [Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 3332]
B. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property
in front of which or for whom the work is to be performed.
C. The location of the property.
D. The extent and nature of the work to be done.
E. The date or dates when the work is to be done.
F. A signed statement by the applicant that he agrees to perform the work
for which the permit is granted strictly in accordance with the
conditions of the permit and this article.
G. A signed statement by the applicant that the Village is to be saved
harmless from any loss, injury or damage arising out of the granting of
the permit or from any negligence or fault of said applicant, his
servants or agents in connection with any of the work done under or in
connection with said permit.
§ 249-36 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-38
246:999
§ 249-39. Specifications.
Sidewalks, curbs and driveways shall be constructed, removed, replaced or
repaired in accordance with such grades and specifications as have been
or may from time to time be established by the Director. Such grades and
specifications shall be placed on file in the office of the Director and shall
be followed in all instances except where the Director determines that the
interest of the Village will be better served by a deviation therefrom. In
the event of a deviation, the permittee shall be advised, in writing, with
the reasons therefor. All work shall be performed so as to meet the grade
and alignment of the adjoining sidewalk, curb or driveway, if any, or such
established line or grade as may be determined by the Director and in
accordance with the Director's instructions.
§ 249-40. Protective barricades.
Pedestrian and vehicular traffic is to be adequately protected by the
permittee by means of suitable protective barricades and lights around
the work, and the work is to be arranged so as to cause a minimum of
inconvenience and hazard to such pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
§ 249-40.1. Limitations of placing concrete. [Added 3-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 3332]
H. All entities applying for a curb/sidewalk permit shall acknowledge that
the Village shall control the pace of any work required on the adjacent
trees in the rights-of-way. [Added 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3462]
A. Cold weather concreting. Anytime when the ambient temperatures are
expected to fall below 4° C. during the placement or cure time of
concrete for curbs and/or sidewalks, the permit holder shall provide
measures to maintain the concrete surface temperature above 29° C.
B. Hot weather concreting. Anytime when the ambient temperatures are
expected to be above 25° C. during the placement or cure time of
concrete for curbs and/or sidewalks, the permit holder shall undertake
all necessary measures to cool the concrete, including but not limited to
using water-reducing admixtures, cooling the aggregate, using chilled
water, preventing adsorption by wetting underlying subgrade or wood
forms, or any other method approved by the Director.
C. If a permit holder is unable to maintain the requisite temperatures in
accordance with hot or cold weather concreting requirements, the work
shall be suspended until suitable weather conditions exists.
§ 249-38 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-40.1
246:1000
ARTICLE IV
Street Openings
[Amended 5-25-1982 by Ord. No. 1846]
§ 249-41. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings ascribed to them by this section:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
CROSS TRENCH — Any opening at 90° to the center line of the street.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the Village or his duly
authorized representative.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence
of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to person or property.
MAJOR PERMIT — An opening exceeding 15 square yards.
MATERIALS — Includes pipes, fittings and appurtenances as well as the
excavation or backfill.
MINOR PERMIT — An opening of 15 square yards or less.
NONPROFIT/TAX EXEMPT — Any qualified nonprofit, religious, or taxexempt
organization domiciled within the Village of Ridgewood and having
a Village of Ridgewood mailing address.[Added 8-11-2010 by Ord. No.
3260]
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed to
fulfill all the terms of this article.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation or entity.
ROADWAY — The cartway or paved area only.
STREET — The improved portion of the right-of-way of any public street,
public highway, public way, public road or public easement within the
Village, including that portion of the right-of-way improved with curbs and
sidewalks.
UTILITY — Any utility, public, private or government.
VILLAGE — The Village of Ridgewood.
§ 249-42. Permit required.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall open or cause to be opened, by
cutting or excavating, the surface or soil of any street, roadway or other
public property for any purpose whatsoever without first obtaining
therefor from the Director a written permit; provided, however, that any
person maintaining pipes, lines or other underground facilities in or
under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening without a
permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done
immediately, provided that the permit could not reasonably and
§ 249-41 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-42
246:1001
practically have been obtained beforehand. The person shall thereafter
apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the Village
is open for business.
B. It is not intended to require a permit for the opening or excavating
within any county or state road for which a permit has been acquired
from the proper authority.
C. A permit shall be valid for an effective period not to exceed 30
consecutive calendar days. Such effective period may be extended if so
requested by the permittee prior to the expiration thereof for an
additional period not to exceed 30 days. An additional extension for a
final period not to exceed 30 days may be requested and granted. A
permit may not be extended for a period in excess of 90 days from the
date the original permit was issued.
D. No work shall proceed between November 15 and March 15 unless
emergency circumstances exist or approval is specifically granted by
the Director and/or his/her designated representative to expedite the
removal of any pole no longer in use as well as any other debris
generated or created by the work of the permit, within the public rightof-
way. [Amended 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 3329]
E. No work provided to be done under a permit shall be performed on
Saturdays, Sundays or holidays except with prior approval of the
Director or in the event of an emergency. Any work regulated
hereunder shall be performed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. unless an emergency exists.
F. No person, firm, or corporation shall, during the course of their work
within the Village's public rights-of-way requiring a permit under this
chapter, occupy metered parking spaces without the proper
compensation due the Village in accordance with the fees set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees. [Added 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 3254]
G. Any nonprofit/tax exempt organization seeking to occupy a portion of
the Village's parking metered public right-of way shall, prior to their
occupation, request and receive permission in the form of a permit from
the Office of the Village Manager. The request shall state the dates of
any occupation of the Village's parking metered public right-of-way, the
anticipated duration, and the number of parking meters to be occupied.
There shall be no permit fee for any qualified nonprofit/tax exempt
organizations. The maximum duration of occupancy to be permitted,
with no fee, shall be two hours per day. [Added 8-11-2010 by Ord.
No. 3260]
H. The Village Manager shall have the discretion to waive the bagged
meter fee for the Village's parking metered right-of-way for any
organization that, prior to its occupation of said spaces, applies for and
receives a permit from the Office of the Village Manager. The said
permit shall be limited to no more than 15 metered parking spaces at a
§ 249-42 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-42
246:1002
§ 249-43. Notice of work.
The permittee shall not begin or carry on any part of the work provided
to be done, except in the event of an emergency, without first notifying
the Director not less than 24 hours in advance and obtaining his approval
therefor.
§ 249-44. General considerations.
time per event. The waiver of the bagged meter fee shall be noted on
the permit issued. [Added 3-12-2014 by Ord. No. 3407]
I. For special events. When a special event, free to the public, desires to
utilize metered parking spaces adjacent to a Village Park or public
space (i.e., Van Neste Square, the train station, etc.) on a Sunday, the
Village Manager shall have the option, upon request, to issue a permit
waiving the fee for bagging the parking meters desired by the event.
[Added 3-12-2014 by Ord. No. 3407]
A. In all cases, full consideration is required to be given to the adoption
and implementation of measures reflecting sound engineering
principles and economic factors necessary to preserve and protect the
integrity and visual quality of the roadway, its maintenance and
efficiency and vehicular and pedestrian traffic safety.
B. Utility lines are to be located to permit servicing such lines with
minimum interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Efforts must
be made to minimize the construction of chambers or vaults in the
roadway area and to avoid their location at street intersections.
C. Ground-mounted utility facilities shall be of a design compatible with
the visual quality of the roadway section being traversed.
D. Opening of new or resurfaced roadways or municipal parking lots.
[Amended 6-10-2009 by Ord. No. 3194; 8-13-2014 by Ord. No.
3424; 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3545]
(1) New roadways, or municipal parking lots and roadways resurfaced
with a bituminous concrete surface course in the Village of
Ridgewood shall not be opened for a period of five calendar years
from the date of the pavement surface completion unless an
emergency exists. When an emergency exists necessitating an
opening, the contractor or utility firm performing the opening shall
compensate the Village of Ridgewood an additional $2,000 per
individual opening or $2,000 for every 50 linear feet of pipe trench,
whichever is greater, in addition to any requirements stated in the
Village's street opening permit process.
(2) All municipal roadways and parking lots that have been resurfaced
with a bituminous concrete surface course upon which imprinted
preformed thermoplastic crosswalk material has been installed
shall not be opened for a period of five calendar years from the date
§ 249-42 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-44
246:1003
§ 249-45. Application for permit.
Any person desiring a permit for street opening shall make application
therefor to the Director for each such opening upon forms provided for that
purpose. Application for a street opening permit for work to be performed
for a utility shall be made by the utility, and such permit shall be issued to
the utility and not to the contractor. A separate application shall be made
and a separate permit issued for each street to be opened by the permittee.
of the imprinted preformed thermoplastic crosswalk material's
installation unless an emergency exists. When an emergency exists
necessitating an opening or crossing of the thermoplastic material,
the contractor or utility firm performing the opening or crossing
shall compensate the Village of Ridgewood an additional $100
per measured square foot of thermoplastic crosswalk material
damaged or removed, in addition to any requirements stated in the
Village's street opening permit process.
E. If any subsequent Village facility necessitates the moving or adjusting
of utility facilities located by permit, then such utilities shall bear all
costs and expenses of the required move or adjustment unless the cost
and expense of said move or adjustment is otherwise provided for by
law.
F. Utility line designs and construction are subject to minimum safety
standards and construction requirements prescribed by the respective
national or industry standard codes.
G. All excavations made in the roadways of the Village of Ridgewood shall
be properly backfilled. Backfill materials shall be compacted by
mechanical means to 95% of Modified Proctor Test, as described in
ASTM D1557. When requested by the Village Engineer, the holder of a
street opening permit shall provide to the Village of Ridgewood
satisfactory documentation that backfill soils have been properly
compacted. [Added 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 3424]
H. The Village Manager shall have the discretion to waive the fee in
Subsection D for Village residents demonstrating a verifiable
emergency situation necessitating the road opening. [Added
8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 3424]
A. Except to the extent waived by the Director and/or his/her designated
representative in case of an emergency, the application shall show or
include the following information for a minor street opening:
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375; 6-9-2010 by Ord. No.
3254; 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 3329]
(1) The name, address, office telephone number, email contact
address, and cellular telephone of the applicant or his/her
designated contact person.
§ 249-44 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-45
246:1004
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property in front of which or for whom the work is to be performed.
(3) The location of the property.
(4) The extent and nature of the work to be done.
(5) The date or dates when the work is to be done.
(6) Evidence that all materials, labor and/or equipment which are
needed to complete such undertaking as authorized by the permit
are available.
(7) A signed statement by the applicant that he agrees to perform the
work for which the permit is granted strictly in accordance with the
conditions of the permit and this article.
(8) A list of all federal, state or local government agencies having
jurisdiction thereover and, if such agencies require approval, a
statement whether such approval has been obtained and
attachment of a copy of such approval.
(9) A signed statement by the applicant that the Village is to be saved
harmless by the applicant from any loss, injury or damage arising
out of the granting of the permit or from any negligence or fault of
such applicant, his servants or agents in connection with any of the
work done under or in connection with such permit.
(10) Certificates of insurance.
(a) A certificate of insurance stating that 10 days' written notice
shall be given to the Village before a policy covered thereby
shall be changed or cancelled, indicating that the applicant is
insured against all hazards and risks of loss which may arise
from or out of the performance of the work, whether such
performance be by himself, his subcontractor or anyone
directly or indirectly employed by him, and shall include
protection against liability arising from completed operations.
This insurance shall be written in comprehensive form, and the
liability limits shall not be less than the following:
[1] Bodily injury: $100,000 each person; $300,000 each
occurrence.
[2] Property damage: $50,000 each occurrence.
(b) With the approval of the Director, public utilities subject to
regulation by the Board of Public Utilities may furnish a selfinsurance
certificate in lieu of a liability insurance certificate.
(11) A nonrefundable application fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
(12) The number of parking meters the proposed work will obstruct.
The number of days the parking meters will be obstructed.
§ 249-45 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-45
246:1005
§ 249-46. Action of Director on application.
§ 249-47. Permit fees; deposits.
Every person obtaining a permit shall:
§ 249-48. Conditions for permit.
In granting any permit under this article and to prevent danger to public
or private property or to prevent the operation from being conducted in
a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to create a
nuisance, the following conditions will apply:
Obstruction counts anytime the parking space is not available to
the public due to the work of the permit.
B. The application for a major street opening permit shall require the
items in Subsections A(1) through (10), both inclusive, and, in addition
thereto, three sets of plans and specifications, a traffic control plan in
accordance with the manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and/or
a detour plan as required by the Director, together with a
nonrefundable application fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
A. The Director will have a minimum of three working days to review the
application prior to issuing a street opening permit.
B. When the Director approves an application, he shall at that time advise
the applicant of the amount of deposit necessary to cover the work
proposed in said application.
C. The Director will also state the probable inspection costs that may be
incurred and advise the applicant of such costs.
D. Once the applicant meets all the requirements of this article, the
Director will grant the permit.
A. Pay a permit fee for the issuance of an excavation permit which shall be
in addition to all other fees for permits or charges relative to any
proposed construction work in an amount as set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
B. Pay an inspection fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
C. Make a deposit as required by § 249-49 of this article.
A. Only rubber-tired equipment shall be used.
B. Routes upon which materials may be transported are to be approved by
the Village before the permit is issued.
§ 249-45 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-48
246:1006
§ 249-49. Required deposit. [Amended 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 3469]
The amount of deposit for street openings shall be a minimum of $1,000 or
shall be computed in accordance with the unit prices the Village received
for its most recent street resurfacing/restoration/reconstruction bid, as
determined by the Director of Public Works, whichever is greater.
C. Disposal of excavated materials within the Village of Ridgewood is
subject to Chapter 246, Soil Removal, of the Village Code.
D. Dust resulting from construction procedures is to be kept to a
minimum.
E. Excessive noise shall be prohibited.
F. Roadways and sidewalks are to be kept clear for pedestrian and
vehicular traffic. All operations shall be planned with full regard to
safety and to keep traffic interference to an absolute minimum. No
trench shall remain open beyond the hours of work. Gas companies,
however, shall be permitted to leave open small openings for the
purpose of adequately venting natural gas, provided that said small
openings are adequately protected with traffic control devices and that
proper notice is given to the Village. Said openings shall be maintained
for no longer than 48 hours. The Director may permit other small
openings in circumstances where work cannot be completed during
normal working hours, provided that said openings are properly plated
so as not to interfere with the flow of traffic or to endanger the public.
G. Construction equipment and materials shall not be left on the street
overnight unless special permission is given, in writing.
H. Traffic shall be controlled in accordance with the appropriate sections
of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, which includes
information regarding the furnishing and erecting of traffic control
devices necessary to move pedestrians and vehicular traffic safely
through or around the work area.
I. All parking meters obstructed by the work of the permit shall be bagged
with bags provided by the Village of Ridgewood Traffic and Signal
Division only. [Added 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 3254]
J. All parking meters to be obstructed by a permit issued to a nonprofit/
tax exempt organization shall be covered only by bags approved by the
Village of Ridgewood Traffic and Signal Division. [Added 8-11-2010
by Ord. No. 3260]
K. All parking meters permitted to be obstructed by a permit issued by the
Village Manager shall be bagged with bags provided by the Village of
Ridgewood Traffic and Signal Division only. [Added 3-12-2014 by
Ord. No. 3407]
§ 249-48 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-50
246:1007
§ 249-50. Form of deposit; approval.
The deposit may be in the form of cash, a certified, treasurer's or cashier's
check or surety bond made payable to the Village and meeting the approval
of the Director. The surety bond must be written by a reputable surety
company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, and the bond
shall be conditioned upon the payment of all charges required by this
article. Such bond must be approved by the Village Attorney as to form. The
Village shall have the right to require the submission of the deposit in any
of the above specified forms.
§ 249-51. Use of deposit.
§ 249-52. Insufficient deposit.
If the deposit made is less than sufficient to pay all fees and costs, the
permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the Village an amount equal to the
deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such deficiency upon
demand, the Village may recover the same by action in any court of
competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, additional
permits shall not be issued to such permittee.
§ 249-53. Annual deposits.
Whenever any public utility or municipal authority maintaining
underground facilities shall contemplate more than one street opening or
excavation per calendar year, it may post a surety bond for the calendar
year or part thereof to cover the estimated fees and cost of any and all
work. Said bond must be written by a reputable surety company licensed
to do business in the State of New Jersey or other approved surety, and the
bond shall be conditioned upon the payment of all charges estimated to be
required by this article during the term of the bond. Such bond must be
approved by the Village Attorney as to form.
§ 249-54. Maintenance period.
A. The amount of deposit shall be retained by the Village for the duration
of the period of maintenance as defined hereunder.
B. Upon failure or default by the permittee of any of the terms,
agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on the permittee's
part to be done or performed, said deposit may be used by the Village
for any expense incurred by the Village by reason of such failure or
default on the part of the permittee.
C. Any balance left after the expense of such failure or default, as
determined and certified by the Director, has been paid and deducted
from the amount of the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee.
A. The period of maintenance shall be construed as a period of one year
after the date of final completion, as determined by the Director, of the
§ 249-50 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-54
246:1008
§ 249-55. Notice to adjoining property owners or tenants.
If the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will affect
the use of properties abutting or adjoining the project, the permittee shall,
in writing, notify by hand delivery or mail the affected property owners or
tenants of the proposed work to be done. The permittee shall submit a list
of names and addresses of the owners and/or tenants of such properties to
the Director along with a copy of the notification.
§ 249-56. Notice to police and fire officials.
The permittee shall notify the Village Police and Fire Directors of any street
opening or excavation which affects the flow of traffic in the streets within
the Village. Such notification shall state the nature of the work to be done
and the location of such project. He shall also notify the Police and Fire
Directors when any openings or excavations have been closed, permitting
traffic to flow thereon.
§ 249-57. Exhibit of permit.
Any person receiving a permit as provided in this article shall cause the
same to be kept in the possession of the person in charge of the work,
who shall exhibit the same to any official or police officer in the Village on
demand.
§ 249-58. Permission of Director required.
Except in the case of emergency, no work shall be performed by the
permittee unless the Director shall be present or permission has been given
by the Director to proceed in his absence. Such permission should not be
unreasonably denied.
§ 249-59. Daily inspections.
work to be done pursuant to the terms of the permit; except, however,
that in the event that the termination of said one-year period shall fall
between November 1 and April 1, inclusive, then and in that event, the
period of maintenance shall be construed as extending until the 15th
day of May next thereafter. [Amended 4-8-2015 by Ord. No. 3469]
B. The permittee shall be responsible for the entire work and shall keep
every portion of said work in perfect order and repair during the entire
period of maintenance, and should said permittee fail to make needed
repairs to the work or to adequately maintain surfaces disturbed by said
permittee, the Director reserves the right, and without prior notice to
the permittee, to cause such repairs to be made or such surfaces to be
maintained by the Village's own forces or by contract or otherwise, in
which case all expenses incurred by the Village shall be deducted from
the deposit as herein otherwise provided for.
§ 249-54 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-59
246:1009
§ 249-60. Permit not required of Village.
Street opening permits will not be required for any contracts proposed
by the Village. All guaranties are provided for within plans and/or
specifications so provided by the Village.
§ 249-61. Additional work.
§ 249-62. Time period for commencement of work; renewal of
permit.
§ 249-63. Nontransferability.
Permits issued under this article are not transferable from one person to
another, and the work shall be carried out only at the location specifically
designated in the permit.
A. The Director or his authorized agents shall make daily inspections of all
work authorized by permits issued pursuant to this article from the time
the street is opened until the temporary pavement is installed. Timely
inspections shall be made during the time the temporary pavement is in
place and during the maintenance period.
B. The Village is empowered to employ an inspector if the Village is of the
opinion that the work to be performed pursuant to a permit authorized
by this article is such that an inspector is necessary to ensure
compliance with the various provisions of this article.
A. No person to whom a permit has been granted under the provisions of
this article shall perform any of the work authorized by such permit in
any amount or quantity greater than that specified in the permit, except
that upon the approval by the Director and payment of the additional
fee, additional work may be done under the provisions of the permit in
an amount not greater than 10% of the amount specified in the permit.
B. Any deposit and bond posted in connection with the original permit
shall be deemed to cover any such additional work as may be approved
pursuant to this section within the limits mentioned herein.
A. Work for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this article shall
commence within 30 days after the issuance of the permit therefor and
shall be carried out as expeditiously as possible.
B. If not so commenced or proper time extension granted, the permit shall
be automatically terminated and the permit fee, inspection fee and any
cash deposit shall be refunded to the permittee, with the exception of
the application fee.
C. Permits thus terminated may be renewed upon the payment of an
additional application fee and the required permit and inspection fees
as defined within this article.
§ 249-59 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-64
246:1010
§ 249-64. Notification to owner of pipes, conduits or other
structures.
It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify any company whose pipes,
conduits or other structures are laid in the street in which any work is to
be done by the permittee not less than 72 hours before commencing such
opening or work. The permittee doing such work shall, at its own expense,
carefully support, maintain in operation and protect from injury such pipes,
conduits or other structures and, in case of injury, shall restore the same at
its own expense or allow the company to whom the pipes, conduits or other
structures belong, at its option, to make the necessary repairs, and costs
thereof sustained by said company thereby shall be paid by said permittee
to said company upon presentation of a bill.
§ 249-65. Excavation specifications.
§ 249-66. Other minimum requirements to be met.
A. Trenches shall be cut to have vertical faces, where soil and depth
conditions permit, with a maximum width of two feet, plus the outside
diameter of the pipe to be installed. Trenches shall be braced as
necessary in accordance with all applicable federal, state, county and
municipal laws and regulations.
B. Pipe bedding shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
or industry standard instructions for the pipe or conduit being used.
C. Prior to the excavation of the trench, the existing pavement shall be cut
by pneumatic or hydraulically operated hand-held equipment or by saw
cut. In no case shall large impact-type equipment be used.
D. The integrity of the remaining pavement structure, shoulders and
slopes shall be of primary concern, and construction methods shall be
utilized which will keep the damages to existing pavement and other
areas to a minimum.
E. All blasting shall be conducted in accordance with applicable state and
federal laws and regulations. Prior to proceeding with blasting, twentyfour-
hour notice shall be given to the Director, owners of utilities within
50 feet and adjacent property owners.
A. Utility installations must meet the minimum requirements of the
national or industry associations, institutes or codes which recommend
methods of installation and utilization.
B. Wherever possible, the depth of bury for pipelines and conduits shall be
of a minimum of 30 inches. Sufficient vertical and horizontal clearance
between pipeline or structure of another utility facility shall be
provided to permit the proper maintenance of the pipeline or structure.
§ 249-64 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-67
246:1011
§ 249-67. Inspection required before backfilling.
No backfilling shall be done by the permittee until the work being done
under the permit shall have first been inspected and the backfilling
authorized by the Director. In case of nonconformity with this requirement,
the Director shall have the right to require that the work be uncovered by
the permittee at the latter's own expense so that proper inspection may be
made.
§ 249-68. Backfilling methods and materials.
§ 249-69. Temporary pavement restoration.
§ 249-70. Permanent pavement; decorative crosswalks.
A. Backfilling must be done with a pervious material placed in two stages.
The first stage includes the fill to a level of one-foot above the top of the
pipe, and the second stage includes the remaining portion of the trench
to finished grade. Backfill for the first stage shall be carefully deposited
and compacted in six-inch layers without in any way injuring or
disturbing the completed pipe or structure. The remaining portion of
the trench shall be backfilled and compacted in twelve-inch layers.
B. Backfilling must be accomplished with select material. Backfilling
necessitated by an emergency opening during the period from
November 15 to March 15, inclusive, shall not be made with frozen
material. In the event that backfilling is made with frozen material, it
shall be removed by the permittee and replaced with stone dust or
backrun sand.
C. Compaction shall be accomplished by approved mechanical or vibratory
means to match the compaction and cohesion of the undisturbed
adjacent material. Consolidation by saturation or puddling shall not be
permitted.
A. Immediately after backfilling the excavation, the permittee shall place
thereon an acceptable temporary pavement as provided herein below.
Such temporary pavement shall be maintained even with the roadway
surface until the permanent restoration is placed.
B. Temporary pavement shall consist of three inches of bituminous
concrete, Mix I-5 or approved equal, when the opening was made in an
existing pavement, and six inches of quarry process stone in all other
cases, except that where topsoil, seeded areas or sod have been
disturbed by the excavation, the permittee shall restore the ground
surface to its original condition.
A. Permanent restoration of pavement surface over the street opening
shall be made within two months, weather permitting, or within the
same construction season if so noted on the permit, from the date the
temporary pavement was installed.
§ 249-67 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-70
246:1012
§ 249-71. Cleanup.
B. Prior to the installation of the permanent pavement, the subgrade shall
be properly prepared and the existing pavement neatly cut back a
minimum of six inches from the edge of the trench or pavement damage
in a straight line with vertical faces free of foreign matter. A tack coat
shall be applied to the vertical faces of the existing pavement prior to
the placement of the patch material.
C. The permanent pavement shall consist of a bottom course of bituminous
stabilized base, Mix I-2, placed at a compacted thickness of six inches
and a surface course of bituminous concrete, Mix I-5, placed at a
compacted thickness of 1 1/2 inches.
D. All pavement restoration, both temporary and permanent, shall be
constructed in accordance with the applicable specifications of the New
Jersey State Highway Department.
E. The top or surface course of the permanent patch shall be flush with the
grade of the surrounding pavement when it is compacted. The joint
between the patch and the existing pavement shall be sealed with an
asphalt emulsion.
F. For lateral trenches over 100 feet in length, the top or surface course of
pavement shall extend from the curbline or edge of pavement to a point
of three feet beyond the edge of the bottom course; however, such
width shall not be less than 10 feet. If cross trenches are located less
than 250 fee apart, the entire roadway shall be resurfaced.
G. Restoration of imprinted preformed thermoplastic decorative
crosswalks shall be by a contractor qualified in the execution of such
work. All restoration efforts shall match the surrounding material in
color and appearance. The Director of Public Works or the designee
shall be the sole judge of a contractor's qualification to properly
perform the work. All restoration work to thermoplastic decorative
crosswalks shall adhere to the same schedule and conditions that apply
for asphalt pavement restoration work. [Added 9-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 3545]
A. The permittee shall clean up and remove promptly from the site of the
work, upon completion thereof, all surplus excavated material and
debris and shall leave the site of the work in a neat and orderly
condition.
B. Where concrete curb, asphalt berm, sidewalk or landscaped areas are
disturbed in the course of the work, the permittee shall restore such
surface to its original condition. A letter of release shall be furnished to
the Village of Ridgewood from the affected property owner prior to the
release of the deposit or bond.
§ 249-70 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-72
246:1013
§ 249-72. Revocation of permit.
Any permit issued under this article may be revoked by the Director, after
notice, for:
§ 249-73. Petition for deviation from provisions.
Deviations from the provisions of this article may be issued by the Village
upon review and approval of a written petition by the permittee which shall
include, in detail, the reason why such a deviation is being requested.
A. Violation of any condition of the permit.
B. Violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable
ordinance or law relating to the work.
C. The existence of any condition or the doing of any work constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or property of others.
§ 249-72 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-73
246:1014
ARTICLE V
Pay Telephones
[Added 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 2607]
§ 249-74. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person responsible for placing or maintaining a pay
telephone.
MUNICIPALITY — The Village of Ridgewood.
PAY TELEPHONE — Any self-service or coin- or credit-card-operated
telephone or telephones located in or over a public sidewalk or public
street.
PERSON — An individual, business, firm, corporation, association,
partnership or other organization or group of persons.
PUBLIC SIDEWALK — That area of a public street dedicated to public use
for pedestrian traffic. The public sidewalk shall include those areas between
the curb and the sidewalk, where such areas exist, and areas beyond the
sidewalk, if dedicated to public use.
PUBLIC STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street
purposes and shall include but not be limited to roadways, parkways and
alleys.
§ 249-75. Permit required; application; fee; indemnity and
insurance; applicability; signs.
A. No person may place or maintain any pay telephone on or above any
public street or public sidewalk within the Village of Ridgewood without
having first obtained a permit as provided in this article. Permits shall
be issued by the Village Manager, or his designee, subject to approval of
the location and means of installation of the pay telephone as set forth
hereinafter. Permits or denial thereof, with reasons set forth in the
event of denial, shall be issued within 10 working days of receipt by the
Village Manager, or his designee, of a completed application for such
permits. A completed application is an application filed with the Village
Manager, or his designee, which furnishes all of the information
required by this article. A permit shall be issued for a term of one year,
which shall be a calendar year commencing January 1 and terminating
December 31. Fees shall be prorated on a monthly basis, but not for any
portion of a month.
B. Before receiving a permit, the applicant shall submit to the Village
Manager, or his designee, a survey or drawing, certified by the
applicant to be correct, showing the public street and sidewalk, the
nearest property line and a plan or sketch of the pay telephone in
§ 249-74 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-75
246:1015
sufficient detail to describe the size, location, equipment and means of
installation.
C. The fee for a permit per telephone for the first year and per telephone
for each year thereafter shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. In
the event that a permit is issued for a partial year, the fee, as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees, shall be prorated over the first 12 months of the
permit upon renewal, namely a fee of $200 shall be paid for the first 12
months that a permit shall be issued and shall thereafter be adjusted to
an annual fee, as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, per calendar year.
Notwithstanding the above, no fee shall be charged for permits
pertaining to pay telephones furnished by the Village of Ridgewood as
an accommodation to the public.
D. Before receiving a permit, an applicant shall:
(1) Execute an indemnification agreement substantially as follows:
"The applicant and any other persons on whose behalf the
application is made agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless
the Village of Ridgewood against liability for all claims for damage
to property or injury to or death of persons arising out of the
control, maintenance or ownership or use of each pay telephone."
(2) File with the Village Manager, or his designee, evidence of a
general liability insurance policy, in form and content approved by
the Village Attorney, of $1,000,000 for bodily injury and $500,000
for property damage naming the Village of Ridgewood as additional
insured against any injury, loss or damage that may result from
placing or maintaining the pay telephone on or above the sidewalk.
(3) Submit a refundable cash deposit, maintenance bond or other
security acceptable to the Village of Ridgewood of $350 for each
pay telephone to cover the cost of removal and repair to the street
or sidewalk. Said deposit shall be returned to the licensee when the
telephone is removed and the location inspected by the Department
of Building and Inspections.
(4) Submit proof of its authority to install a pay telephone. Such
authority shall be a signed statement from the Board of Public
Utilities and the telephone company to which the pay telephone will
be tied, e.g., Bell Atlantic.
(5) Submit proof of consent to the installation and use from the
adjacent property owner or property owners as required in
§ 249-78C(7).
E. The issuance of a permit under this article shall not be deemed to
supersede any requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code or
other federal, state, county or municipal laws, ordinances or
regulations. No permit shall be issued to erect or install a public
sidewalk or public street pay telephone in any residential zone of the
Village nor in any place in other zones of the Village, except along
§ 249-75 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-75
246:1016
§ 249-76. Telephone rates to be posted; emergency calls; other
information to be posted.
public sidewalks and public streets as herein defined. No advertising,
signs or publicity purposes other than those dealing with the actual
use of the pay telephone shall be permitted on the pay telephone or
its surround. The erection of any pay telephones not within the public
street or public sidewalk shall be subject to Chapter 190, Land Use and
Development, of the Ridgewood Village Code.
F. Pay telephones shall have only one primary identification sign, which
shall not exceed 2.5 square feet and not be freestanding but attached to
the phone structure.
A. Pay telephones shall permit the following calls to be placed without
charge:
(1) Calls to the 911 emergency number.
(2) Emergency calls placed through operator assistance to the Police,
Fire or Emergency Services Departments.
B. Pay telephones shall permit a caller directly to select the long-distance
company to carry a call without any incremental charges, except as may
be otherwise permitted by applicable tariffs filed with the New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities.
C. The following current rates, including the rates for the initial time
period and for any additional time periods, as applicable, shall be
posted on each pay telephone in a clear and readable form:
(1) Local call rates.
(2) Long-distance rates.
(3) Surcharges for long-distance calls, if applicable, whether those
surcharges apply to calls carried by the pay telephone company on
its own facilities or by any other long-distance company.
(4) Operator assistance rates.
D. The following information shall be clearly posted on each pay
telephone:
(1) The identity of the local interexchange company, the long-distance
company and the operator assistance company that normally
process or carry calls from the pay telephone.
(2) A toll-free number that a caller can use to obtain information on the
rates, the surcharges or the terms and conditions applicable to
calls placed from the pay telephone.
(3) A toll-free number that a caller can use for the resolution by the pay
telephone company of a billing or a service complaint.
§ 249-75 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-77
246:1017
§ 249-77. Standards for installation, operation and maintenance.
Pay telephones shall comply with the following standards:
A. Provide dial tone at all times when the receiver is taken off hook (when
receiver is removed from its normal holder).
B. Restrict incoming calls; that is, the telephone shall be used only for
outgoing calls.
C. No enclosed booth shall surround a pay telephone, although soundproof
panels may separate each telephone in a multiphone installation.
D. Each coin-operated pay telephone shall be equipped with a coin-return
mechanism to permit a caller to obtain an immediate refund of all
moneys deposited, when applicable. The coin-return mechanism shall
be maintained in good working order.
E. Each pay telephone shall have affixed to it, in a place visible to everyone
using the pay telephone, the name and address of the distributor and
the telephone number of a working telephone service to report a
malfunction or secure a refund.
F. Pay telephones shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, a pay telephone shall be serviced and maintained so that:
(1) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint
on the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion on the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
(3) Any clear plastic or glass parts are unbroken and reasonably free of
cracks, dents, blemishes and discolorations.
(4) Any paper or cardboard parts or inserts are reasonably free of
tears, peeling or fading.
(5) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
(6) The telephone receiver is attached to the telephone.
(7) It is free of graffiti.
G. Each pay telephone shall be restricted to outgoing calls only.
H. Any distributor or pay telephone company that fails to maintain its pay
telephone in good working condition shall be given a ten-day written
notice by the Village Manager, or his designee, to repair the pay
telephone. If the pay telephone is not in good working condition at the
end of the ten-day period, the Village Manager, or his designee, may
revoke the permit.
§ 249-77 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-77
246:1018
§ 249-78. Location and placement.
I. If telephone books or other written manuals are provided, they shall be
maintained in good condition to ensure readability.
A. No pay telephone shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any street
or sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance shall:
(1) By determination of the Village Manager, or his designee,
unreasonably interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles;
(2) By determination of the Village Manager, or his designee,
unreasonably interfere with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
(3) By determination of the Village Manager, or his designee, interfere
with the use of traffic signs or signals, hydrants or mailboxes
permitted at or near said location.
B. Pay telephones shall be placed or otherwise secured so as to prevent
their being blown down or around the street or sidewalk but shall not
be chained or otherwise secured to any traffic or street signs, signals,
hydrants or mailboxes.
C. No pay telephones shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within five feet of any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within four feet of a curb.
(3) Within 20 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
(4) Within five feet of any driveway.
(5) Within three feet of any public area improved with a lawn, flowers,
shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
(6) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than 10 feet.
(7) Within three feet of any building unless written permission is
secured from the property owner and filed with the application;
wall-mounted telephones shall not extend more than 20 inches
from the wall; ground-mounted telephones shall not extend farther
than 24 inches from the wall.
(8) Within 10 feet of a bus shelter.
(9) Within 200 feet of a theater or church.
D. In the event that a particular pay telephone does not meet the
requirements set forth herein, an applicant may apply to the Village
§ 249-77 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-78
246:1019
§ 249-79. Removal.
§ 249-80. Revocation.
Manager, or his designee, for a waiver. The Village Manager, or his
designee, may issue a waiver if, in his/her judgment, strict application
of this article results in an undue hardship and that a waiver can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public health, safety and
welfare.
E. Pay telephones shall not be placed in sidewalks in front of street
addresses or within 100 feet, measured along the street frontage
measured on both sides of the street, from the property line of street
addresses in either direction where there appears to be continuous
criminal activity. Continuous "criminal activity" means a location or
locations which has or have generated more than four criminal reports
in any one month or more than 12 criminal reports within a year.
F. No pay telephone shall be placed within 500 feet, measured along the
street frontage, of any other pay telephone on the same side of the
street.
A. The distributor or pay telephone company shall remove any pay
telephone within 10 days following notice by the Village Manager, or his
designee, should the Village determine that such pay telephone
interferes with the repair or improvement of any street, sidewalk or
public place. Upon the completion of such repair or improvement, the
applicant may reinstall such pay telephone without additional fee.
B. The applicant shall remove any pay telephone within 10 days following
revocation or nonrenewal of a permit.
A. Upon the receipt of a written complaint that the location or use of a pay
telephone constitutes a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the
community or violates any terms of this article or any other ordinances
of the Village of Ridgewood or other federal, state or county laws or
ordinances, the Village Manager shall conduct a hearing after providing
written notice of the same at least 10 days in advance thereof to all
affected parties to ascertain whether the location and use of the pay
telephone constitutes a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the
community. If the Village Manager finds grounds for revocation
pursuant to the authority conferred by this section, he shall revoke any
permit issued by the agency for the use of the pay telephone. He may
also order such other relief as he deems fair.
B. A threat to the health, safety or welfare of the community shall include,
but not be limited to, the existence of continuous activity as set forth in
§ 249-78 above.
§ 249-78 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-81
246:1020
§ 249-81. Applicability to existing pay telephones.
All existing pay telephone owners or operators shall have a period of
sixty days from the effective date of this article to obtain the permits
required by this article. The Village Manager, or his designee, reserves the
right to reject any and all locations submitted for approval if a location or
installation is not in conformity with this article.
§ 249-82. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall subject the violator to the penalty
provisions set forth in the Village Code.172
172. Editor's Note: See § 1-15, Violations and penalties.
§ 249-81 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-82
246:1021

ARTICLE VI
Placement, Replacement or Removal of Public Utility Poles or
Underground Facilities
[Added 3-14-2012 by Ord. No. 3329]
§ 249-83. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to implement a program, upon adopting of
this article, to effect the timely removal of utility poles no longer in use,
damaged beyond use or reuse, or found to be redundant within the public
rights-of-way in the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 249-84. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADA RAMPS — Any depressed curb cut constructed to provide ease of
access from the street to the sidewalk in accordance with the requirement
of the Public Right-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines (PROWAG, 36 CFR Part
1190) for individuals needing the same.
JOINT POLES — For any pole utilized by two or more utilities serving
the public, the utility last removing its wires, cables, conduit, pipes, lines,
or other structures shall be liable for the removal of the pole and the
restoration at grade as required. Said removal shall include any guy wires
and supports previously used to assist the joint pole.
RESPONSIBLE UTILITY — Any entity, public or privately owned (business,
regulated utility, or utility), that maintains wires, cables, conduit, pipes,
lines, or other structures on a utility pole. For the purposes of this article,
the responsible utility shall mean the entity last transferring wires, cables,
conduit, pipes, lines, or other structures from the pole.
UTILITY POLE — Any pole erected within the public right-of-way for the
purposes of carrying wires, conduit, cabling, or utilized to provide support
to an adjacent utility pole.
§ 249-85. Notification of Village.
A. Any firm, public utility, or other entity, public or privately owned,
engaged in the placement or replacement of utility poles within the
public right-of-way in the Village, after the effective date of this article,
shall obtain a minor street opening permit for each pole location
proposed in accordance with the requirements in Article IV, § 249-45,
Application for permit.
B. Any firm, public utility, or other entity, public or privately owned,
engaged in the placement or replacement of utility poles within the
public right-of-way in the Village shall provide the Village of Ridgewood
with a contact person or department head within 30 calendar days of
the adoption of this article.
§ 249-83 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-86
246:1023
§ 249-86. Requirements for utility pole installation; removal.
§ 249-87. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Village of Ridgewood Director of
Public Works or his/her designated representative, and/or the Village of
Ridgewood Police Department.
§ 249-88. Violations and penalties.
Any utility, public or otherwise, contractor or entity firm (public or privately
owned) found to be in violation of the provisions of this article with regard
A. For both new and replacement utility poles in the Village, the following
requirements shall be adhered to:
(1) Location and placement. The street opening permit application
shall provide a street address for the proposed work.
(2) Standards for installation.
(a) All pole locations shall be coordinated with adjacent utilities to
avoid conflicts with any existing structures.
(b) No utility pole installation shall be closer than 15 feet from the
apron of a depressed curb ADA ramp. In the event a street
intersection corner does not have sidewalks or an ADA ramp,
the pole installation shall be no closer than 15 feet from the
intersection of the projection of each curbline of the
intersection.
(c) No pole shall be placed within the apron of a driveway entering
the public right-of-way.
B. Utility pole removal in the public right-of-way.
(1) For joint pole conditions observed in the Village, the responsible
utility shall have 14 calendar days to remove the pole upon written
notice from the Director and/or his/her designated representative.
Removal shall include the complete restoration of the surface of the
public right-of-way in accordance with the street opening permit.
(2) For any Village project widening a paved street within the public
right-of-way, the responsible party for a pole shall remove the pole
within 21 calendar days of written notification from the Director
and/or his/her designated representative to do so at no fee to the
Village.
(3) Any utility requesting a waiver from the above requirements, shall
do so in writing to the Director and/or his/her designated
representative within 10 calendar days of the issuance of the
written notice directing a pole to be removed. The request shall
present documentable reason for a waiver.
§ 249-86 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-88
246:1024
to the requirements therein, shall be subject to a minimum fine of $250 per
violation per day, not to exceed $2,000 per violation per day.
§ 249-89. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any clause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
§ 249-88 SOIL REMOVAL § 249-89
246:1025
Chapter 251
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 251, Swimming Pools, adopted 8-27-1974 by Ord. No.
1541 as Ch. 29 of the 1974 Code, as amended, was repealed
4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3591.]
Chapter 254
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Businesses and occupations — See Ch. 117.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 101.
§ 249-89 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 249-89
254:1026
ARTICLE I
Delinquency
[Adopted 8-9-1988 by Ord. No. 2171; amended in its entirety
11-10-1992 by Ord. No. 2383]
§ 254-1. Taxes to be paid prior to issuance of license or permit;
revocation.
In the event that the applicant for any license or permit to be issued by the
Village of Ridgewood is the owner of the premises on which the licensed or
permitted activity is to take place, no license or permit shall be issued to
such applicant until he shall pay currently any delinquent property taxes or
assessments on the property wherein the activity for which the license or
permit is sought or is to be conducted. Any outstanding license or permit
issued by the Village of Ridgewood shall be revoked or suspended in the
event that the licensed or permitted business or activity is conducted on
premises by the owner thereof and the owner has failed to pay the taxes due
on the property for at least three consecutive quarters.
§ 254-2. Exceptions.
Excepted therefrom is the issuance of a permit to a real estate broker to
permit the erection of a sign on the premises in question to advertise the
same for sale or lease.
§ 254-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or include any alcoholic
beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 254-1 TAXATION § 254-3
254:1027
Chapter 256
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 265.
§ 254-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 254-3
254:1028
ARTICLE I
Taxicabs
§ 256-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
DRIVER — Any person who operates a taxicab within the Village of
Ridgewood, whether or not such person is also the owner thereof.
OWNER — Any person or corporation in whose name title to any taxicab
is registered with the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles or who
otherwise exercises custody or control of said vehicle as an owner or lessee
thereof.
TAXICAB — Includes any automobile or motor car, commonly called a "taxi,"
engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run over
any of the streets or highways of the Village of Ridgewood, and particularly
a vehicle which accepts and discharges persons as may offer themselves
for transportation from points or places within the Village of Ridgewood to
other points or places within or without the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 256-2. Licenses.
A. There are hereby established two classes of taxicab licenses, to be
known as "taxicab owner's license" and "taxicab driver's license"
respectively.
B. No person or corporation shall operate or permit to be operated a
taxicab upon the streets of the Village of Ridgewood without first
having obtained the licenses provided for herein.
C. The owner or lessee of each taxicab shall make written application to
the Village Council on forms furnished by the Village Clerk for a license
for each vehicle to be operated in the Village of Ridgewood as a taxicab.
Each application shall be accompanied by the requisite fees as herein
fixed for the license applied for. Each application shall set forth under
oath or affirmation:
(1) The type, maker's name, seating capacity, weight, year of
manufacture, factory number and engine number of each vehicle.
(2) The proposed rates of fare for each vehicle.
(3) The principal location of each vehicle when not being operated
upon the streets as a taxicab.
(4) The home and business address of the owner of the vehicle.
(5) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
a crime or of a violation of a traffic regulation and, if the applicant
has been convicted of a crime or traffic violation, a complete
§ 256-1 TAXATION § 256-2
254:1029
§ 256-3. License fees. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on
December 31 of the year for which they are issued and shall be
nontransferable, both as to owners and drivers. The fees for such licenses
shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
§ 256-4. License card.
statement concerning dates and disposition thereof. In the case of
a corporate applicant, the statement shall be completed as to all
officers, directors and stockholders owning 10% or more of the
stock of the corporation.
D. The driver of each taxicab shall make written application to the Village
Council on forms furnished by the Village Clerk for a driver's license.
Such application shall be accompanied by the requisite fees as herein
set forth for the license applied for. The application shall set forth under
oath or affirmation:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) The home and business address of the applicant, the number of his
state driver's license and the physical characteristics of the
applicant.
(3) Whether the applicant was ever convicted of a crime or a violation
of a traffic regulation and, if the applicant has been convicted of a
crime or a traffic violation, the nature and disposition thereof.
(4) A photograph of the applicant taken within 12 months prior to the
date of the application.173
E. No taxicab driver's license shall be issued to any person who has not
attained the age of 21 and who has not held a valid New Jersey driver's
license for a period of 12 consecutive months.
F. Each application for a taxicab driver's license shall be accompanied by
a statement signed by a licensed physician of the State of New Jersey
and dated within 60 days prior to the filing of the application stating
that in the physician's opinion the applicant does not have any infirmity
based on the physician's examination of the applicant which might
make the applicant unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab.
G. The application may also contain such other questions or requirements
for information as the Village Manager may from time to time require
for the purposes of licensing and regulating public transportation
consistent with the purposes of this article.
173. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(5), requiring applicant fingerprints, added 3-10-2004
by Ord. No. 2873, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 2888.
§ 256-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 256-4
254:1030
§ 256-5. Grounds for revocation or suspension of license.
Any license, owner's or driver's, issued pursuant to the provisions of this
article may be revoked or suspended (without refund of fees) by the Village
Manager for any violation hereof or of any rules or regulations adopted
hereunder or for other good cause shown. The person or corporation
affected by such revocation or suspension shall have the opportunity for a
public hearing before the Village Manager in a summary manner in order
to contest the suspension or revocation. Pending hearing and decision by
the Village Manager, the revocation or suspension shall remain in effect.
In order to obtain a hearing from a summary revocation or suspension of
a license, the licensee shall be required to request the hearing, in writing,
within 10 business days of the effective date of the suspension or revocation
imposed by the Village Manager.
§ 256-6. Municipal consent required.
No taxicab shall be operated as such along any street in the Village of
Ridgewood until the owner thereof shall have obtained the consent of the
Village Council.
§ 256-7. Insurance requirements. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375; 1-12-2011 by Ord. No. 3274; 2-13-2013 by Ord. No. 3374]
No consent by the Village Council to the owner of a taxicab to operate upon
the streets of the Village shall become effective until the owner of each
such taxicab shall have filed with the Village Clerk an insurance policy of a
company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of this
state, conditioned for the payment of the sum of not less than $100,000 to
satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to or the death of
any one person resulting from an accident and property damage and a sum
of not less than $300,000 to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of the
bodily injuries to or the death of all persons and property on account of any
such accident, by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use
of such taxicab within the Village of Ridgewood. Any consent to operate or
lease a taxicab upon the public streets of the Village of Ridgewood which
has been granted by the Village Council shall become void and of no effect
A. Upon the granting of any license, the Village Clerk shall issue to the
licensee, owner or driver a license card.
B. Each owner's license card shall be posted in a conspicuous place inside
the licensed vehicle.
C. Each driver's license card shall be carried upon the person of the driver
at all times while driving the taxicab within the Village.
D. The owner and driver are each required to produce his license card for
inspection whenever so required by any passenger, police officer or any
person reasonably desiring inspection thereof because of collision,
accident or other happening.
§ 256-4 TAXATION § 256-7
254:1031
in the event that the aforementioned insurance policy lapses, is canceled, or
becomes ineffective for any reason.
§ 256-8. Power of attorney to Village.
The owner of each taxicab licensed hereunder shall execute and deliver
to the Village Clerk, concurrently with the filing of the insurance policies
herein required, a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall
appoint the Village Manager of the Village his true and lawful attorney
for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policies required hereunder.
§ 256-9. Inspection of taxicab.
§ 256-10. Driver actions prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for a driver of a taxicab to drive a taxicab while the
driver's view of the road is obstructed or receive or discharge passengers of
a taxicab in any part of the street except within three feet of the right-hand
curb.
§ 256-11. Taxicab stands.
Taxicabs may only operate from such public stands as may be created by
the Village Council from time to time. It shall be unlawful for taxicabs to
solicit passengers within the Village limits except from such public stands,
and no individual or company owning or operating a taxicab within the
Village except as are authorized to use such public taxi stands shall operate
a taxicab upon the streets of this Village.
§ 256-12. Meters.
A. Each taxicab shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition,
inside and out, and shall be kept in good repair, both mechanically and
in appearance. Each taxicab shall be kept in strict compliance with the
motor vehicle laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. The Village Manager, his designee or any member of the Police
Department of the Village of Ridgewood shall have the right to inspect
any taxicab licensed hereunder for the purposes of determining
whether said taxicab complies with this article or with state law.
A. Each and every public taxicab operating in the Village shall have
installed therein a taximeter or the equivalent thereof of standard
make, by which the fare or charge for hire of such taxicab is
mechanically and accurately calculated and registered and on which
taximeter such charge is plainly indicated. Such taximeter is to be so
placed in the taxicab that the charge thereof may be plainly seen by the
passengers.
§ 256-7 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 256-12
254:1032
§ 256-13. Meter and other rates. [Amended 10-8-1985 by Ord. No.
2008; 8-8-2001 by Ord. No. 2751]
B. No person shall use or permit to be used upon any taxicab a taximeter
which shall be in such a condition as to be over 5% incorrect to the
prejudice of any passenger.
C. After sundown the face of every taximeter shall be illuminated by a
suitable light so arranged as to throw a continuous steady light thereon,
while in operation and carrying a passenger, so that the meter will be
clearly discernible and can be read by a passenger in the rear seat.
D. Such taximeter shall be sealed, and a colored sticker different in color
at each inspection shall be placed on the taximeter after inspection.
E. No person shall use or permit to be used or drive for hire a public
taxicab equipped with a taximeter the case of which is unsealed or the
seal of which is broken.
F. Taximeters on all taxicabs shall be subject to inspection at any time by
the Village Manager, his designee or by any member of the Department
of the Police of the Village of Ridgewood.
A. Meter and other rates to be charged for the transportation of
passengers shall be subject to the final approval of the Village Council
by a resolution approving, rejecting or modifying the recommendation
of the Village Manager.
(1) Request for rate modification shall be made in writing to the Village
Manager, who shall have 60 days to review the request and report a
recommendation to the Village Council.
(2) In making his or her recommendation, the Village Manager shall
take into account changes in operating costs of providing the taxi
service, general fees charged for similar services in other
communities in the region and other economic factors that the
Village Manager may deem relevant to a particular application.
(3) The Village Manager may conduct an administrative public hearing
pursuant to a ten-day public notice. The cost of the public notice
shall be borne by the applicant seeking the rate modification.
(4) The Village Council shall consider the report of the Village
Manager at a public meeting at which the public shall have the
opportunity to comment on the recommendations of the Village
Manager. A public notice of the Village Council's intent to consider
the recommendation of the Village Manager shall be published at
least 10 days prior to the public meeting at which the matter is to
be considered. The cost of the public notice shall be borne by the
applicant seeking the rate modification.
§ 256-12 TAXATION § 256-13
254:1033
§ 256-14. Records.
Each taxicab owner shall require each driver to maintain a daily record
upon which all trips shall be recorded. The daily record shall show the
taxicab number or other pertinent identification, the name and license
number of the driver, specific hours of duty, time and place of origin and
destination of each trip and the amount of the fare received for each trip. All
such records shall be maintained by the taxicab owner for a period of one
year and shall be subject to inspection by the Village Manager, his designee
or any member of the Department of Police of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 256-15. Manager to promulgate regulations.
The Village Manager may adopt and promulgate written regulations
hereunder prescribing rules effecting the operation maintenance of
taxicabs within the Village of Ridgewood, including the conduct and
appearance of the drivers thereof and designations, markings and the
appearance and safety of the taxicabs.
B. Every vehicle licensed by the Village as a taxicab shall have fastened in
a conspicuous place therein a printed card showing the rates
authorized in figures of not less than 1/2 inch in height, which card shall
bear the license number of such vehicle and also the name of the owner
thereof. Any fares charged in excess thereof shall constitute a violation
of this article by the driver or owner, or both.
C. Every driver of a taxicab shall, when requested, give a passenger a
receipt for the fare paid.
D. (Reserved)174
E. Licensed taxicab operators are required to accept from senior citizens
65 years of age or over prepurchased Senior Transportation Assistance
Program coupons bearing the words, "Village of Ridgewood, Senior
Transportation Assistance Program, Sponsored by the Village of
Ridgewood," and the dollar denomination of the coupon. These coupons
shall be purchased by senior citizens at the Village Hall in the Village of
Ridgewood. The rates for the Senior Transportation Assistance
Program coupons shall be set periodically by resolution of the Village
Council of the Village of Ridgewood, and such rates shall become
effective immediately upon adoption of said resolution. [Amended
3-8-2006 by Ord. No. 2985]
174. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding specific meter rates to be charged for the
transportation of passengers by taxicabs, was repealed 8-8-2001 by Ord. No. 2751. Current
rates are on file in the Village offices.
§ 256-13 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 256-15
254:1034
ARTICLE II
Limousines
§ 256-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIMOUSINE — Includes any automobile or motor car with a carrying
capacity of not more than nine passengers, not including the driver, used in
the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out, announced
or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run over any of the
streets or public highways of the Village of Ridgewood and which is hired
by charter or for a particular contract or by the day or hour or other fixed
period or to transport passengers to a specified place or places or which
charges a fare or price agreed upon in advance between the operator and
the passenger. Nothing herein shall be construed to include taxicabs, hotel
buses or buses employed solely for transporting schoolchildren or teachers
or autobuses or other vehicles which are subject to the jurisdiction of the
Board of Public Utilities or interstate autobuses required by federal or state
law or rules of the Board of Public Utilities to carry insurance against loss
from liability imposed by law on account of bodily injury or death.
§ 256-17. License required; application.
A. No limousine service which has its principal place of business within
the Village of Ridgewood shall be operated along any street in the
Village of Ridgewood until the owner or operator of said limousine
service shall have obtained a limousine owner's license for each
limousine so operated.
B. Written application for such license shall be made to the Village Council
on forms furnished by the Village Clerk. Each application shall be
accompanied by the requisite fees as herein fixed for the license applied
for. Each application shall set forth under oath or affirmation:
(1) The type, maker's name, seating capacity, weight, year of
manufacture, factory number and engine number of each vehicle.
(2) The principal location of each vehicle when not being operated
upon the streets as a limousine.
(3) The home and business address of the owner of the vehicle.
(4) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
a crime or of a violation of a traffic regulation and, if the applicant
has been convicted of a crime or a traffic violation, a complete
statement concerning dates and disposition thereof. In the case of a
corporate applicant, the statement shall be completed as to each
officer, director and owner of more than 10% of the stock of the
corporation.175
§ 256-16 TAXATION § 256-17
254:1035
§ 256-18. Expiration; nontransferability; fee. [Amended 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375]
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on
December 31 of the year for which they are issued and shall be
nontransferable. The fee for a license for each limousine shall be as set forth
in Chapter 145, Fees.
§ 256-19. License card.
Upon granting of such license, the Village Clerk shall issue to the licensee a
license card which shall be posted in a conspicuous place inside the licensed
vehicle.
§ 256-20. Grounds for revocation or suspension of license.
Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article may be revoked
or suspended (without refund of fees) by the Village Manager for any
violation hereof or of any rules or regulations adopted hereunder or for
other good cause shown. The person or corporation affected by such
revocation or suspension shall have the opportunity for a public hearing
before the Village Manager in a summary manner in order to contest
the suspension or revocation. Pending hearing and decision by the Village
Manager, the revocation or suspension shall remain in effect. In order to
obtain a hearing from a summary revocation or suspension of a license,
the licensee shall be required to request the hearing, in writing, within 10
business days of the effective date of the suspension or revocation imposed
by the Village Manager.
§ 256-21. Municipal consent required.
No limousine, the owner of which has his principal place of business in the
Village of Ridgewood, shall be operated along any street in the Village of
Ridgewood until the owner thereof shall have obtained the consent of the
Village Council.
§ 256-22. Insurance requirements. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
No consent by the Village Council to the owner of a limousine to operate
upon the streets of the Village shall become effective until the owner of such
limousine shall have filed with the Village Clerk an insurance policy of a
C. The application form may also contain such other information as the
Village Council may from time to time require for the purpose of
licensing and regulating public transportation consistent with the
purposes of this article.
175. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(5), regarding applicant fingerprints, added 3-10-2004
by Ord. No. 2873, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 2888.
§ 256-17 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 256-22
254:1036
company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of the
state, conditioned for the payment of the sum of not less than $1,000,000
to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to or the death
of any one person resulting from an accident and a sum of not less than
$1,000,000 to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of the bodily injuries
to or the death of all persons on account of any such accident, by reason
of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of such limousine within
the Village of Ridgewood, and conditioned for the payment of not less than
$1,000,000 to satisfy any claim for damages to property of any one person
resulting from an accident and a sum of not less than $1,000,000 to satisfy
all claims for damages to property of all persons on account of any such
accident by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of such
limousine upon the public streets of the Village of Ridgewood. Any consent
to operate a limousine which has been granted by the Village Council shall
become void and of no effect in the event that the aforementioned insurance
policies are cancelled or for any reason become ineffective.
§ 256-23. Power of attorney to Village.
The owner of each limousine licensed hereunder shall execute and deliver
to the Village Clerk, concurrently with the filing of the insurance policies
herein required, a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall
appoint the Village Manager of the Village his true and lawful attorney
for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process of a court of
competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policies required hereunder.
§ 256-24. Manager to promulgate regulations.
The Village Manager may adopt and promulgate written regulations
hereunder prescribing rules effecting the operation and maintenance of
limousines within the Village of Ridgewood, including the conduct and
appearance of the drivers thereof and designations, markings and the
appearance and safety of the limousines.
§ 256-22 TAXATION § 256-24
254:1037
Chapter 258
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 265.
§ 258-1. Title.
For reference purposes, this chapter shall be known as the "Towing, Road
Service and Storage of Vehicles Ordinance" of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 258-2. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide criteria and standard
operating procedures that are reasonable, nonexclusionary and
nondiscriminatory in the selection and use of towing operators, on a
rotational basis, in providing towing, road services and the storage of
vehicles, including but not limited to the towing of vehicles that are
abandoned, disabled, illegally parked or stolen, vehicles involved in
accidents and/or those vehicles suspected or identified by the Village as
being involved in criminal activities.
§ 258-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the terms listed below shall be defined as follows:
APPROVED TOWING OPERATOR — A person, firm, corporation or
partnership engaged in the business of providing towing services, road
service to disabled vehicles, and storage services of towed vehicles
approved by the Village Manager upon the Chief of Police’s
recommendation. The approved towing operator shall be registered with
the New Jersey Division of Consumer Affairs, and display such registration
on all tow vehicles operating within the Village. Any towing firm not
registered with the Division of Consumer Affairs, or having had its
registration suspended or revoked, shall not be considered an approved
towing operator.[Added 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3106]
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of a vehicle
from a highway, street or other public or private road, parking area or from
a storage facility. This chapter and the definitions herein shall not include
the recovery of a vehicle from a position beyond the public right-of-way or
berm or from being impaled upon any other object outside of the public
right-of-way or berm.
CLASSIFICATION OF TOWING VEHICLES —
A. LIGHT-DUTY — A vehicle conforming to the following:
§ 256-24 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 258-3
254:1038
Commercially manufactured chassis, rated capacity of not less than
10,000 pounds GVWR.
(1)
Commercially manufactured lifting apparatus with a minimum
capacity of four tons.
(2)
(3) Dual rear wheels.
(4) Universal tow sling or wheelift with System 7 safety chains.
(5) One snatch block, three-ton rating.
(6) Dolly equipped.
(7) Proper safety lights.
(8) Amber rotation emergency flashing light.
(9) Two floodlights to the rear of the vehicle.
(10)One motorcycle sling.
(11)Two-way radio.
HEAVY-DUTY — A vehicle conforming to the following:
Commercially manufactured chassis, rated capacity of not less than
32,900 pounds GVWR.
(1)
Commercially manufactured lifting apparatus with a minimum
capacity of 25 tons.
(2)
(3) Two snatch blocks, twelve-ton rating.
(4) Air brake hookup lines.
(5) Tow sling/tow bar or wheelift with System 7 safety chains.
(6) Proper safety lights.
(7) Amber rotation emergency flashing light.
(8) Two floodlights to rear of vehicle.
(9) Two-way radio.
B.
CAR CARRIER — A vehicle conforming to the following:
Commercially manufactured chassis rated no less than 10,000
pounds GVWR.
(1)
One hydraulically powered winch with a pulling capacity of not less
than four tons.
(2)
(3) Fifty feet of 3/8 cable.
C.
§ 258-3 TAXATION § 258-3
254:1039
CLASSIFICATION OF VEHICLES TO BE TOWED — [Added 3-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 3106]
DISABLED VEHICLE — A vehicle which has been abandoned, impounded or
rendered inoperable as a result of a mechanical failure, involvement in an
accident or criminal activity. A vehicle, the location of which constitutes a
hazard to the motoring public, shall be deemed disabled for the purposes of
this chapter.
IMPOUNDMENT — The act of storing and confining a vehicle upon an order
of the Police Department at either the towing operator's storage area or at
the Village facility as a result of abandonment, involvement in an accident
or suspected criminal activity, or disabled as defined above.
INSIDE BUILDING STORAGE FACILITY — A vehicle storage facility that
is completely indoors, having one or more openings or storage bins in the
walls for the storage of vehicles, and that is secured by a locking device on
each bin or opening.
INVESTIGATIVE STORAGE — Storage of vehicles collected as "investigative
tows," at the direction of the Village Police Department, with storage in
a manner according to "inside building storage facility" conditions.[Added
2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3457]
INVESTIGATIVE STORAGE FEE — The fee charged per 24 hours of "inside
building storage facility" storage or part thereof of any vehicle a towing
Seventeen feet or longer hydraulically operated slide-back or tilt
bed.
(4)
(5) One snatch block, four-ton capacity.
(6) Tie down chains.
(7) Proper safety lights.
(8) Amber rotation emergency flashing light.
(9) Two-way radio.
LIGHT-DUTY — A vehicle conforming to the following:
Commercially manufactured chassis, with a gross vehicle weight of
not more than 8,000 pounds.
(1)
A.
MEDIUM-DUTY — A vehicle conforming to the following:
Commercially manufactured chassis, with a gross vehicle weight of
more than 8,001 pounds and less than 16,000 pounds. [Amended
5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3293]
(1)
B.
HEAVY-DUTY — A vehicle conforming to the following:
Commercially manufactured chassis, with a gross vehicle weight
of more than 16,000 pounds. [Amended 5-11-2011 by Ord. No.
3293]
(1)
C.
§ 258-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 258-3
254:1040
operator is directed by the Village of Ridgewood Police Department to
collect and store for any subsequent investigation by any law enforcement
department.[Added 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3457]
INVESTIGATIVE TOW — Any vehicle that the Village of Ridgewood Police
Department directs a towing operator to collect and store in accordance
with the definition of an "inside building storage facility" for subsequent
investigation in accordance with the law when possibly related to a criminal
matter shall be classified as an "investigative tow."[Added 2-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 3457]
OUTSIDE SECURED STORAGE FACILITY — A vehicle storage facility that
is not completely indoors and that is secured by a fence, wall or other manmade
barrier that is at least six feet in height and is protected with on-site
security or an alarm system. "Outside storage facilities" shall also maintain
adequate lighting to protect stored vehicles from vandalism.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED STORAGE FACILITY — A vehicle storage facility
that is not indoors and is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made
barrier and all other storage facilities not defined above as inside a building
or outside secured.
OWNER — A person, firm, corporation or partnership who or which owns
and/or operates a vehicle on the roads and highways within the Village of
Ridgewood, which vehicle, by reason of being disabled or abandoned on the
roads and highways of the Village, requires towing and/or storage.
STORAGE FEE — The fee charged per 24 hours or any part thereof a towed
vehicle is stored by the towing operator. [Added 3-12-2008 by Ord. No.
3106]
TOWING OPERATOR — A person, firm, corporation or partnership engaged
in the business of providing towing, road and storage services for vehicles.
TOW TRUCK DRIVER — A person who drives or otherwise operates a tow
truck or assists in any activity involving the towing of vehicles.[Added
10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2644]
§ 258-4. Administration.
The Chief of Police and the Village Manager are hereby designated to
administer and enforce all provisions of the Towing, Road Service and
Storage of Vehicles Ordinance.
§ 258-5. Application.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the Village Manager or his designee,
upon recommendation of the Chief of Police, to approve all applications
for towing operators to be utilized on a rotational basis for the purpose
of providing emergency towing, road and storage services to the
owners of motor vehicles utilizing Village roads when he determines
that the following requirements have been met by the applicant. On
forms prepared by the Village and provided by the Village Manager or
his designee, all towing operators shall submit written documentation
§ 258-3 TAXATION § 258-5
254:1041
that they are in compliance with the qualification requirements set
forth below:
(1) Submission of certificate of insurance. All towing operators shall
submit a certificate of insurance to the Village Manager. Except for
workers' compensation insurance, the insurance certificate shall
name the Village, its employees, agents, servants and all
subordinate or related boards and commissions as an additional
insured. All certificates shall evidence coverage with insurance
companies licensed in New Jersey and which have a AM Best
Rating of "A" or better. All certificates shall provide that the Village
Manager receive 30 days' advance prior written notice from the
insurance company in the event of policy cancellation, termination
or material change. The certificate shall provide evidence that the
towing operator carries the following insurance coverage:
(a) Comprehensive general liability, with a minimum limit of
$1,000,000 combined for bodily injury or property damage,
including contractual liability coverage for the indemnification
obligations of this chapter.
(b) Automobile liability, with a minimum limit of $1,000,000
combined for bodily injury or property damage. Policy to
include coverage for towing operations, including
garagekeepers, comprehensive and collision coverage for
vehicles in care, custody or control of towing operator.
Garagekeeper limits to be minimum of $50,000 per vehicle.
Towing operator shall also provide at least $10,000 minimum
coverage for loss of or damage to contents of vehicles in their
care, custody and control.
(c) Excess liability (umbrella form): a minimum two-million-dollar
limit combined for bodily injury or property damage.
(d) Workers' compensation.
[1] Coverage A: statutory.
[2] Coverage B: $1,000,000.
[3] Each accident, bodily injury: $1,000,000.
[4] Policy limit, disease: $1,000,000.
[5] Each employee, disease: $1,000,000.
B. The towing operators agree that, to the fullest extent permitted by law,
they shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Village of
Ridgewood, its employees, agents, servants and all subordinates or
related boards and commissions from and against any and all claims,
suits, judgments and demands whatsoever, including, without
limitation, costs, litigation expenses, counsel fees and liabilities with
respect to injury to or death of any person or persons whatsoever, or
§ 258-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 258-5
254:1042
§ 258-6. Performance standards; requirements.
damage to property of any kind by whomever owned, arising out of
or caused or claimed to have been caused in whole or in part by the
negligent acts or omissions of the towing operators or any other person
directly or indirectly employed by the towing operators while in the
performance of rendering any services pursuant to the scope of this
chapter.
C. No tow truck driver, as defined herein, shall drive or otherwise operate
a tow truck or assist in any towing activity for an approved towing
operator unless such person(s) shall first have obtained a tow truck
driver’s annual permit from the Village of Ridgewood. Each driver shall
submit an application for an annual permit on forms prepared by the
Village and provided by the Village Manager or his or her designee. The
Village Manager or his or her designee, upon recommendation of the
Chief of Police, or his or her appointed designee, may approve such
application. [Added 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2644; amended
5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3293]
D. The approved towing operator(s) shall not delegate (subcontract)
towing operations in the Village of Ridgewood to a subordinate firm,
entity, corporation or partnership without approval of the Chief of
Police or his designated representative. Upon notification from the
Police Department, the selected approved towing operator shall
respond with the appropriate vehicle(s) for the situation. The selected
approved towing operator’s vehicles shall display the selected firm’s
name on them in accordance with § 258-6, Subsection I. [Added
3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3106]
E. Applications for review to be selected as an approved tow operator shall
be accepted January 1 of each year. An application shall be valid for a
one-year period, with an annual review and registering of operators and
equipment by the Chief of Police or the designated representative for
compliance with Chapter 258 of the Code of the Village of Ridgewood.
[Added 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3106; amended 5-11-2011 by Ord.
No. 3293]
A. Any person, firm, corporation or partnership operating a towing and
storage business shall endeavor to maintain a principal place of
operation within the Village as a property taxpayer. In maintaining a
principal place of operation within the Village, any person, firm,
corporation or partnership operating a towing and storage business
shall conform to a legally approved zoning and/or site plan and shall
comply fully with all of the Village's zoning, land use and property
maintenance codes.176 Failure to comply with the Village's zoning, land
use and development and property maintenance codes may subject any
operator to suspension from the rotational duty service list upon
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Land Use and Development, and Ch. 223, Property
Maintenance.
§ 258-5 TAXATION § 258-6
254:1043
request to the Village Manager from the Village's Construction Code
Official, Zoning Officer or Property Maintenance Officer. In no event
shall the principal place of operation be further than one mile from the
border of the Village of Ridgewood.
B. Nothing herein shall preclude a towing operator from storing its towing
vehicles and equipment at another location outside the boundaries of
the Village. The storage facility, however, shall be no further than one
mile from the border of the Village of Ridgewood.
C. All towing operators shall have a storage facility which can
accommodate a minimum of five medium-sized vehicles. The storage
facilities shall be lighted, fenced and/or secured in order to guarantee
the safe storage of all vehicles in accordance with the minimum
requirements for indoor and outdoor secured and unsecured storage
facilities as defined under § 258-3 of this chapter. The storage facility,
however, shall be no further than one mile from the border of the
Village of Ridgewood.
D. In addition to other equipment which is necessary for the safe
performance of towing, emergency road and storage services, all
towing operators must own and have available at least one conventional
tow truck and/or flatbed truck and/or one heavy-duty tow truck. Failure
of the towing operator to own or have available at least one heavy-duty
tow truck shall not disqualify the owner from being added to the
rotation for light-duty towing.
E. All towing operators' trucks must be equipped with either two-way
radio and/or mobile telephone communications equipment with their
principal place of business, including their garage, and/or facilities to
ensure the proper availability of services and equipment on behalf of
the Village and motorists.
F. All towing operators’ trucks shall be equipped with brooms, shovels,
and any other necessary street-sweeping equipment for the purpose of
clearing debris off of the roadways. The towing operator shall, at the
time of removing any motor vehicle, in response to a Police Department
request, remove from the public or private roads or highways any motor
vehicle debris or material within the area surrounding the vehicle to be
towed. Petroleum product debris or materials, such as oil, gasoline,
kerosene, or other petroleum or chemical products, shall be removed by
absorptive materials. The absorptive materials shall then be removed
and disposed off in a legal and proper manner by the towing operator
without additional charge to the Village of Ridgewood. [Amended
3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3106]
G. The towing operators' wrecker(s) and all other vehicles shall be
properly licensed and registered with the New Jersey Division of Motor
Vehicles. All towing operators' vehicles shall display New Jersey
commercial license plates.
§ 258-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 258-6
254:1044
H. All towing operators shall have facilities and equipment that will ensure
and guarantee the furnishing of prompt and efficient services for all
standard passenger automobiles.
I. The towing operators' company name, address and telephone
number(s) shall be prominently and permanently displayed on both
sides of all wrecker(s) and other towing vehicles.
J. Rotation.
(1) All towing operators selected to serve on a rotational basis must
guarantee the availability of all services to the Village Manager
seven days a week, 24 hours a day. In this respect, a towing
operator shall immediately respond to any type of towing,
emergency road service or storage call with the appropriate vehicle
and/or equipment within 20 minutes after receipt of telephone
notification from the Police Department's Dispatcher/Desk Officer.
Unless heavy or unusual traffic conditions or inclement weather
within the Village prevent a towing operator from arriving at the
scene within 20 minutes, failure to respond within the time frame
shall be considered a breach of this chapter.
(2) In the event that a towing operator fails to respond within 20
minutes from the time of the call, the Police Department reserves
the right to contact the next available towing operator on the
rotational list.
(3) In the event the responding approved towing operator cannot
remove the vehicle, the Police Department reserves the right to
notify the next available approved towing operator on the rotation
list. Whenever the responding tow operator cannot remove the
vehicle, the tow operator shall forfeit the right to bill the
responsible party. [Added 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3106]
K. In times of emergencies and/or natural disasters, the Village of
Ridgewood reserves the right to contact other towing service operators
who may not be on the rotational list.
L. The owner of a vehicle involved in an accident shall have the right, if he/
she so desires, to designate a towing operator of his/her choice.
M. Employees of the towing operator, in responding to a call, shall request
and be afforded police assistance during the course of providing
towing, emergency road services or removal of abandoned or accident
vehicles when such employees find it necessary to turn around, back
up, tow in the opposite direction of traffic or cross the median.
N. A towing operator shall not permit a vehicle to be removed from the site
of a vehicular accident, the scene of a crime or any other instance or
situation without the prior approval and permission of a police officer
and/or superior at the scene.
§ 258-6 TAXATION § 258-6
254:1045
§ 258-7. Removal and storage of vehicles; fees.
O. The responding towing operator shall be responsible for the handling
and management of any fluid(s) observed to have been discharged from
a vehicle, after the Fire Department has secured the scene. All
absorbed fluids and absorptive materials utilized for their clean up at a
scene, when a vehicle has been requested to be removed, shall become
the responsibility of the tow operator. [Added 3-12-2008 by Ord. No.
3106]
P. An approved towing operator, when directed by an officer of the
Ridgewood Police Department, shall collect any vehicle identified as an
"investigative tow," remove it, and store the vehicle as an "investigative
storage," keeping said vehicle secure and accessible at all times to law
enforcement departments for investigative purposes, until such time
that the Village of Ridgewood Police Department authorizes, in writing,
the release of the said vehicle. [Added 2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3457]
A. The fees set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, for towing and storage rates are
the maximum permitted charges that shall apply to the towing and/or
storage of passenger automobiles or other vehicles. Towing operators
transporting multiple passenger cars at one time shall receive the
applicable fees for each vehicle transported.
B. It shall be the responsibility of all towing operators to provide all
motorists utilizing the towing operators services with a written
schedule of fees which lists, in full, all fees to be charged for towing,
storage and road service within the Village of Ridgewood. The list shall
be presented, in writing, to the motorist prior to the motorist being
obligated to utilize the services of the towing operator. Failure to
provide the motorist with a written schedule of fees as set forth herein
prior to engaging the vehicle shall constitute a violation of the
operator's permit. To the extent feasible, fees shall be posted on the
vehicle. The written schedule of fees shall be listed in a conspicuous
place at the storage yard and at the office of the towing operator. The
towing operator shall not exceed the maximum charges set forth on the
fee schedule for towing and storage of vehicles regulated under the
provisions of this chapter. [Amended 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 2644]
C. The towing and storage fee schedules of all towing operators serving
the Village on a rotational basis shall be filed with the Chief of Police
and the Village Clerk and shall be made available to any citizen upon
request. The fee schedules shall be available at the Village Hall, 131
North Maple Avenue, Ridgewood, Monday through Friday, except
holidays, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
D. In addition, the Chief of Police and the Village Clerk shall be informed,
in writing, at least 10 business days prior to the amendment of any
towing operator's towing and storage fee charges. Under no
circumstances shall any amendments exceed the maximum amounts for
towing and storage as described below.
§ 258-6 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 258-7
254:1046
E. In no instance shall the towing operator request payment from the
Village of Ridgewood for any services rendered to the owners of private
vehicles, except, however, in those cases where the Police Department
authorizes the removal of a Village-owned vehicle or a vehicle that is
abandoned or related to criminal activity.
F. Towing and storage fee schedule. The fees in Chapter 145, Fees,
represent the maximum fees permitted under this chapter. It shall be
unlawful for any towing operator to charge a fee in excess of the fees
prescribed in this chapter for the services regulated herein.
(1) (Reserved)177
(2) There shall be no premium or surcharge paid for night, weekend, or
holiday towing, removal, or storage services other than the rates in
Chapter 145, Fees. [Amended 3-12-2008 by Ord. No. 3106;
5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3293]
(3) Storage. The fees set forth for storage are the maximum storage
charges per twenty-four-hour period that shall apply to a vehicle
that is stored as a result of accidents, abandonments, repairs or
suspected criminal activities.
(4) Emergency road repair services. [Amended 5-11-2011 by Ord.
No. 3293]
(a) The fees in Chapter 145, Fees, shall be exclusive of any other
repair costs provided by the towing operator, including but not
limited to such activities as repairing flat tires or installing new
and/or spare parts to a disabled vehicle. The towing operator
shall be permitted to charge an additional fee based on the
towing operator’s prevailing hourly labor rates and charges for
parts or materials. Wherever applicable, it shall be the
responsibility of the towing operator to first inform the owner
of the vehicle of the hourly labor rates and the estimated total
cost for parts and/or materials prior to the performance of the
road repair services.
(b) Emergency road service shall include jump starts, bringing up
to two gallons of fuel, and tire changes. For vehicle lockouts
and emergency road service, if a tow results, there will be no
charge for the emergency road service or vehicle lockout
service, except for the cost of fuel placed in the vehicle.
(5) Heavy-duty wreckers. The maximum fee permitted for heavy-duty
towing services shall not exceed the hourly rate in Chapter 145,
Fees, at any time or on any day.
177. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(1), concerning vehicle towing, removal and storage
service rates, as amended, was repealed 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3293.
§ 258-7 TAXATION § 258-7
254:1047
§ 258-8. Establishment of rotational list. [Amended 3-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 3106]
Following the approval of applications by the Village Manager, it shall be the
Chief of Police’s responsibility to establish an approved towing operators’
rotational duty service list. The Police Department shall call the towing
operators in sequential order as set forth by the Chief so that each approved
towing operator will be given the opportunity to respond to individual calls
as received by the Village. The Police Department shall have the right
to call the next approved towing operator on the list should a towing
operator fail to respond to a call within 20 minutes or if the first approved
towing operator called cannot be reached by telephone or advises that he
is unable to respond. The Chief of Police or his designated representative
shall establish the rotational duty service list.
§ 258-9. Supervision.
(6) Recovery. The maximum fee permitted for the recovery of vehicles
of 10,000 pounds and up shall not exceed the hourly rate in
Chapter 145, Fees, which rate includes operator and vehicle.
(7) For heavy-duty towing, there shall be no mileage fee charged for
removal to the tower’s storage yard. [Added 5-11-2011 by Ord.
No. 3293]
(8) When vehicle towing, removal, and storage services are requested
by the Village of Ridgewood Police Department or any other law
enforcement agency, for an "investigative tow" with subsequent
"investigative storage," the rates established, as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees, shall be discounted to be no more than 60% of
the established rate for all classifications of vehicles, all days,
evenings, and holidays. All invoices for "investigative tows" or
"investigative storage" shall reflect the discount. [Added
2-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3457]
G. Annual towing fee adjustment. Approved towing operators shall have
the option, effective January 1 of each year, to apply a two-percent
annual cost of living adjustment to the established rates set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees. Fees shall conform to the requirements of N.J.S.A.
56:13-9 et al. Any approved towing operator requesting to adjust their
fees shall submit to the Village Clerk, Village Manager, and Chief of
Police their proposed fee changes within 15 calendar days of January 1
of each year. Upon approval of the Village Manager, with the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the approved towing operator
can adjust its fees. In the absence of the Village Manager’s approval,
the approved towing operator shall not be permitted to adjust its fees.
[Added 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3293]
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish reasonable rules
and regulations for the supervision, inspection and safe operation of
tow trucks, wreckers and other related vehicles and equipment in
§ 258-7 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 258-9
254:1048
§ 258-10. Complaint forms and complaints. [Added 10-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 2644178]
The Chief of Police shall prepare a complaint form. Complaint forms shall
be available at the office of the Village Manager, at the Department of
Police and at the office of each towing operator. Complaint forms shall
also be carried on each towing vehicle and shall be provided to the person
owning or operating a disabled vehicle, together with the schedule of fees
as provided in § 258-7B. Complaint forms completed and returned to the
Department of Police will be investigated by the Department of Police and,
upon completion of the investigation, both the towing operator and the
vehicle owner shall be apprised of the results of the investigation.
§ 258-11. Suspension and removal from list.
accordance with the standards outlined in this chapter. The Chief shall
maintain due vigilance over all towing operators to make certain that
the tow trucks and other related vehicles and equipment are
maintained in a safe working condition for transporting and hauling
disabled vehicles. The Chief or his duly designated representative shall
have the right at all times to inspect all towing vehicles and related
equipment which perform services pursuant to this chapter.
B. At any time, should the Chief or his designee determine that the
vehicles and/or equipment being used are unsafe, he shall have the
power and authority to direct the immediate correction or repair of any
automotive defect, malfunction or violation of motor vehicle regulations
within a specified period of time to be determined by the Chief. The
Chief of Police is authorized and empowered to establish and transmit
from time to time to all towing operators on the rotational list such
additional rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter as may be reasonable and necessary in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter.
A. The Chief of Police shall have the power to suspend a towing operator
from the rotational duty service list for a period of up to 30 calendar
days for failure to comply with any section of this chapter. A subsequent
violation may result in the permanent removal of a towing operator
from the rotational duty service list for a twelve-month period. A towing
operator may appeal the Chief's ruling of either a suspension or a
permanent removal. In such cases, an appeal may be filed with the
Clerk within 10 business days of the Chief's decision. A hearing shall be
held by the Village Manager within 30 business days of the filing. The
Village Manager shall render his determination within 20 business days
following the conclusion of the hearing. The Village Manager's
determination as rendered shall be final and conclusive under this
chapter.
178. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former § 258-10,
Suspension and removal from list, and § 258-11, Violations and penalties, as §§ 258-11 and
258-12, respectively.
§ 258-9 TAXATION § 258-11
254:1049
§ 258-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which willfully violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days,
or both. Each and every violation of this chapter, or each and every day
that any violation shall be permitted to continue, shall be construed as a
separate and distinct violation hereof. The Police Department is specifically
designated as the enforcement office to serve and execute process for
violation of this chapter.
Chapter 260
TREES AND SHRUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 105.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 249.
§ 260-1. Purpose.
B. In addition, failure to comply with the Village's zoning, land use and
property maintenance codes179 may subject any operator to suspension
from the rotational duty service list upon request to the Village
Manager from the Village's Construction Code Official/Zoning Officer
and/or Property Maintenance Officer. Any towing operator suspended
from the rotational duty service list for any violation of the Village's
zoning, land use and development and/or property maintenance codes
shall have the right to due process and appeal as set forth in Subsection
A above.
A. This chapter rescinds and replaces in its entirety Ordinance No. 3599,
previously adopted on June 14, 2017 with an effective date of July 4,
2017 that amended Chapter 260 of the Village of Ridgewood Code.
B. The Council of the Village of Ridgewood, advocates the preservation of
trees throughout the Village of Ridgewood, so as to minimize
stormwater runoff, soil erosion, and a decreased groundwater recharge
to our groundwater aquifer supplied potable water system. All of which
can negatively impact the character of the Village and decreased
property values. The Village desires to encourage the replacement of
trees that need to be removed with new trees.
179. Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Land Use and Development, and Ch. 223, Property
Maintenance.
§ 258-11 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 260-2
254:1050
§ 260-2. Definitions.
Below are defined key terms to be used with this chapter.
DBH (DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT) — The diameter of a tree trunk,
when measured at a height of 4.5 feet above the ground at the base of the
tree, calculated as the circumference (or girth) of the tree divided by pi
(3.1416). On sloping ground the aboveground reference point is the average
between the highest and lowest points of the ground at the base of the
tree. If the DBH point falls on a swelling in the trunk, it is measured below
the swelling point where the diameter is the smallest. In case of trees with
multiple trunks, the DBH of each trunk shall be measured separately.
INVASIVE SPECIES or NOXIOUS NONINDIGENOUS TREES — Any tree
listed in Appendix A of this chapter.180
NATIVE SPECIES — Trees that are native to the Northern New Jersey (or
immediate region) environment.
QUALIFIED TREE — Any tree with a diameter measured at breast height
(DBH) greater than eight inches, on any lands within the Village of
Ridgewood.
QUALIFIED TREE EXPERT — An individual that holds a New Jersey State
Certified Tree Expert license, or is a Board Certified Arborist or Master
Arborist under the International Society of Arboriculture.
REPLACEMENT TREE — Any tree proposed to be considered as
replacement for a tree removed under a permit.
§ 260-3. Responsibility of owner or tenant; notice.
A. Pursuant to the authority contained in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26 et seq., the
owner or tenant of any land or premises within the Village, wherever
necessary to address issues of public safety, shall keep all brush,
hedges, and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any roadway,
within one foot of the edge of a sidewalk, and within 25 feet of the
intersection of two roadways cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet
above grade within 10 days after receipt of written notice sent to the
last known post office address of such owner or tenant, by certified
return receipt mail, to cut the same.
B. The aforesaid notice shall be sent by the Director of Department of
Building and Inspections, or their designee; or the Director of Parks and
Recreation, or their designee; as well as the Director of Public Works or
their designee, and shall direct the cutting of all such brush, hedges or
other plant life and shall set forth the reasons therefore and provide an
opportunity to such owner or tenant, within five days of the receipt of
such notice, to show cause before the identified Directors, by sending a
written reply to such notice why the demands therein cannot be
complied with.
180. Editor's Note: Said Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 260-2 TAXATION § 260-4
254:1051
§ 260-4. Cutting or removal of a tree within the public right-of-way.
No person, property owner, hired firm, or other entity shall cause to be
cut or removed any existing tree, with a diameter at breast height (DBH)
greater than two inches, upon any public lands or within the public rightsof-
way of the Village of Ridgewood, without prior written approval from the
Director of the Parks and Recreation Department or their designee; or the
Director of the Department of Public Works or their designee. Any such
cutting or removal of a tree or trees, with a DBH greater than two inches,
shall only be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 260-5. Other restrictions.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lands within the
limits of the Village to permit to exist or harbor tent caterpillars, gypsy
moths, or any other insect detrimental to the health of a tree. Any firm
retained to eradicate insects trees shall be duly licensed for such tasks
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
B. The Village Manager may appoint from time to time one or more
inspectors to make an inspection of the trees or shrubbery in the
Village, on both public and private lands, for the purposes of identifying
any insects detrimental to the well-being of trees and shrubbery. If such
insects are noted, the inspectors shall notify the responsible property
owner by certified mail return receipt letter requesting that they
address the noted concerns within 14 calendar days from the date of
the letter at their cost. Failure to do so will be considered a violation of
this chapter.
C. It shall be expressly prohibited anywhere within the public rights-ofway
and public properties of the Village of Ridgewood to affix a sign or
any other device to a tree of any size by means of fasteners like nails,
screws, or bolts.
D. It shall be expressly prohibited in the Village of Ridgewood to fasten
any rope, wire, or cable to a tree within the public right-of-way for any
reason other than for staking stabilization purposes in accordance with
standard arboriculture practices.
E. No person shall hitch or fasten an animal to any tree or shrub within a
public right-of-way or any guard or support provided for such tree or
shrub or permit an animal to bite or otherwise injure any such tree or
shrub.
F. No person shall permit or cause to be permitted the discharge or
release of any liquid, gas or solid compound containing injurious
chemicals to come in contact with the stalk, leaves, or roots of any tree
or shrub within the public right-of-way.
G. During the execution of any work on trees in the public right-of-way of
the Village of Ridgewood, for which permission has been obtained,
§ 260-4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 260-5
254:1052
§ 260-6. Sidewalk construction and driveway enlargement.
When a sidewalk is constructed or being reconstructed due to defects
within the public right-of-way, the party responsible for the work (i.e., the
adjacent property owner), shall coordinate all work that may affect the roots
systems of trees within the public right-of-way with the Village's Arborist
(qualified tree expert). No tree root or roots shall be cut or removed
for sidewalk construction or driveway enlargement, without first obtaining
the Village Arborist's authorization. The Village Arborist shall have sole
authority in the determination if root grinding, a tree's removal, or a round
out or bump out are warranted with the goal of preservation of trees in
the public right-of-way as best as possible. Any tree roots cut or removed
without the Village Arborist's authorization shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter.
§ 260-7. Protection of trees near construction sites.
During the erection, repair, alteration, or removal of any building or
structure within the Village, it shall be unlawful for the person or entity in
charge of such work to fail to protect any tree within the public right-of-way
in the vicinity of such work with suitable guards and protective measures so
as to prevent injury to such tree arising out of or by reason of such erection,
repair, alteration or removal of a building or structure.
§ 260-8. Protection of trees from wires.
other than for a tree's removal, no gaffs or spikes shall be permitted to
be used to ascend a tree by a climber.
H. It shall be expressly prohibited in the Village of Ridgewood to alter or
prune any tree within the public right-of-way, or the conditions
surrounding a tree in the public right-of-way in such a manner so as to
reduce its viability and life span.
I. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lands within the
limits of the Village to permit to exist or harbor any insects detrimental
to the well-being of trees or shrubbery on such premise after being
noticed of such by certified mail return receipt requested.
A. Every person or entity having control over any wire for the transmission
of an electric current or communication transmission along a public
roadway shall at all times guard all trees through which or near which
such wires pass against injury from such wire. The means used shall in
every case be subject to approval by the Director of the Department of
Parks and Recreation or their designee.
B. Every person having control over any wire for the transmission of an
electric current or communication along a public roadway shall
temporarily remove any such wire or the electricity there from when it
shall be necessary in order to take down or prune any trees growing in
a public roadway in the Village of Ridgewood within 24 hours after the
§ 260-5 TAXATION § 260-8
254:1053
§ 260-9. Interference with work of the department.
No person shall prevent, delay, or interfere with any lawful work undertaken
by the Department of Parks and Recreation or the Department of Public
Works with regard to trees within the public rights-of-way of the Village of
Ridgewood.
§ 260-10. Enforcement.
The Village's Director of Parks and Recreation or their designee; the
Director of Public Works or their designee; the designated Village Arborist;
or any other Village employee who may be designated by the Village
Manager, shall have the authority to enforce all provisions of this chapter.
Enforcement shall mean the following:
Chapter 263
VALET PARKING SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 265.
§ 263-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to permit and regulate valet parking services
operating within the existing public streets and public rights-of-way in the
Village of Ridgewood's Central Business District in order to reduce the
demand for public parking spaces. The chapter establishes a valet parking
operator permit program in the Village.
§ 263-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZING AGENT — The Village of Ridgewood's designated individual
authorized to issue permits for valet parking operators as well as adjudicate
issues related to this chapter and its functions. The authorizing agent shall
be the Village Manager or any person so designated by the Manager.
service upon or notification to the owner of such wire or his agent of a
written notice to remove such wire or the electricity there from, signed
by the Director of the Department of Parks and Recreation or their
designee.
A. Issuance of a municipal summons for violations of sections of this
chapter.
§ 260-8 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 263-2
254:1054
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — For the purpose of this chapter, any area
dedicated for public use as a street, pedestrian way or other thoroughfare,
including but not limited to roadways, parkways, streets, alleys, ingress and
egress rights-of-way for abutting lots, sidewalks, and pedestrian ways.
VALET/LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES — The designated zones
within the public right-of-way, in accordance with § 265-72, Schedule XXII,
of the Village Code, to be utilized by the valet parking operator for
collection and return of vehicles to users of the valet parking service.
VALET PARKING ATTENDANT — Any employee or agent of the valet
parking operator who receives, takes possession of or moves any vehicle or
handles the keys to any vehicle left with the attendant for valet parking.
VALET PARKING OPERATOR — The firm, business or person engaged in
providing valet parking service for patrons of any business establishment,
including its own, in the Village of Ridgewood.
VALET PARKING OPERATOR ANNUAL PERMIT — The annual permit issued
by the Village of Ridgewood to a firm or business desiring to perform the
functions of a valet parking operator or desiring to hire a valet parking
service in accordance with the terms of this chapter and Village
requirements.
VALET PARKING SERVICE — The service of receiving, taking possession of,
driving, moving, parking or storing of any vehicle that is left at one location
to be driven to another location for parking, over the public right-of-way,
whether or not a charge or fee is imposed for the said service.
§ 263-3. Permit requirements.
No firm, business, person, or entity shall engage in, conduct, or operate
a business providing valet parking services that entails the movement of
vehicles on or over any public right-of-way or public property without
first obtaining a valet parking operator annual permit from the Village's
authorizing agent, in accordance with the requirements below.
A. Permit application and review.
(1) Applications for valet parking operator annual permits shall be filed
in the Village Clerk's office.
(2) Permit applications shall be reviewed by the Engineering
Department, which may refer the application to any Village agency
or department that the Village Engineer deems appropriate.
(3) Permit applications shall be reviewed within 30 days of their filing
with the Village Clerk, unless it is determined that the application
has not provided all required information or that the information
provided is inaccurate or ambiguous, in which case the applicant
shall be requested to provide or revise the deficient information.
(4) Upon approval by the Village, a valet parking operator shall be
issued an annual operating permit. The annual permit shall run
§ 263-2 TAXATION § 263-3
254:1055
from January 1 to December 31 of each year. Prior to issuance of
the permit, the operator shall submit the following to the Village
Clerk:
(a) Proof of general liability insurance and motor vehicle
insurance pursuant to Subsection D below.
(b) Annual operating permit fee. [Amended 1-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 3568]
[1] Permits issued January 1 of the year until June 30 of the
year shall be $1,000.
[2] Permits issued after July 1 of a year until December 31 of
the same year shall be $500.
(5) Applications for permit renewal shall be reviewed as provided
above for the initial permit. In order to ensure sufficient time for
permit review and issuance before January 1 of the following year,
applications for permit renewal must be submitted in the 11th
month of its annual cycle.
(6) Violations of the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be
grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of the valet parking
operator's annual permit pursuant to § 263-5, and for denial of the
permit renewal application.
B. Application submission requirements. All parties seeking a valet
parking operator annual shall submit the following information:
(1) A completed permit application, which shall include:
(a) The name and location of the business the valet permit
operator is proposing to serve.
(b) The legally permitted seating capacity of the business/venue to
be served by the valet permit operator.
(c) The hours and days of operation of the valet parking service.
(d) The street address and lot and block location, as identified on
the Village's Tax Map, of the off-site parking lot where all valetparked
vehicles are to be parked or stored for the businesses
served.
(e) A signed and executed statement from the business/venue
certifying that it is requesting the services of the valet parking
operator.
(2) A map of the routes to the off-site parking lot and back to the
designated valet/loading and unloading zones being served.
§ 263-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 263-3
254:1056
(3) A copy of the agreement between the proposed lot's owner and the
valet parking operator permitting vehicles to be parked on the lot
by the valet parking operator.
(4) The required application fee of $250 for the annual permit.
C. Modification of terms of permit application. In the event there is, or is
proposed, any change, modification, transfer, amendment, or
termination of any agreement for services provided to any business/
venue in the Village or with the lot where vehicles are to be parked, or
any change in any other information submitted with the permit
application, the valet parking operator shall inform the Village of
Ridgewood Manager's office within 14 consecutive calendar days of
such change. Any change which violates the provisions of this chapter
shall subject the responsible party to permit revocation or suspension
or fines as provided in § 263-5. [Amended 2-11-2015 by Ord. No.
3458]
D. Insurance requirements. Prior to the issuance of a valet parking
operator annual permit, a certificate of insurance must be submitted to
the Village Clerk evidencing comprehensive general liability,
automobile liability, workers' compensation and employer's liability
insurance in accordance with this subsection.
(1) The certificate of insurance and coverage is to be provided by
insurance companies:
(a) Licensed in the State of New Jersey; and
(b) Having an A.M. Best rating of at least "A."
(2) The certificates shall evidence comprehensive general liability
(occurrence form) coverage with a combined single limit for bodily
injury, personal injury and property damage of $2,000,000 per
occurrence and aggregate, where applicable. The limit may be
provided through a combination of primary and umbrella/excess
liability policies. This insurance shall include:
(a) Premises/operations coverage.
(b) Coverage for the operation of a valet parking service if the
applicant wishes to conduct such service on its own.
(c) Personal injury liability coverage (contractual exclusion
deleted).
(d) Products/completed operations coverage.
(e) Independent contractor coverage for the operation of a
separate valet parking service independent of the applicant if
hired separately.
§ 263-3 TAXATION § 263-3
254:1057
§ 263-4. Operating requirements.
All valet parking operations regulated by this chapter shall be conducted in
accordance with the following requirements:
(f) Contractual coverage for obligations of hold harmless and
indemnification provision.
(g) Broad form property damage coverage.
(h) XCU hazards, if applicable.
(3) If the aggregate limits shown have been reduced by claims paid,
the certificate of insurance is to be accompanied by a letter stating
that those reductions do not substantially affect the coverage.
(4) The certificate of insurance must state that all insurance coverage
shown thereon is primary and not contributing to any insurance
maintained by the Village of Ridgewood.
(5) The certificate of insurance shall state that the Village of
Ridgewood has been added as an additional insured to the policies
shown on the certificate.
(6) The certificate shall provide that the Village of Ridgewood, 131
North Maple Avenue, Ridgewood, New Jersey 07450, Attention:
Village Manager, receives 30 days' advance written notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of the cancellation of the
policy for any reason or any material change in the policy's
coverage set forth in the certificate.
A. The valet parking operator is permitted one temporary sign identifying
the debarkation/pickup point for the valet parking services at the
business at which the services are being provided. Such sign shall be no
larger than 12 inches by 18 inches, located on a stanchion and not
placed higher than 42 inches above the grade level beneath the sign.
The sign shall be removed at the end of every evening's operation and
reinstalled the following evening.
B. A properly permitted valet parking operator may utilize the streets and
public parking lots of the Village of Ridgewood as thoroughfares only
for the performance of its services.
C. At no time shall the valet parking attendants of a valet parking operator
be permitted to violate any State of New Jersey or Village of Ridgewood
traffic regulations in the performance of their duties.
D. The collection of vehicles and subsequent return of vehicles to patrons
shall only be conducted at designated loading and unloading zones
within the public right-of-way.
E. At no time shall a valet parking operator be permitted to block or
occupy any Village of Ridgewood reserved metered parking spaces.
§ 263-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 263-4
254:1058
F. In the event of a snow, ice, or other weather emergency, the valet
parking operator shall conduct its operations in a manner so as to not
interfere with the Village's efforts. The Village shall have no
responsibility for clearing of routes used by the valet parking operator,
other than the normal effort expended for an event.
G. The valet parking operator shall not cause any pedestrian path or
walkway to be obstructed by its operations at either the vehicle
collection location or the vehicle parking location.
H. The valet parking operator shall employ a sufficient number of valet
parking attendants in order that traffic on Village streets and in Village
parking lots shall not be impeded by the activities of the valet parking
operator. Each operator shall meet the requirements of this chapter and
any rules and regulations for valet parking operators promulgated by
the Village Manager and adopted by the Village Council by resolution.
Records of this action shall be made available for inspection upon
request of the Village of Ridgewood.
I. The valet parking operator shall lock all vehicles parked at the off-site
parking area. Security of the vehicles shall be the operator's
responsibility. Vehicle keys shall not be left with the parked vehicle.
J. The valet parking operator shall ensure its operation does not cause
any queuing in the loading or unloading area of patrons within the
public right-of-way. No vehicle is permitted to stop or stand at a dropoff
or loading area for longer than 10 minutes, as long as the vehicle does
not impede traffic flow.
K. Use of designated valet loading and unloading zones. [Added
12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 3512]
(1) Authorized and permitted valet parking operators shall be
permitted to use designated valet loading and unloading zones in
the public right-of-way during the prescribed times and dates, 5:00
p.m. to 3:00 a.m., all days (Chapter 265, § 265-26, Loading zones).
(2) Use of valet loading and unloading zones outside of prescribed
times shall be permitted only under the following conditions:
(a) Any request to use a valet loading and unloading zone outside
prescribed times by a valet parking operator shall be made to
the office of the Village Manager at least 72 hours in advance
of the desired time period.
(b) The Village Manager or designee shall approve or deny the
request for relief within 48 hours of its receipt.
(c) If the Village Manager or designee fails to act within the fortyeight-
hour period, the request shall be automatically deemed
denied.
§ 263-4 TAXATION § 263-4
254:1059
(d) If a request for relief is approved, all parking meters in
designated valet loading and unloading zones shall be bagged
by the valet parking operator and the appropriate fee remitted
in accordance with the fee schedule181 for a bagged parking
meter [§ 145-6, fees, § 249-45A(12)].
L. Valet parking operator conduct. All valet parking operators shall ensure
their employees conduct themselves in a courteous and professional
manner with all patrons in the Village. [Added 12-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3512]
M. Each valet parking operator shall cover all of the signage installed by
the Village to identify the parking spaces on the public street permitted
to be utilized by the said valet parking operator whenever their service
is not in operation. Failure to do so shall be considered a violation of
this chapter, subject to the terms of § 263-5. [Added 1-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 3568]
N. As a condition of their operating permit, all valet parking operators and
valet parking attendants operating in the Village of Ridgewood shall be
subject to, upon request of a Village police officer, a full New Jersey
Division of Motor Vehicles driver's license lookup. Failure to comply can
subject the valet parking operator, valet parking attendant, or business
employing a valet parking service to the penalties in § 263-5. [Added
8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 3653]
O. As a condition of their operating permit, a valet parking operator shall
maintain a log of all attendants employed, along with a copy of their
driver's license. Said log shall be available for review by the Village
Police Department upon their request. Failure to comply can subject the
valet parking operator to the penalties in § 263-5. [Added 8-8-2018 by
Ord. No. 3653]
P. As a condition of their operating permit, all valet parking operators and
valet parking attendants, upon the completion of the use of the
designated valet loading zones, shall securely cover the valet loading
zone signage with opaque materials until such time the load zone is
used again. Signage shall not be uncovered before 3:00 p.m. on a date
the valet loading zone is desired to be used. Failure to comply can
subject the valet parking operator, valet parking attendant, or business
employing a valet parking service to the penalties in § 263-5. In the
event a valet operator desires to offer their services prior to 3:00 p.m.,
for a specific date, they shall seek written permission from the Village
Manager to do so. [Added 8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 3653]
Q. As a condition of their operating permit, no valet parking operator or
valet parking attendants, operating within the public right-of-way and
hired by a private business, shall be permitted to charge or request
181. Editor's Note: See Ch. 145.
§ 263-4 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 263-4
254:1060
§ 263-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-11-2015 by Ord. No.
3458]
compensation from those using their valet parking services. [Added
8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 3653]
A. Any valet parking operator, valet parking attendant, or business
employing valet parking services, found to be in violation of the terms
and conditions of this chapter shall be subject to suspension or
revocation of their permit(s). Grounds for suspension or revocation of
the permit(s) shall include, but not be limited to, the following acts.
B. The valet parking operator, valet parking attendant, or business
employing valet parking services, through carelessness, negligence, or
failure to make proper provision for the safeguarding of vehicles left in
their custody, have knowingly or unknowingly facilitated or contributed
toward the theft or damage to such a vehicle, or the contents thereof.
C. The valet parking operator, valet parking attendant, or business
employing valet parking services, fails to cooperate with the Village
Police Department in any investigation of any theft or other crime
committed related to the valet parking operations.
D. The valet parking operator, valet parking attendant, or business
employing valet parking services knowingly delivers a vehicle in their
custody to a person that is not the registered owner nor entitled to its
possession.
E. The valet parking operator, valet parking attendant, or business
employing a valet parking services operation creates a negative impact
to the traffic in the Central Business District or disrupts the peace and
quiet within any area of the Village.
F. Any valet parking operator, valet parking attendant, or business
employing valet parking services that fails to adhere to the operating
provisions of their permit, including not parking vehicles at the
designated off-site parking area, storing vehicles within the public
right-of-way, obstructing designated fire lanes and traffic through lanes
in Village-owned parking facilities, obstructing public parking spaces,
shall be liable to the following penalties:
Number of Violations per
Calendar Year Penalty for Each Violation
1 to 5 $100
6 to 10 $150
11 to 15 $200
Violations shall be cumulative for any and all valet parking operators
and valet parking attendants working anywhere in the Village of
Ridgewood.
§ 263-4 TAXATION § 263-5
254:1061
Chapter 265
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 112.
Park and ride facility — See Ch. 210.
Skateboards — See Ch. 241.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 249.
Taxicabs and limousines — See Ch. 256.
Towing — See Ch. 258.
G. The Village Manager or designee shall designate such officers and
personnel of the Village of Ridgewood Police Department and various
Village-authorized Code enforcement staff as deemed necessary for the
enforcement of applicable provisions of this chapter. [Amended
12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 3512]
H. Any valet parking operator, valet parking attendant, or business
employing a valet parking services operation found to be operating
within the Village of Ridgewood without proper authorization from the
Village of Ridgewood shall be liable for a fine of not less than $500 per
violation, per day. [Added 12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 3512]
§ 263-5 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 263-5
254:1062
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 265-1. Definitions.
A. Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the
New Jersey Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words
and phrases used herein.
B. Additionally, as used herein, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DUMPSTER — A container with a cover used for storing refuse,
garbage, rubbish, recyclable materials, trash, waste, and any other
materials designated for disposal by a commercial entity. "Dumpster,"
for the purpose of this chapter, shall also mean any container used
to hold waste oil or grease for subsequent recycling. All dumpsters
shall be in accordance with the Village Code governing such.[Added
9-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3213]
FLEX PARKING SPOTS — Parking spots designated for use by either
CBD employee parking permit holders, shoppers, or as diner patron
parking spots on a first come, first served basis throughout the
day.[Added 10-24-2018 by Ord. No. 3674; amended 1-8-2020 by
Ord. No. 3764]
HOLIDAYS — Includes New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Jr.'s
Birthday, Washington's Birthday (Presidents' Day), Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.[Amended 4-15-2009 by Ord.
No. 3178]
METERED PARKING PLACE — Any parking location the privilege of
parking a vehicle in or upon which is regulated by a single parking
meter.
MULTISPACE METERED PARKING AREA — Any Village-owned and
operated parking lot area for which the privilege of parking a passenger
car thereupon is regulated by a multispace parking meter system and
corresponding pay station.[Added 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 3203;
amended 9-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3212]
MULTISPACE PARKING METER — A parking meter regulating a
number of parking spaces, activated by United States of America
coinage or paper currency, which is located upon a public right-of-way,
street, sidewalk, or within a parking facility wherein upon parking of
passenger cars for an established fee is permitted.[Added 7-8-2009
by Ord. No. 3203; amended 9-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3212]
OVERTIME PARKING — To park, stop or stand a vehicle in or upon a
metered parking place beyond the maximum period of time allowed by
the parking meter therefor, for parking privilege, whether the fee for
such additional time shall have been deposited or not.
§ 265-1 TAXATION § 265-1
254:1063
§ 265-2. Repealer.
Chapter 20, Motor Vehicles and Traffic, and Chapter 34, Parking Meter
Zones, of the 1974 Village Code, and all former traffic ordinances of the
Village of Ridgewood are hereby repealed, with the exception of any
ordinances relating to traffic or parking adopted subsequent to July 11,
1995, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal. This repeal shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act
done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to
the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 265-3. Authority of Village Manager to close streets.
PARKING METER — A coin-activated mechanical device located upon a
street, parking site or sidewalk in a designated parking meter zone to
measure the period of time during which parking will be permitted.
PARKING METER ZONE — Such parking site or sites as hereinafter
designated in or upon which the privilege of temporarily parking a
vehicle shall be regulated as to duration and fee by a parking meter or
meters.
PARKING SITE — Any lot, tract or parcel of land excluding streets,
alleyways and footpaths designated and maintained by the Village for
the parking of vehicles by the public.
REFUSE ENCLOSURE — A designated area in a municipal parking lot
constructed by the Village of Ridgewood for the purposes of containing
dumpsters.[Added 9-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3213]
REPEAT PARKING — To move or cause to be moved a vehicle from a
metered parking place to the same or another metered parking place
for the sole purpose of exceeding the maximum time limitation for
parking privilege established for a metered parking place.
VALET LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES — The designated zones
within the public right-of-way, in accordance § 265-72, Schedule XXII,
of the Village Code, to be utilized by the valet parking operator for
collection and return of vehicles to users of the valet parking
service.[Added 9-17-2014 by Ord. No. 3433]
A. The Village Manager is hereby authorized and empowered, from time to
time, to adopt and promulgate reasonable regulations for the closing of
any public street or portion or portions thereof in the Village of
Ridgewood to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days or during
specified hours on any day or days whenever he finds such closing to be
necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
B. Any regulation adopted pursuant to Subsection A above shall be kept on
file in the office of the Village Clerk and available for public inspection
during all hours when said office is open for public business; provided,
however, that no such regulation shall take effect prior to approval
§ 265-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-3
254:1064
thereof by the Commissioner of the New Jersey State Department of
Transportation.
C. The Division of Parking and Traffic shall post or cause to be posted
proper warning signs of any such closing in any street or portion
thereof during the time the same is closed pursuant to Subsection A
above.
§ 265-3 TAXATION § 265-3
254:1065

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 265-4. Traffic control signals.
§ 265-5. Midblock crosswalks.
Midblock crosswalks having a minimum width of six feet shall be
established at the locations listed in Schedule II (§ 265-52), attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 265-6. Speed limits.
§ 265-7. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV (§ 265-54), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 265-8. U-turns. [Amended 8-12-2015 by Ord. No. 3485]
No person shall make a U-turn, or any turning motion crossing the
centerline of a street, other than into a designated driveway on any street
or parts of streets described in Schedule V (§ 265-55), attached to and made
part of this chapter.
§ 265-8.1. Improper access to angle parking. [Added 8-12-2015 by
Ord. No. 3485]
No person shall access an angled parking stall in the Village on or in a
public right-of-way where the angle of the stall is away from the direction of
the vehicle's travel.
A. Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection
of those streets described in Schedule I (§ 265-51), attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
B. The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle 1
of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, and shall conform to
the design and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the
Department of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule III (§ 265-53), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits.
§ 265-4 TAXATION § 265-9
254:1067
§ 265-9. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 265-56), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 265-10. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VII (§ 265-57),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 265-11. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 265-58),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as
through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each
street intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided
for in the designations.
§ 265-12. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 265-59), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 265-13. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule X (§ 265-60), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 265-14. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule XI (§ 265-61), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as lane use reservations,
and traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 265-15. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained along
those streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XII (§ 265-62),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, as authorized by the New
Jersey Department of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated
and numbered as indicated.
§ 265-16. Trucks over certain weights excluded.
Trucks in excess of the gross weights indicated are hereby excluded from
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XIII (§ 265-63),
§ 265-9 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-16
254:1068
attached to and made a part of this chapter, except for the pickup and
delivery of materials on such streets.
§ 265-16.1. Over height vehicles. [Added 5-13-2015 by Ord. No.
3473]
§ 265-16.2. Overweight and over-length vehicles prohibited. [Added
1-17-2018 by Ord. No. 3630]
No motor vehicle or combination of vehicles, including loads or contents
of any part or portion thereof, shall exceed 22 feet in length and 10,000
pounds in gross vehicle weight on the following streets:
Name of Street Between
Glenwood Road From Upper Boulevard to the Ho-
Ho-Kus municipal boundary
§ 265-17. Closing of certain streets. [Amended 6-12-2013 by Ord.
No. 3383]
No person shall operate a vehicle on those streets or parts of streets as
described in Schedule XIV (Village Code § 265-64), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, during the times of the days indicated in said schedule
unless he is a resident of the said street needing access to his home or can
demonstrate or document a need to access a residence on the streets or
parts of streets as described.
A. No motor vehicle or combination of vehicles, including loads or
contents of any part or portion thereof, shall exceed 10 feet and 11
inches in height in any direction of travel at the following locations:
Name of Street Between
Garber Square From West Ridgewood Avenue and
North Broad Street
B. No motor vehicle or combination of vehicles, including loads or
contents of any part or portion thereof, shall exceed 14 feet and 11
inches in height at the following locations:
Name of Street Between
West Glen Avenue From Oak Street, west to Upper
Boulevard
C. It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles,
including loads or contents of any part or portion thereof to operate
that motor vehicle on any Village street in a manner that causes
damage to trees within the Village right-of-way.
D. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles, including load or contents of
any part or portion thereof found to be in violation of this section shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $200, nor more than $250.
§ 265-16 TAXATION § 265-17.1
254:1069
§ 265-17.1. Solid waste vehicle routes. [Added 1-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 2618]
All solid waste vehicles used for transportation of solid waste shall, except
for operations of their collection service routes, access and exit solid waste
facilities solely in accordance with the designated solid waste vehicle route
as specified in the Bergen County Solid Waste Management Plan.
§ 265-17.1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-17.1
254:1070
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 265-18. Regulations not exclusive.
§ 265-19. Parking prohibited at all times. [Amended 5-13-2015 by
Ord. No. 3473]
A. The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute
or as hereinafter provided.
B. The Chief of Police for the Village of Ridgewood, or his or her designee,
shall have the authority under Chapter 265 to waive the prohibitions on
overnight parking regulations when requested to do so by residents. All
requests for waivers for up to five nights will be considered, upon the
required proper information describing the vehicle, location, and caller
being provided. All waivers in excess of five nights will be individually
reviewed, upon the submittal of the required proper information. All
requests shall be made through Central Dispatch. [Added 9-14-2016
by Ord. No. 3543]
A. It shall be prohibited for any motor vehicle to be parked on any
roadway, or in any municipal parking lot, in the Village of Ridgewood in
an area not intended or marked for parking. These areas include all
areas described in Schedule XV (§ 265-65) and any roadway or parking
lot marked in the following manner:
(1) A roadway or parking lot marked, by an official government entity,
with either approved marking paint or by appropriate signage that
indicates parking is prohibited in this area.
B. It shall also be prohibited for any motor vehicle to park on any roadway
or in any municipal parking lot in a manner in which can interfere with
and affect the safety of the public. Any person found to be in violation of
this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $75, nor more than
$100.
C. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The vehicle owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the
removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 265-18 TAXATION § 265-20
254:1071
§ 265-20. No stopping or standing. [Amended 6-10-2009 by Ord. No.
3186]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle, unless it is a bus legally operated
for the public transportation or conveyance of passengers, upon any of the
streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XV (265-66), attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 265-21. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle on any street in the Village between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. In addition, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified in Schedule XVII (§ 265-67) of any day, unless
otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
said Schedule XVII, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 265-21.1. Parking prohibited certain hours for commercial
vehicles. [Added 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2952]
No person shall park a vehicle bearing a commercial license plate between
the hours specified in Schedule XXVI (§ 265-75.1), of any day, unless
otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
said Schedule XXVI, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 265-22. No stopping or standing certain hours. [Amended
4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 3248]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle, unless loading or unloading
passengers only, during the times specified in Schedule XVIII (§ 265-68)
of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the sheets or parts of
streets described in said Schedule XVIII, attached to and made part of this
chapter.
§ 265-23. Time limit parking. [Amended 1-14-2015 by Ord. No.
3453]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XIX (§ 265-69) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule XIX of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described in said Schedule XIX, attached to and made a
part of this chapter, and except during the time period meter parking shall
be in effect.
§ 265-24. Special holiday parking restrictions.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00
midnight on the Fourth of July (or, in the event that the Fourth of July falls
on a Sunday, on July 5) upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
in Schedule XX (§ 265-70), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 265-20 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-25
254:1072
§ 265-25. Angle parking. [Amended 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 3481;
3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3582]
A. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this ordinance, for any vehicle to
be parked on any roadway or in any municipal parking lot within the
Village of Ridgewood in any other manner other than as described:
(1) Angled parking stall spaces: With the nose of the vehicle facing the
nearest curb line at an angle designated by officially painted
markings.
(2) Perpendicular parking stall spaces: With either the front or the rear
of the vehicle facing perpendicular to the nearest curb line within
the officially painted markings.
(3) Parallel parking spaces: The nose of the vehicle shall face in the
direction of travel of the section of roadway nearest the parking
space.
(4) All vehicles parked on any roadway or in any municipal parking lot
within the Village of Ridgewood shall be parked fully within the
confines of the officially painted parking space. Any vehicle, or
portion of vehicle, not fully within the confines of the parking
space, shall be in violation of this chapter.
B. Exceptions:
(1) Any emergency vehicle, while in the official performance of their
duties or to allow for a rapid deployment of resources;
(2) Any Village of Ridgewood vehicle, in the official performance of
duties; or
(3) Any vehicle visibly displaying either valid disability parking plates
or a disabled parking placard, operated by a person with
disabilities or their caregiver while transporting them, so long as
the vehicle must be parked in violation of this chapter in order to
safely allow the person with disabilities to embark and disembark
the vehicle.
C. Any vehicle found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine.
D. In the interest of public safety, any police officer may provide for the
removal of any vehicle found to be in violation of this section if the
officer reasonably believes that the vehicle is a nuisance and a menace
to the safe and proper regulation of traffic. The owner of the vehicle
shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which may
result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 265-25 TAXATION § 265-26
254:1073
§ 265-26. Loading zones. [Amended 8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 3431;
5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3471]
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to park a motor vehicle
in any of the locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 265-72), except under
the following conditions:
§ 265-27. Taxi stands. [Amended 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 3482]
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to park a motor vehicle
in any of the locations described in Schedule XXIII (§ 265-73), except under
the following conditions:
A. A motor vehicle may be temporarily parked in a described loading zone:
(1) By the owner, or employee of, a business to load or unload material
related to the commerce of said business only:
(a) For no more than 10 minutes from the time the vehicle had
been parked, unless permission has been given specifically for
an occurrence in which the vehicle can be parked no longer
than 20 minutes.
(2) By a delivery company, while actively delivering or picking up
goods from an establishment, reasonably distanced from the
loading zone location:
(a) For no more than 15 minutes from the time the vehicle has
been parked, unless permission has been given specifically for
an occurrence in which the vehicle can be parked no longer
than 30 minutes.
(3) By an authorized and permitted valet parking operator, utilizing an
authorized and permitted valet loading and unloading zone, as
described in Chapter 265, between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 3:00
a.m.
B. All requests to extend time longer than stated above shall be made
through the Office of the Chief of Police, or his designee.
C. Any vehicle parking longer than the prescribed times, or not being
utilized for the prescribed uses stated above, shall be in violation of this
chapter and be subject to a fine.
A. A taxicab may be parked in a described, designated taxi stand if the
individual or company owning or operating the taxicab has
authorization, from the Village of Ridgewood, to use this public taxi
stand.
B. Any vehicle parking in the taxi stand, who is not authorized by the
Village of Ridgewood, shall be in violation of this chapter and be subject
to a fine.
§ 265-26 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-28
254:1074
§ 265-28. Bus stops. [Amended 7-15-2015 by Ord. No. 3482]
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to park a motor vehicle
in any of the locations described in Schedule XXIV (§ 265-74), except under
the following conditions:
A. A bus, authorized either by the Village of Ridgewood or the State of
New Jersey, which is currently, or shall be shortly thereafter, embarking
or disembarking passengers, shall be authorized to park, stop or stand
in a designated bus stop described in Schedule XXIV.
B. Any other vehicle parking in a bus stop, which is not authorized, shall
be in violation of this chapter and be subject to a fine.
§ 265-28 TAXATION § 265-28
254:1075

ARTICLE IV
Metered Parking and Permit Parking
§ 265-29. Parking meter zones designated.
A. On-street parking meter zones. Parking or standing a vehicle in a
parking meter space in the on-street parking meter zones described
below shall be lawful from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., prevailing time,
Monday through Friday, and 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays, upon
deposit of such amount of funds as is established by the Village Council
by ordinance or the payment of such funds by means of a wireless
cellular communication device through a designated vendor authorized
by the Village of Ridgewood only. [Last amended 8-8-2018 by Ord.
No. 3660182]
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit
(hours) Limits
Chestnut Street Both 1/4 The meter on each side which is
nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue
Chestnut Street East 3 From Franklin Avenue to East
Ridgewood Avenue, except for
the meter nearest to East
Ridgewood Avenue
Chestnut Street
Chestnut Street West 3 From Franklin Avenue to East
Ridgewood Avenue, except for
the three meters nearest to East
Ridgewood Avenue
Cottage Place Both 1/4 The meter on each side which is
nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue
Cottage Place Both 3 From Franklin Avenue to East
Ridgewood Avenue, except for
the meter on each side which is
nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue
Dayton Street North 3 From Van Neste Square
easterly, the 5 most easterly
meters
Dayton Street North 3 The 13 meters between Van
Neste Square and South Walnut
Street
182. Editor’s Note: Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.
§ 265-29 TAXATION § 265-29
254:1077
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit
(hours) Limits
Dayton Street South 3 From Prospect Street easterly,
the 7 most easterly meters
Dayton Street South 3 From Prospect Street easterly,
the 12 most westerly meters
East Ridgewood
Avenue
Both 3 From its western terminus to
Maple Avenue
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
10-7-2019 by
Ord. No.
3750]
South 3 From Broad Street, east to
Prospect Street, except for the
last metered space, No. 437A,
which is nearest to Prospect
Street
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
10-7-2019 by
Ord. No.
3750]
South 3 From Prospect Street, east to
Maple Avenue
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
10-7-2019 by
Ord. No.
3750]
South 1/4 Meter No. 437A, which is the
first meter west of Prospect
Street
East Ridgewood
Avenue by
Broad Street
West 3 One space on the westerly side
of the lot, the 5th space south of
the north edge of the parking lot
Franklin
Avenue
Both 3 From Chestnut Street to Oak
Street
Franklin
Avenue
Both 3 From North Walnut Street to
Cottage Place
Franklin
Avenue
South 3 From Broad Street to Chestnut
Street
Franklin
Avenue
South 3 From the easterly line of
Cottage Place to a point 170
feet east thereof
Godwin Avenue North 3 From Sherman Place to Wilsey
Square
Godwin Avenue South 3 From a point 155 feet east of
Pomander Walk extended to
Wilsey Square
Hudson Street Both 3 From South Broad Street to
Prospect Street
§ 265-29 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-29
254:1078
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit
(hours) Limits
Library Place North 3 The 2 meters which are the
farthest from Garber Square
after the tenant space
Library Place North/
South
3 From Garber Square to their
respective west termini, except
for the 2 meters which are
farthest from Garber Square
Library Place South 1/4 The 2 meters which are the
farthest from Garber Square
Library Place West 3 From West Ridgewood Avenue
to its north terminus
North Broad
Street
Both 1/4 The meter on each side which is
nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue
North Broad
Street
Both 3 From Franklin Avenue to East
Ridgewood Avenue, except for
the meter on each side which is
nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue
North Walnut
Street
East 1/4 The 3 meters which are the
nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue
North Walnut
Street
East 3 From East Ridgewood Avenue,
north to Franklin Avenue,
except for the 3 meters which
are nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue
North Walnut
Street
South 2 North Walnut Street, south of
Franklin Avenue Parking Site
North Walnut
Street
West 1/4 The meter which is the nearest
to East Ridgewood Avenue
North Walnut
Street
West 3 From East Ridgewood Avenue to
a point 185 feet south of
Franklin Avenue, except for the
meter which is nearest to East
Ridgewood Avenue
North Walnut
Street
West 3 From Franklin Avenue to a point
185 feet south of Franklin
Avenue
§ 265-29 TAXATION § 265-29
254:1079
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit
(hours) Limits
Oak Street Both 1/4 The meter on each side which is
nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue
Oak Street Both 3 From Franklin Avenue to East
Ridgewood Avenue, except for
the meter on each side which is
nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue
Passaic Street North 3 From Prospect Street to South
Broad Street
Passaic Street South 8 From Prospect Street to South
Broad Street
Prospect Street Both 1/4 The meter on each side which is
nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue
Prospect Street Both 3 From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Hudson Street, except for the
meter on each side which is
nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue
Prospect Street East 3 From Passaic Street to
Woodside Avenue
South Broad
Street
East 3 From Leroy Place to Passaic
Street
South Broad
Street
East 3 From Passaic Street to Hudson
Street
South Broad
Street
West 1/4 The meter which is nearest to
East Ridgewood Avenue
South Broad
Street
West 3 From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Hudson Street, except for the
meter which is nearest to East
Ridgewood Avenue
South Walnut
Street
East 1/4 The meter which is nearest to
East Ridgewood Avenue
South Walnut
Street
East 3 From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Dayton Street, except for the
meter which is nearest to East
Ridgewood Avenue
South Walnut
Street
West 3 From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Dayton Street
§ 265-29 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-29
254:1080
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit
(hours) Limits
Station Plaza
[Repealed
9-4-2019 by
Ord. No. 3744;
8-7-2019 by
Ord. No.
3728]
Van Neste
Square
East
and
both of
island
3 From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Dayton Street
Van Neste
Square
West 1/4 The meter which is nearest to
East Ridgewood Avenue
Van Neste
Square
West 3 From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Dayton Street, except for the
meter which is nearest to East
Ridgewood Avenue
West
Ridgewood
Avenue
North 3 From Heights Road to a point
175 feet east thereof
West
Ridgewood
Avenue
North 3 From Heights Road to Library
Place
West
Ridgewood
Avenue
North 1/4 From Library Place to Garber
Square
West
Ridgewood
Avenue
South 3 From the easterly line of
Heights Road extended to a
point 173 feet east thereof
West
Ridgewood
Avenue
South 1/4 The 2 metered spaces nearest to
Washington Place
West
Ridgewood
Avenue
South 3 From Washington Place to a
point 120 feet west thereof,
except for the 2 metered spaces
nearest to Washington Place
West
Ridgewood
Avenue
South 1/4 The 2 metered spaces closest to
Wilsey Square between
Washington Place and Wilsey
Square
§ 265-29 TAXATION § 265-29
254:1081
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit
(hours) Limits
Wilsey Square West 3 The 1 space on the westerly side
of the angle parking area
nearest to the intersection with
the easternmost extension of
West Ridgewood Avenue
Wilsey Square West 1/4 The meter which is nearest to
Godwin Avenue
Wilsey Square West
side of
traffic
3 From Godwin Avenue to Garber
Square, except for the meter
which is nearest Godwin Avenue
B. On-street valet loading and unloading zones. Parking or standing a
vehicle in a parking meter space that has also been designated a valet
loading and unloading zone in the on-street parking meter zones
described below shall be lawful from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., prevailing
time, Monday through Saturday, upon the deposit of such amount of
funds as is established by the Village Council by ordinance. [Added
9-17-2014 by Ord. No. 3433;183 amended 1-14-2015 by Ord. No.
3453]
Name of Street Side
Time Limit
(hours) Limits
Chestnut Street
[Added
7-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 3479]
East 3 The first 3 metered spaces
south from the entrance
driveway into the Chestnut
Street Parking Lot (Meter
Nos. 301, 300, and 299)
Chestnut Street
[Added
9-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 3544]
East 3 From the 4th parking meter
south of the entrance
driveway to the Chestnut
Street Municipal Lot
Chestnut Street
[Added
7-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 3479]
East 3 The first 5 metered spaces
north from East
Ridgewood Avenue (Meter
Nos. 281 through 285)
183. 1Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former Subsections B and C were redesignated
as Subsections C and D, respectively.
§ 265-29 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-29
254:1082
Name of Street Side
Time Limit
(hours) Limits
Chestnut Street East 3 From Franklin Avenue to
East Ridgewood Avenue,
except for the meter
nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue, and the 6th and
7th meter locations north
from East Ridgewood
Avenue
Chestnut Street
[Amended
10-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 3554]
West 3 The first 3 parking meters
north from East
Ridgewood Avenue,
including the meter that is
nearest to East Ridgewood
Avenue
Oak Street
[Added
3-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 3463;
amended
9-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 3544]
West 3 From a point 147 feet
south of Franklin Avenue
to a point 216 feet south
thereof
Prospect Street
[Added
7-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 3479;
amended
12-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3512]
West 3 The first five metered
spaces south from East
Ridgewood Avenue (Meter
Nos. 160, 159, 158, and
157)
C. Off-street parking meter sites. Parking or standing a vehicle in a
parking meter space in the off-street parking meter sites described
below shall be lawful only when not in excess of the maximum parking
time indicated during the hours of operation specified and on the days
indicated, and only upon the deposit of such amount of funds as is
established by the Village Council by ordinance for each specified
period of time or the payment of such funds by means of a wireless
cellular communication device through a designated vendor authorized
and approved by the Village of Ridgewood only or the display of a valid
Ridgewood parking permit in accordance with the requirements in
§ 265-33C or a Ridgewood resident daily parking pass. [Amended
3-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2731; 10-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2758;
7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 3203; 9-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3212; 5-11-2011
by Ord. No. 3295; 12-22-2014 by Ord. No. 3455; 3-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 3464; 3-25-2015 by Ord. No. 3466; 11-9-2016 by Ord.
§ 265-29 TAXATION § 265-29
254:1083
No. 3557; 1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 3572; 1-25-2017 by Ord. No.
3575; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3580]
(1) Central Business District.
Name of Lot Hours
Time
Limit
(hours) Location
Cottage Place
[Amended
1-17-2018 by
Ord. No.
3629;
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660;
1-8-2020 by
Ord. No.
3764]
9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
11 The spaces
designated for flex
parking
Cottage Place
[Added
10-24-2018
by Ord. No.
3674;
amended
1-8-2020 by
Ord. No.
3764]
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday
9 The spaces
designated for flex
parking
Cottage Place
[Amended
1-17-2018 by
Ord. No.
3629;
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660;
1-8-2020 by
Ord. No.
3764]
9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
11 Entire lot on Cottage
Place between
Franklin Avenue and
East Ridgewood
Avenue
§ 265-29 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-29
254:1084
Name of Lot Hours
Time
Limit
(hours) Location
Cottage Place
[Added
10-24-2018
by Ord. No.
3674;
amended
1-8-2020 by
Ord. No.
3764]
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday
9 Entire lot on Cottage
Place between
Franklin Avenue and
East Ridgewood
Avenue
Cottage Place
Annex [Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660;
amended
1-8-2020 by
Ord. No.
3764]
9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
11 Entire lot
Cottage Place
Annex [Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660;
amended
1-8-2020 by
Ord. No.
3764]
9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday
9 Entire lot
Franklin
Avenue
10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Saturday
3 Corner of Franklin
Avenue and North
Walnut Street
Hudson Street
[Added
4-10-2019 by
Ord. No.
3719]
9:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday,
dedicated
spaces for
Hudson Street
Lot Permits only
Corner of Hudson
Street and South
Broad Street, fourth
and fifth north-south
row eastward from
South Broad Street
containing 22
parking spaces
§ 265-29 TAXATION § 265-29
254:1085
Name of Lot Hours
Time
Limit
(hours) Location
Hudson Street
[Amended
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660;
amended
4-10-2019 by
Ord. No.
3719]
9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday,
dedicated
spaces for
shoppers and
diners
3 Corner of Hudson
Street and South
Broad Street, first
three north-south
rows eastward from
South Broad Street
containing 28
parking spaces
Hudson Street
[Added
4-10-2019 by
Ord. No.
3719]
9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday,
dedicated
spaces for
shoppers and
diners
3 Corner of Hudson
Street and South
Broad Street, sixth,
seventh and eighth
north-south rows
eastward from South
Broad Street
containing 26
parking spaces
Hudson Street
[Added
4-10-2019 by
Ord. No.
3719]
10:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.,
Saturday,
dedicated
spaces for
Hudson Street
Lot Permits only
Corner of Hudson
Street and South
Broad Street, fourth
and fifth north-south
row eastward from
South Broad Street
containing 22
parking spaces
Hudson Street
[Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660]
10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday,
dedicated
spaces for
shoppers and
diners
3 Corner of Hudson
Street and South
Broad Street, first
three north-south
rows eastward from
South Broad Street
containing 28
parking spaces
Hudson Street
[Added
4-10-2019 by
Ord. No.
3719]
10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday,
dedicated
spaces for
shoppers and
diners
3 Corner of Hudson
Street and South
Broad Street, sixth,
seventh and eighth
north-south rows
eastward from South
Broad Street
containing 26
parking spaces
§ 265-29 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-29
254:1086
Name of Lot Hours
Time
Limit
(hours) Location
Hudson Street
[Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660;
repealed
4-10-2019 by
Ord. No.
3719]
Hudson Street
[Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660;
repealed
4-10-2019 by
Ord. No.
3719]
Hudson Street/
Former Fire
Station
10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Saturday
3 Hudson Street,
between South
Broad Street and
Prospect Street (37
spaces)
North Walnut
Street
[Amended
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660]
9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
3 North Walnut Street
North Walnut
Street
[Amended
10-11-2017
by Ord. No.
3616;
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660]
10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday
3 North Walnut Street
§ 265-29 TAXATION § 265-29
254:1087
Name of Lot Hours
Time
Limit
(hours) Location
North Walnut
Street [Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660;
amended
2-5-2020 by
Ord. No.
3774]
9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
11 For 30 spaces
designated for CBD
employees, North
Walnut Street
North Walnut
Street [Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660;
amended
2-5-2020 by
Ord. No.
3774]
6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday
12 For 30 spaces
designated for CBD
employees, North
Walnut Street
North Walnut
Street [Added
2-5-2020 by
Ord. No.
3774]
After 6:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
the CBD
employee
parking permit
is not required.
Meter rates still
apply from 6:00
p.m. to 8:00
p.m.
N/A For 30 spaces
designated for CBD
employees, North
Walnut Street
North Walnut
Street [Added
2-5-2020 by
Ord. No.
3774]
After 6:00 p.m.
on a Saturday,
the CBD
employee
parking permit
is not required.
N/A For 30 spaces
designated for CBD
employees, North
Walnut Street
§ 265-29 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-29
254:1088
Name of Lot Hours
Time
Limit
(hours) Location
Prospect Street
[Amended
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660]
9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday,
29 parking
spaces
dedicated for
shoppers and
diners
3 Van Neste Square
and Prospect Street
Prospect Street
[Amended
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660]
10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday, 29
parking spaces
dedicated for
shoppers and
diners
3 Van Neste Square
and Prospect Street
Prospect Street
[Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660]
9:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday,
all parking
spaces not
dedicated for
shoppers and
diners
3 Van Neste Square
and Prospect Street
Prospect Street
[Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660]
10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday, all
parking spaces
not dedicated
for shoppers
and diners
3 Van Neste Square
and Prospect Street
§ 265-29 TAXATION § 265-29
254:1089
Name of Lot Hours
Time
Limit
(hours) Location
Train Station/
Station Plaza
[Amended
9-5-2018 by
Ord. No.
3662;
8-7-2019 by
Ord. No.
3728;
9-4-2019 by
Ord. No.
3744]
6:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
Monday through
Friday
14 Approximately 128
spaces between
Garber Square and
the railroad bed
Train Station/
Station Plaza
[Amended
9-5-2018 by
Ord. No.
3662;
8-7-2019 by
Ord. No.
3728;
9-4-2019 by
Ord. No.
3744]
10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday
8 Approximately 128
spaces between
Garber Square and
the railroad bed
(2) Non-Central Business District. [Amended 8-8-2018 by Ord. No.
3660]
§ 265-29 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-29
254:1090
Name of Lot Hours
Time
Limit
(hours) Location
Route 17 Park
and Ride
Facility
[Amended
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660]
6:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
14 Route 17 Park and
Ride Facility; all
metered spaces
Route 17 Park
and Ride
Facility
[Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3660]
10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday
8 Route 17 Park and
Ride Facility; all
metered spaces
D. Multispace parking meter kiosk locations. [Added 7-8-2009 by Ord.
No. 3203; amended 9-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3212; 5-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 3295; 12-22-2014 by Ord. No. 3455; 3-11-2015 by Ord.
No. 3464; 11-9-2016 by Ord. No. 3557; 1-11-2017 by Ord. No.
3572; 2-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3580; 8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 3660;
9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 3662; 8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 3660; 1-8-2020
by Ord. No. 3770]
(1) Street parking: Parking or standing a vehicle in a marked parking
space, designated as street parking, while utilizing a multispace
meter for payment, shall be lawful only upon payment of the
required fees via a multispace meter (kiosk) or payment of such
funds by means of a wireless cellular communication device
through a designated vendor authorized by the Village of
Ridgewood or a valid parking permit only. Deposit of payment for
parking shall be for the hours of operation specified and on the
days indicated as established by the Village Council.
(2) Lot parking: Parking or standing a vehicle in a marked parking
space, designated as lot parking, while utilizing a multispace meter
for payment, shall be lawful only upon payment of the required fees
via a multispace meter (kiosk) or payment of such funds by means
of a wireless cellular communication device through a designated
vendor authorized by the Village of Ridgewood or a valid parking
permit only. Deposit of payment for parking shall be for the hours of
operation specified and on the days indicated as established by the
Village Council.
§ 265-29 TAXATION § 265-29
254:1091
§ 265-30. Installation of parking meters; indication of time
limitations and fee. [Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3464]
Name of Lot Hours
Time
Limit
(hours) Location
Chestnut
Street
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday,
dedicated spaces
for shoppers and
diners
3 The closest 30
spaces to Chestnut
Street, as indicated
by signage in the
lot
Chestnut
Street
10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday,
dedicated spaces
for shoppers and
diners
3 The closest 30
spaces to Chestnut
Street, as indicated
by signage in the
lot
Chestnut
Street
9:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
3 The remaining
spaces in the lot
Chestnut
Street
10:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Saturday
3 The remaining
spaces in the lot
E. Parking zones requiring electronic payment only. Parking or standing a
vehicle on-street or off-street in a defined designated marked parking
space absent a meter, and marked as for electronic payment only, will
require payment of such funds by means of a wireless cellular
communication device through a designated vendor authorized and
approved by the Village of Ridgewood only. [Added 3-11-2015 by Ord.
No. 3464]
A. Fee required for designated parking spaces, with meters. Parking
spaces shall be marked with appropriate signage along the street
indicating the maximum duration of the parking privilege for each
designated marked metered parking place. Parking meters shall be
placed immediately adjacent to the parking place to be regulated in
such a manner as to display by visual signal whether such metered
parking place is legally in use.
B. Each parking meter shall indicate the maximum duration of the parking
privilege for each metered parking place and the fee for the same and,
on the expiration of such time, indicate a violation or overtime parking.
C. Fee required for designated parking spaces, without meters. Parking
spaces shall be marked, with appropriate signage along the street
indicating the maximum duration of the parking privilege for each
§ 265-29 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-30
254:1092
§ 265-31. Marking of parking spaces; posting of signs; operation
and maintenance.
The Division of Parking, Traffic and Electrical Signals, Department of Public
Works, shall install all parking meters and shall cause each metered parking
place to be marked with lines or boundaries within which any vehicle
using such metered parking place shall be parked. It shall cause signs to
be posted and prominently displayed indicating the duration of parking
privileges for each metered parking place or group thereof and shall
operate, maintain and repair all parking meters, signs, boundaries or
markings provided for herein.
§ 265-32. Payment of parking fee required. [Amended 4-15-2009 by
Ord. No. 3178; 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3464]
No vehicle shall be parked and remain upon any designated defined parking
place unless and until the operator thereof shall have either deposited the
requisite currency in a parking meter or made the payment of such funds
by means of a wireless cellular communication device through a designated
vendor authorized and approved by the Village of Ridgewood for the fee for
the duration of time of parking desired, not to exceed the maximum allowed
by the parking meter thereof; except that such limitations shall not apply on
the holidays as defined in § 265-1B hereinabove.
§ 265-33. Permit parking.
designated parking place. Said spaces shall only be paid for via a
wireless cellular communication device through a designated vendor
authorized and approved by the Village of Ridgewood.
A. Off-street metered sites.
(1) Parking at the following sites shall be allowed by permit only:
Name of Street Location
Station Plaza Entire area
(2) No vehicle shall be parked at or upon any metered parking sites
designated hereinabove unless it displays in the lower rear corner
of its left rear window a valid and current decal issued pursuant to
the provisions hereof and unless the requisite meter fees therefor
have been paid.
(a) Decals shall be issued annually for the period of January 1 to
December 31 upon application therefor to the Village Clerk
during regular business hours and only upon display of a
current valid New Jersey motor vehicle registration certificate
showing the name and address of the applicant as a resident of
the Village. In the alternative, if no New Jersey registration
certificate is available for the subject vehicle, then the display
of a valid out-of-state motor vehicle certificate for the subject
§ 265-30 TAXATION § 265-33
254:1093
vehicle showing the name and address of the applicant as a
resident of the Village and a copy of the most recent Public
Service Electric and Gas or other electric and heating fuel bill
showing the name and address of the applicant as a resident of
the Village must be provided. [Amended 3-11-2009 by Ord.
No. 3166]
(b) Such decal shall be issued only to the owner of the motor
vehicle and shall be nontransferable, provided that a decal may
be transferred during the period for which valid to a new or
other motor vehicle purchased by the applicant on the sale or
transfer of the original vehicle. In case of any such sale or
transfer, the owner shall remove the decal and supply evidence
of same to the Village Clerk in order to obtain a new decal.
(c) All deals shall have written thereon "Village of Ridgewood
Parking Permit," together with the number of the decal, the
motor vehicle registration number, the date issued and the
date of expiration.
(d) The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all decals issued by
number, date of issuance, name and address of person to whom
issued, motor vehicle registration number, make, model, color
and year of the motor vehicle for which issued.
(3) The Village Manager shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in
and around the parking sites hereinabove designated, indicating
such parking is restricted to vehicles with decals only.
B. On-street permit parking sites.
(1) Parking at the following sites between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, shall be allowed by permit only:
Name of Street Side Location
Bogert Avenue Both From Fairfield Avenue to a point 350
feet north of Meadowbrook Avenue
extended
Bogert Avenue East From East Glen Avenue to a point
555 feet south of Bogert Avenue
extended
Fairfield Avenue East From Meadowbrook Avenue to a
point 330 feet north of
Meadowbrook Avenue extended
Graydon Terrace South From Northern Parkway to a point
375 feet east of Northern Parkway
extended
(2) No vehicle shall be parked at or upon any parking sites designated
hereinabove between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday
§ 265-33 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-33
254:1094
through Friday, unless it displays in the lower rear corner of its
left rear window a valid and current decal issued pursuant to the
provisions hereof.
(a) Decals shall be issued annually to the Village Board of
Education for the period January 1 to December 31, upon
application therefor to the Village Clerk during regular
business hours and only upon display of a current and valid
New Jersey motor vehicle registration certificate showing the
name and address of the applicant.
(b) Such decal shall be issued only to the owner of the motor
vehicle and shall be nontransferable, provided that a decal may
be transferred during the period for which valid to a new or
other motor vehicle purchased by the applicant on the sale or
transfer of the original vehicle. In case of any such sale or
transfer, the owner shall remove the decal and supply evidence
of same to the Village Clerk in order to obtain a new decal.
(c) All decals shall have written thereon "Village of Ridgewood
Parking Permit," together with the number of the decal, the
motor vehicle registration number, the date issued and the
date of expiration.
(d) The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all decals issued by
number, date of issuance, name and address of person to whom
issued, motor vehicle registration number, make, model, color
and year of the motor vehicle for which issued.
(3) The Village Manager shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in
and around the parking site hereinabove designated, indicating
such parking is restricted to vehicles with decals only.184
C. Ridgewood parking permits. [Amended 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 2567;
5-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2696; 3-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2731;
4-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2779; 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2903;
5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3295; 12-10-2014 by Ord. No. 3446]
(1) Ridgewood parking permit users shall be identified by a placard
issued by the Village of Ridgewood. Resident and nonresident users
of these placards shall not be required to deposit any meter fee
during the time in which the placard holder occupied the metered
parking space. Ridgewood parking permit placards shall be valid
any time parking meter rates are in effect in metered parking lots
only as identified hereinbelow.
(2) Issuance of placards; residency.
184. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(4), regarding the expiration date of this section,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 1-11-2017 by Ord, No. 3572.
§ 265-33 TAXATION § 265-33
254:1095
(a) Ridgewood parking permit placards shall be issued for a
twelve-month (annual) basis in accordance with the fees as set
forth in § 145-6 entitled "Enumeration of fees according to
Code chapters." There shall be separate and distinct
Ridgewood parking permit placards issued to residents of the
Village and separate and distinct Ridgewood parking permit
placards issued to nonresidents of the Village on an annual
basis. They shall be issued on a first-come, first-served basis,
upon the filing of an application for said permit and the
payment of the fee established herein. The number of
Ridgewood parking permit placards to be issued each year
shall be within the sole discretion of the Village Manager.
(b) For the purposes of this section, residency in the Village of
Ridgewood shall be established by the production of a valid
New Jersey driver's license and motor vehicle registration or a
utility bill from the current or previous month or other
secondary documentation that satisfies the Village Clerk's
office.
(c) For the purposes of this section, residency in the Village of
Ridgewood shall also mean the demonstrated ownership of a
commercial property in the Village of Ridgewood Central
Business District wherein the applicant for the Ridgewood
parking permit has a permanent office. Said office shall be
maintained for the duration of the Ridgewood parking permit.
Upon closure of the said office, the Ridgewood parking permit
shall be null and void. [Added 7-17-2019 by Ord. No. 3726]
(3) All Ridgewood parking permit placards shall identify and
distinguish "Village resident" and "Village nonresident" in such
manner so as to assist the appropriate enforcement of this
subsection.
(4) The Department of Finance shall keep a record of all placards
issued by number, date of issuance, name and address of person to
whom issued, license plate numbers and make, model, color and
year of the motor vehicles, limited to three vehicles per applicant
for a placard, for which the placard will be used.
(5) The Village Manager shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in
and around the parking areas designated indicating the parking
restrictions set forth in this section. The signs shall include a
statement that all of the areas designated by this section are towaway
zones.
(6) The Ridgewood parking permit placards shall not be valid for any
on-street parking sites as designated by the Village. The various
Ridgewood parking permit placards shall only be valid for the
following public parking lots: [Amended 11-9-2016 by Ord. No.
§ 265-33 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-33
254:1096
3557; 1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 3572; 1-25-2017 by Ord. No.
3575]
(a) Ridgewood resident parking permit: Train Station Plaza
Parking Lot; Prospect Street Parking Lot; Route 17 South Park
and Ride lot; Chestnut Street Parking Lot; Walnut Street
Parking Lot; and Cottage Place Parking Lot. [Amended
2-13-2019 by Ord. No. 3699; 4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 3713;
2-5-2020 by Ord. No. 3773]
[1] The Ridgewood resident parking permit is not required at
any of the off-street parking lots after 3:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. Meter rates still apply from 3:00 p.m. until
8:00 p.m., and payment must be made. In addition, the
time limit in all lots shall still apply.
[2] In addition, a Ridgewood resident parking permit is not
required at the Train Station Parking Lot on Saturdays;
however, meter rates are still in effect from 10:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
(b) Ridgewood residents parking permit: Chestnut Street Parking
Lot; Walnut Street Parking Lot; Cottage Place Parking Lot;
Route 17 South Park and Ride.
(c) Nonresident parking permit: Route 17 South Park and Ride.
(d) Nonresident parking permit: Cottage Place Parking Lot.
(7) Ridgewood resident parking permit usage. Ridgewood resident
parking permits are not permitted to be used in the dedicated
shopper/diner parking spaces (Hudson Street Lot, Chestnut Street
Lot, Prospect Street Lot) Monday through Friday. The Ridgewood
resident parking permits are permitted to be used in the shopper/
diner parking spaces on Saturday only. [Added 1-25-2017 by Ord.
No. 3575]
(8) The graduated fine schedule set forth in § 265-47E of this chapter
shall be applied to violations of this section.
(9) Misuse, abuse, placard falsification, placard fraud, mutilation of the
placard so as to render it illegible, use of an expired placard, shall
be deemed violations as set forth in § 265-47E.
(10) Replacement of a lost or missing placard shall incur a fee of $100
for a replacement placard. A placard holder is permitted no more
than two replacements per calendar year.
D. On-street commuter parking sites. [Added 2-9-2005 by Ord. No.
2925]
(1) Parking at the following sites between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, shall be allowed by permit only:
§ 265-33 TAXATION § 265-33
254:1097
Name of Street Side Location
Ridge Road South Crest Road to the end of Ridge
Road
(2) No vehicle shall be parked at or upon any parking sites designated
hereinabove between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, unless it displays in the lower rear corner of its left
rear window a valid and current decal issued pursuant to the
provisions hereof.
(a) Decals shall be issued annually by the office of the Village
Clerk for the period of January 1 to December 31, upon
application thereof to the Village Clerk during regular business
hours and only upon display of a current and valid New Jersey
motor vehicle registration certificate showing the name and
the address of the applicant.
(b) Applications for parking decals shall be submitted on or before
December 1 of the prior year. In the event the number of
applications exceeds the number of delineated spaces
available, the Village Clerk shall select by blind lottery the
applicants that will be issued decals. Unsuccessful applicants
are welcomed to try again the following year.
(c) For the originating year of this subsection, 2005, upon
adoption by the Village Council, the Village Clerk will accept
applications for on-street commuter parking decals for the
period between the date of adoption and the 15th of the second
month after said date. Decals will be then issued by the first of
the following month in the manner described in Subsection
D(2)(b) above. The cost of the decal will be prorated to the time
remaining in the year according to the annual fee as set in
Subsection D(2)(g).
(d) Such decal shall be issued only to the registered owner of the
motor vehicle and shall be nontransferable, provided that a
decal may be transferred during the period for which it is valid
to a new or other motor vehicle purchased by the applicant on
the sale or transfer of the original vehicle. In case of any such
sale or transfer, the owner shall remove the decal and supply
evidence of same to the Village Clerk in order to obtain a new
decal.
(e) All decals shall have written thereon "Village of Ridgewood
Commuter Parking Permit," together with the number of the
decal, the motor vehicle registration number, the date issued,
and the year the permit shall be valid for.
(f) The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all decals issued by
number, date of issuance, name and address of person to whom
§ 265-33 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-33
254:1098
issued, motor vehicle registration number, make, model, color
and year of motor vehicle manufacture for which issued.
(g) The annual fee for the on-street commuter parking decal shall
be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
(3) The Village Manager shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in
and around the parking site hereinabove designated, indicating
such parking is restricted to vehicles with the appropriate decals
only.
(4) The graduated fine schedule set forth in § 265-47C of this chapter
shall be applied to violations of this subsection.
E. Off-street nonmetered parking sites. [Amended 2-11-2009 by Ord.
No. 3164]
(1) Parking at the following sites shall be allowed by permit only:
Name of Street Location
Corsa Terrace Parking lot adjacent to Pease
Library
(2) No vehicle shall be parked at or upon any of the six parking spaces
designated at the location stated above during the hours of 5:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, unless a decal is
displayed in the lower corner of the left rear window. Said decal
must be valid and current, issued pursuant to the provisions hereof.
(a) Said decal shall be issued only to the owner of the motor
vehicle and shall not be transferable, provided that a decal may
be transferred during the period of validity to a new or other
vehicle purchased or leased by the permit owner on the sale or
transfer of the original vehicle. The owner shall supply
evidence of such sale or transfer of the original vehicle to the
Director or appointed designee of the Ridgewood Public
Library that satisfies the proof of this sale or transfer.
(b) Any and all decals shall bear the words "Village of Ridgewood
Parking Permit" together with a decal number, the motor
vehicle registration number, the date of issue and the date of
expiration.
(c) Decals for parking at the above-stated location shall be issued
to Ridgewood residents only who have been awarded same by
bid and enter into and execute a lease agreement with the
Ridgewood Public Library authorizing the receipt of said decal
and the authority to park at the above-stated location.
(3) The Village Manager shall cause the appropriate signs to be
erected in and around the subject off-street parking spaces,
§ 265-33 TAXATION § 265-33
254:1099
indicating such parking is restricted to vehicles with such decals
only.
F. Off-street nonmetered permit parking sites for motorized two-wheeled
vehicles. [Added 8-11-2010 by Ord. No. 3258; 1-15-2019 by Ord.
No. 3768]
(1) Parking at the following sites shall be allowed by annual permit or
daily payment only during the time periods stated.
Name of Parking Lot Location
Garber Square Train Station Lot The 5 motorized two-wheeled
vehicle parking spaces in the
northwest corner of lot by the
retaining wall
Route 17 Park and Ride The 5 motorized two-wheeled
vehicle parking spaces in the
easternmost row of parking
spaces not designated for
handicap permit parking
nearest to the bicycle racks
(2) No motorized two wheeled vehicle shall be parked at or upon any of
the parking spaces designated at the locations stated above during
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
unless an annual permit is displayed upon the two-wheeled
motorized vehicle, issued by the Village of Ridgewood on an annual
basis or payment is made as described below. Said annual parking
permit must be valid and current, issued pursuant to the provisions
hereof.
(a) Said parking permit shall be issued only to the owner of the
motorized two-wheeled vehicle and shall not be transferable,
provided that the parking permit may be transferred during
the period of validity to another motorized two-wheeled vehicle
purchased or leased by the permit owner/holder upon the sale
or transfer of the original vehicle. The owner/permit holder
shall supply evidence of such sale or transfer of the original
vehicle to the Village of Ridgewood that satisfied the proof of
this sale or transfer.
(b) All permits shall bear the words "Village of Ridgewood
parking" together with a permit number, the motor vehicle
license plate number, the year the permit is valid for.
(c) Annual permits for parking at the train station location shall be
issued to Village of Ridgewood residents only on a first-come,
first-served basis for a maximum of five permits per year.
§ 265-33 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-33
254:1100
(d) Annual permits for parking at the Route 17 Park and Ride
location shall be on a first-come, first-served basis for a
maximum of five permits per year.
(e) For the purposes of this subsection, a motorized two-wheeled
vehicle shall be any vehicle registered for legal use upon
Village streets with no more than two wheels.
(f) In lieu of use of an annual permit, a motorized two-wheeled
vehicle may park in any of the designated spaces only upon
payment for daily use, with designated fees, through the
multispace meter (kiosk) or payment of such fees by means of a
wireless cellular communication device through a designated
vendor authorized by the Village of Ridgewood or a valid
parking permit only. Payment for parking shall only be for the
hours of operation specified and on the days indicated as
established by the Village Council.
(3) The Village Manager shall cause the appropriate signs to be
erected in and around the subject off-street nonmetered permit
parking spot, indicating such parking is restricted to motorized
two-wheeled vehicles with the described permits only.
(4) The graduated fine schedule set forth in § 265-47C of this chapter
shall be applied to violations of this subsection.
G. Ridgewood resident daily parking pass. [Added 3-25-2015 by Ord.
No. 3466]
(1) The Ridgewood resident daily parking pass is available to Village
residents that display the free annual resident sticker on their
vehicles. The pass shall entitle the resident to park his/her vehicle
in any available delineated parking space, in any available Village
parking lot. Any pass purchased online shall be displayed on the
vehicle dashboard while the vehicle is parked. The purchase of a
daily pass does not guarantee the purchaser a parking space in any
parking lot.
(2) Residents shall also have the option of paying for a daily parking
permit by means of a wireless cellular communication device
through a designated vendor authorized and approved by the
Village of Ridgewood, including any and all applicable fees.
(3) Fees shall be as set forth in § 145-6.
H. Hudson Street Parking Lot parking permit. [Added 2-13-2019 by Ord.
No. 3702]
(1) Hudson Street Parking Lot parking permit. Users of these permits
shall not be required to deposit any meter fee or make payment via
a wireless cellular communication device through a designated
vendor authorized and approved by the village of Ridgewood
§ 265-33 TAXATION § 265-33
254:1101
during the time in which the permit holder occupies a marked
parking stall location at the Hudson Street Parking Lot. Permit
placards shall be valid any time parking meter rates are in effect in
the Hudson Street metered parking lot only.
(2) Hudson Street Parking Lot parking permit placards shall be issued
for a twelve-month period (annual basis), in accordance with the
fee as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees. Hudson Street Parking Lot
parking permit placards will be prorated by full months
commencing on the first day of the first month subsequent to the
effective date of this chapter upon application therefor to the
Village of Ridgewood Department of Finance and upon payment of
the fee established herein.
(a) Placards shall be displayed with the serial number on it (front
of the placard) facing outward toward the windshield. Placards
shall be readily visible to Village Parking Enforcement Officers.
Placards must be hung on the rear view mirror support (but
must be removed before the vehicle is in transit).
(3) All Hudson Street Parking Lot parking permit placards shall have
written thereon "Village of Ridgewood - Hudson Street Parking Lot
only" together with the number of the placard.
(4) The Department of Finance shall keep a record of all placards
issued by number, date of issuance, name and address of person to
whom issued, license plate numbers and make, model, color and
year of the motor vehicles, limited to three vehicles per applicant
for a placard, for which the placard will be used.
(5) The Village Manager shall cause appropriate signs to be erected in
and around the Hudson Street Parking Lot indicating that the
parking lot shall be for use only by holders of a Hudson Street
Parking Lot permit only. The signs shall include a statement that
violators shall be subject to removal by towing.
(6) The Hudson Street Parking Lot parking permit placards shall not
be valid for any on-street parking sites designed by the Village at
any time. The Hudson Street Parking Lot parking permit shall be
valid for use in other Village parking lots on Saturdays only.
(7) During the construction of the Hudson Street Parking Garage,
when the Hudson Street lot will be unavailable to park in, the
Hudson Street Parking Lot parking permit shall entitle the holder
to utilize the ridesharing agreement program to provide
transportation from the permit holder's registered home address to
the train station or Van Neste Square Bus Station in the morning
and back home to the registered address again in the evening at no
additional cost to the Hudson Street Parking Lot parking permit
holder.
§ 265-33 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-33
254:1102
(8) The graduated fine schedule set forth in § 265-47E of this chapter
shall be applicable to violations of this section.
(9) Misuse, abuse, placard falsification, placard fraud, mutilation of the
placard so as to render it illegible, use of an expired placard, shall
be deemed violations as set forth in § 265-47E.
(10) Replacement of a lost or missing placard shall incur a fee of $100
for a replacement placard. A placard holder shall be permitted no
more than two replacements per calendar year.
(11) The ridesharing agreement program shall operate Monday through
Friday during the construction of the parking garage. Upon
completion of the parking garage or December 31, 2020, whichever
comes first, the ridesharing agreement program shall cease
operations.
(12) Hudson Street Parking Lot parking permits shall be valid for the
calendar year for which they were purchased. All Hudson Street
Parking Lot parking permits expire on December 31 of the year.
Utilization of the ridesharing agreement program requires the user
to have a valid Hudson Street Parking Lot permit.
(13) Hudson Street Parking Lot/Garage premium parking permit. Users
of these permits shall be permitted to park at the train station until
11:59 p.m. on December 31, 2019. Permit holders shall be
permitted to use the first 12 parking spaces along the railroad
tracks when one first enters the Station Plaza Lot. The designation
for the afore-described Hudson Street Parking Lot/Garage
premium parking permit parking space users shall lapse at 11:59
p.m. on December 31, 2019. [Added 8-7-2019 by Ord. No. 3728;
amended 9-4-2019 by Ord. No. 3744]
I. Village employee parking. [Added 1-8-2020 by Ord. No. 3766]
(1) Parking at the following location(s), between 5:00 a.m. and 1:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, shall be allowed by permit only:
Name of Street Side Location
Chestnut Street West From the south curb
line of Douglas Place
a distance of 500 feet
southward
(2) No vehicle shall be parked at or upon any parking location
designated hereinabove between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 1:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, unless it displays in the lower rear
corner of its left window a valid and current decal issued pursuant
to the provisions hereof.
(a) Decals shall be issued to full- and part-time Village employees,
upon application thereof to the Village Clerk during regular
§ 265-33 TAXATION § 265-33
254:1103
§ 265-34. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to:
business hours and only upon the display of a current and valid
motor vehicle registration certificate for the vehicle desired to
be permitted by the Village employee.
(b) Such decal shall be issued only to a Village employee's motor
vehicle utilized for transportation to work and shall be
nontransferable, unless the Village employee replaces a
permitted motor vehicle.
(c) Only one decal per Village employee.
(d) All decals shall have written upon them "Village of Ridgewood
employee parking permit," together with the number of the
decal, the motor vehicle registration number, and the date
issued.
(e) The Village Clerk shall keep a record of all decals issued by
number, date of issuance, name and address of person to whom
issued, motor vehicle registration number, make, model, color,
and year of the motor vehicle for which issued.
A. Park, stop or stand a vehicle in or upon any Village-designated parking
space without either depositing the requisite coins established in the
parking meter or making payment of such funds by means of a wireless
cellular communication device through a designated vendor authorized
and approved by the Village of Ridgewood for the fee for the duration of
parking time desired except on the holidays hereinabove mentioned.
[Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3464]
B. Park overtime. It shall be a separate and distinct offense, subject to the
penalty provisions as hereinafter provided, to park overtime in or upon
any metered parking place for each period of time equivalent to the
maximum allowed by the parking meter therefor.
C. Exceeding parking duration. [Amended 12-14-2016 by Ord. No.
3566]
(1) Parking a vehicle for a duration (time period) greater than the
stated duration for that described parking location and zone in
accordance with § 265-29.
(2) Parking a vehicle for a duration (time period) greater than the
stated duration for an applicable payment zone covered by a
wireless cellular communication device through a designated
vendor authorized and approved by the Village of Ridgewood.
D. Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any coins,
substitute or slug other than legal tender of the United States of
America.
§ 265-33 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-34
254:1104
E. Deface, injure, tamper with or mar any parking meter.
F. Park, stand or stop a vehicle in such a position that the same shall not
be entirely within the lines, marking or boundaries of a parking place or
space. [Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3464]
G. Park, stand or stop a vehicle in any marked parking place in a position
other than facing inward therefor. [Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No.
3464]
H. Park, stand or stop a vehicle in or upon any metered parking space
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., prevailing time.
§ 265-34 TAXATION § 265-34
254:1105

ARTICLE V
Public Parking Lots
§ 265-35. Parking within spaces. [Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No.
3464]
In any public parking lot or marked and designated on-street parking zones,
now existing or which shall hereafter exist in the Village, no vehicle shall be
parked or allowed to stand except within the lines specifically marked for
such purpose therein.
§ 265-36. Parking prohibited certain hours. [Amended 8-10-1999 by
Ord. No. 2675; 6-9-2004 by Ord. No. 2883; 6-8-2011 by Ord. No.
3299]
A. Except as hereinafter provided in Subsection B, no vehicle shall be
parked or allowed to remain in any public parking lot between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. Permit required overnight parking shall be permitted only between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in the Prospect Street Parking Lot
bounded by Van Neste Square, Dayton Street, and Prospect Street; in
the Hudson Street Parking Lot bounded by Hudson Street and South
Broad Street; in the Wilsey Square parking site bounded by the New
Jersey Transit Railroad and Wilsey Square, and in the Cottage Place
Parking Lot bounded by Cottage Place and East Ridgewood Avenue, and
in those locations to be designated from time to time by the Director of
Public Works or his/her authorized representative. [Amended
12-14-2011 by Ord. No. 3320]
(1) Users will be limited to residents of the Village of Ridgewood who
purchase permits for this privilege on a quarterly basis, as set forth
in Chapter 145, Fees, from the Director of Finance.
(2) This privilege is limited to passenger cars, and the Village of
Ridgewood disclaims any responsibility for damage to vehicles or
contents, including theft or vandalism.
(3) All cars must be removed at the expiration of the permitted parking
period and when the site is posted “No Parking” for snow removal
purposes. Owners of vehicles towed shall pay all costs for removal
and storage.
C. No person, except Village of Ridgewood employees with valid window
stickers, shall park or permit to stand a vehicle between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, along and in the
yellow lined stalls located on the easterly side of the Village Hall and
Village Library parking lot designated as Block 3607, Lots 42 and 43.
Excepted from this restriction are those designated as handicapped
areas. The restricted parking stalls are indicated on the attached map
as blue stalls.185
§ 265-35 TAXATION § 265-37
254:1107
§ 265-37. Installation of parking meters; fixing of fees. [Amended
3-14-2001 by Ord. No. 2731; 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 3203; 9-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3212; 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3295]
§ 265-38. Deposit of money required; overtime parking prohibited.
When any vehicle shall be parked in any space in which, or adjacent to
which, a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon
entering the parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited,
in such parking meter, the amount of money required for the space and
period of time in which such vehicle shall be parked as shown upon such
parking meter. Upon the making of such deposit in such parking meter, the
parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of
time prescribed upon the parking meter. If such vehicle shall remain parked
in any such parking space, and the parking meter shall by its dial and
pointer indicate that the vehicle has remained beyond the period of time
permitted, then such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and
beyond the period permitted for such space and such overtime parking shall
be a violation of this article and punishable as set forth in § 265-47 hereof.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name
of such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period established for
such parking meter space.
§ 265-39. Increasing parking time prohibited. [Amended 3-11-2015
by Ord. No. 3464]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person to deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter a coin or coins
or the payment of funds by means of a wireless cellular communication
device through a designated vendor authorized and approved by the Village
of Ridgewood for the purposes of increasing or extending the parking time
of any vehicle beyond the maximum period prescribed for the parking
spaces on which such vehicle has been parked, and every such violation
shall be punishable as set forth in § 265-47.
§ 265-40. Defacing or injuring parking meters prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or
A. In any public parking place, parking lots, streets, or any public right-ofway,
parking meters may be installed at the direction of the Village
Council for the purpose of regulating the length of time during which
vehicle may be parked therein. The fee or charge for parking shall be
fixed by the Village Council for the designated locations.
B. The fees for parking shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
185. Editor's Note: Said map is available in the Village offices.
§ 265-37 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-40
254:1108
impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article.
§ 265-41. Enforcement; collection of money deposited in meters;
disposition.
§ 265-42. Reserved parking spaces.
A. The Village Manager shall designate such officers of the Police
Department of the Village as he may deem necessary to enforce the
provisions of this article and shall further provide for the collection of
the money deposited in such meters and the delivery of such sums,
together with such record as may be necessary, to the Clerk of the
Village, to be used for the payment of such meters, the cost of
enforcement, supervision and the collection thereof, and for such uses
and purposes as may be directed by the Manager.
B. The deposits required to be made in the parking meters are hereby
levied and assessed as fees to the Village to provide for the proper
regulation and control of such public parking spaces, the cost of
purchase and maintenance of such parking meters and of the
supervision, protection, inspection, operation and control thereof.
A. Parking reserved for physically handicapped drivers.
(1) The following locations are hereby designated as restricted parking
spaces for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-205, when using a motor vehicle on
which is displayed a certificate for which a special vehicle
identification card has been issued, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206.
All spaces indicated hereby shall be painted and signed in
accordance with the applicable regulations issued from time to
time by the State of New Jersey Department of Transportation.
(a) Two spaces in the most northerly portion of the parking area of
Prospect Street/Van Neste Square/Dayton Street.
(b) Two spaces in the most westerly portion of the parking area at
Cottage Place.
(c) Two spaces in the most easterly portion of the parking area on
North Walnut Street.
(d) Two spaces in the most southerly portion of the parking area
on the northeast corner of Hudson Street and South Broad
Street.
(e) One space along the north side of the entrance driveway, one
space along the south side of the entrance driveway, and one
space in the most southerly portion of the public parking area
§ 265-40 TAXATION § 265-42
254:1109
accessed from Chestnut Street, known as the "Chestnut Street
Lot." [Amended 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3226]
(f) Five spaces at the northwest corner of the Library/Village Hall
Parking Lot. [Amended 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2948]
(g) Two spaces at the southeasterly corner of the parking lot
adjacent to the access ramp to the field walking path.
[Amended 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2948]
(h) (Reserved186)
(i) One space located immediately north of the entrance to
Veterans Field from the parking area at the rear of the Village
Hall at the Memorial Band Shell.
(j) Two spaces at the most southwesterly portion of the parking
area of Graydon Park.
(k) One space on the east side of Morningside Road, as follows:
from the northerly side at California Street to Glenwood Road,
except for one handicapped parking space located at 267.5 feet
north of the intersection of the northerly curbline of California
Street extended to meet the easterly curbline extended of
Morningside Road extended.
(l) One space on the northerly side of Passaic Street commencing
232 feet easterly from the intersection of the northerly side of
Passaic Street with the easterly side of south Broad Street and
running from that point the full length of a required physically
handicapped parking space.
(m) One space on the northerly side of Fairmount Road
commencing 116 feet east from the easterly curbline,
extended, of California Street and running from that point the
full length of a required physically handicapped parking space.
(n) One space on the southerly side of Passaic Street commencing
268 feet easterly from the intersection of the southerly side of
Passaic Street with the easterly side of South Broad Street and
running from that point the full length of a required physically
handicapped parking space. [Added 3-11-1997 by Ord. No.
2594]
(o) One space on the easterly side of North Murray Avenue
commencing 35 feet north of the north side curbline of West
Ridgewood Avenue and running from that point north the full
length of a required physically handicap parking space.
[Added 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 2872]
186. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1)(h), regarding a space adjacent to the rear of the
Village Hall Building, was repealed 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2948.
§ 265-42 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-42
254:1110
(p) One space on the westerly side of Bogert Avenue, commencing
474 linear feet north of the north curbline of Meadowbrook
Avenue at its intersection with Bogert Avenue, and running
from that point north the full length required of a physically
handicapped parking space. [Added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2900]
(q) One space on the easterly side of Morningside Road,
commencing 284 linear feet north of the north curbline of
California Street at its intersection with Morningside Road,
and running from that point north the full length required of a
physically handicapped parking space. [Added 10-13-2004
by Ord. No. 2900]
(r) One space on the southerly side of Dayton Street, nearest to
the intersection with Prospect Street. [Added 10-13-2004 by
Ord. No. 2900]
(s) One space on the westerly side of the angle parking area of
Wilsey Square nearest to its intersection with the easternmost
extension of West Ridgewood Avenue. [Added 10-13-2004 by
Ord. No. 2900]
(t) One space, along the western side of parking in the municipal
parking lot at the terminus of East Ridgewood Avenue by Broad
Street; space to be the fifth space south of the north edge of
the parking lot. [Added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2900]
(u) Station Plaza parking lot, two spaces at the southern terminus
of the easterly side of the ninety-degree angle parking north of
the Train Station. [Added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2900]
(v) Library Place on street parking. The fourth or westernmost
parking space on the north side of Library Place from its
intersection with Garber Square. [Added 9-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 3210]
(2) Any person parking a motor vehicle in a parking space restricted
for use to persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification cards or wheelchair symbol license plates by the
Division of Motor Vehicles without such a special vehicle
identification card or wheelchair symbol license plate, shall be
liable to a fine of $250 for the first offense and, for subsequent
offenses, a fine of at least $250 and up to 90 days' community
service on such terms and in such form as the court shall deem
appropriate, or any combination thereof. This penalty provision
shall apply to vehicles parked on public or private property.
[Amended 10-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2852]
B. Parking reserved for taxi firm. The following locations are hereby
designated as restricted parking spaces for use by a taxi company that
has leased the spaces from the Village of Ridgewood as authorized by
§ 265-42 TAXATION § 265-42
254:1111
the Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood: [Amended 1-25-2017
by Ord. No. 3575]
(1) Two spaces along the west side curb of North Broad Street, north
of the Taxi Stand building, as designated by the Village Council.
C. Spaces designated for municipal parking.187 The eight most
northwesterly parking spaces located in the Cottage Place Parking Lot
which are currently regulated by parking meters shall hereinafter be
limited to use by vehicles registered with MG license plates at such
times as the parking meters otherwise regulating said parking spaces
are bagged or otherwise designated. When said spaces are so bagged
or designated, they shall not be subject to parking fees. The Village
Manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish the manner of
bagging or other designation and to establish the days and hours when
said parking spaces are restricted to municipal purpose use.
D. Election Day only parking reserved for physically handicapped drivers.
[Added 10-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2907]
(1) The following locations are hereby designated as restricted parking
spaces for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-205, when using a motor vehicle on
which is displayed a certificate for which a special vehicle
identification card has been issued, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206.
All spaces indicated hereby shall be signed in accordance with the
applicable regulations issued from time to time by the State of New
Jersey Department of Transportation. A properly placarded and
identified vehicle, as described above, shall be permitted to park no
more than 20 minutes for the purpose of voting during the
following designated elections: Board of Education Election, third
Tuesday in April; Municipal Election, second Tuesday in May, evennumbered
years; Primary Elections, first Tuesday after first
Monday in June; General Election, first Tuesday after first Monday
in November; in addition, any special referendums or elections the
Village of Ridgewood or the Board of Education of Ridgewood may
so designate at any time of the year.
(a) One space on the easterly side of North Van Dien Avenue,
commencing 87 linear feet south of the south curbline of East
Glen Avenue at its intersection with North Van Dien Avenue,
and running from that point south for a distance of 30 linear
feet.
E. Designated spaces for parking at the Village Hall/Police Annex.188 The
intent of the following subsection is to regulate parking at the Village
Hall/Library facility so as to provide residents, patrons, and persons
187. Editor's Note: See also Subsection E.
188. Editor's Note: See also Subsection C.
§ 265-42 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-42
254:1112
having business with the Village the ability to conveniently do so.
[Added 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2948; amended 7-18-2007 by Ord.
No. 3067; 9-19-2007 by Ord. No. 3076; 12-12-2007 by Ord. No.
3089; 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 3613]
(1) Police Department lot: parking area on the north side of the Village
Hall/Police Annex.
(a) Lot east of north parking area entrance driveway: Police
Department vehicles only, 17 spaces.
(b) Lot west of north parking area entrance driveway: spaces
designated only for Village Hall employees, Mayor and Village
Council members; total of 31 spaces.
(2) Library/Village Hall parking lot.
(a) Designated playground parking spaces: The six northerly-most
spaces along Veterans Field shall be designated for patrons of
the playground only between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:30
p.m., Monday through Saturday.
(b) Designated Library patron parking spaces: The six parking
spaces, three either side bracketing the concrete walkway
bisecting the main parking lot closest to the Library, shall be
designated for Library patrons between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m., all days.
(c) Designated Village Hall patron parking spaces: [Amended
3-14-2018 by Ord. No. 3633]
[1] The four head-on parking spaces (two on two) immediately
south of the northerly most concrete landscape island
fronting the center aisle of double spaces along the access
roadway at the Village Hall entrance shall be designated
for Village Hall patrons only with a one-hour use duration,
having business in Village Hall between the hours of 8:30
a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday.
[2] The two parking spaces by the 90° landscaped island and
fire hydrant along the access road across from the Village
Hall doorway shall be designated for Village Hall patrons
only with a one-hour use duration, having business in
Village Hall between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
(d) (Reserved)189
(e) The nondesignated 137 marked parking spaces south of the
90° turn into the Village Hall parking lot from the North Maple
189. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(2)(d), Designated motorcycle parking space, was
repealed 3-14-2018 by Ord. No. 3633.
§ 265-42 TAXATION § 265-42
254:1113
Avenue entrance shall be designated as reserved parking
spaces for patrons, staff and visitors to Village Hall, the
Library, the Kasschau Shell, and the playground between the
hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(f) There shall be no parking for buses or vans transporting four
or more individuals participating in an athletic or sporting
event at Veterans Field. All such vehicles shall drop off
participants and park in the Graydon South parking lot.
(g) Only Library employees shall park in the 15 spaces adjacent to
the southern boundary of the Village Hall/Library parking lot.
(h) All non-Police Department municipal-license-plate-bearing
vehicles shall only park in the 36 spaces adjacent to Veterans
Field from the 13th northerly-most parking space along
Veterans Field southward to the two handicapped parking
spaces.
(i) Designated Parking Enforcement vehicle parking spaces: The
seventh and eight northerly-most spaces along Veterans Field
shall be designated for the Village's Parking Enforcement
vehicles between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m., Monday
through Saturday.
F. Parking reserved for the first-floor tenant of the Pease Library Building.
The following location is hereby designated as a restricted parking
space for use by the legal first-floor tenant of the Pease Library Building
only, as authorized by the Village Council of the Village of Ridgewood:
[Added 9-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3210]
(1) The easternmost parking space on the north side of the eastbound
direction of Library Place as it approaches Garber Square. The
space shall be unmetered and placarded accordingly.
G. Parking reserved for Central Dispatch Center, located in the basement
of Pease Library. The following location is hereby designated as
restricted parking space for use by properly identified employees or
staff of Central Dispatch Center only, as authorized by the Village
Council of the Village of Ridgewood: [Added 9-9-2009 by Ord. No.
3210]
(1) The northernmost two parking spaces along the west side of
Library Place on its approach to the turn toward Garber Square.
The two spaces shall be unmetered and placarded accordingly.
H. Portions of public parking lots designated for refuse enclosure. The
following locations in the designated Village of Ridgewood owned and
operated parking lots are only for the placement of refuse dumpsters
that have remitted to the Village the annual fee as set forth in Chapter
145, Fees. [Added 9-9-2009 by Ord. No. 3213]
§ 265-42 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-42
254:1114
(1) Chestnut Street Lot (also known as Block 3805, Lot 23).
(a) Refuse enclosure users. Only entities that have paid the annual
dumpster permit fee, as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, shall be
permitted to place and have serviced by their vendor of choice
dumpsters, refuse containers, recycling bins, waste oil
collection containers, and any other container system utilized
for the efficient, legal, and health code complaint means of
disposing of waste from commercial establishments.
(b) In the Chestnut Street Lot, dumpsters may only be placed in
the northeast corner of the lot atop the fence-enclosed
concrete pad bracketed by parking space Nos. 29 and 30.
(c) Dumpsters are not permitted in any other portion of the
parking lot.
I. Designated spaces for Pease Library. [Added 4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
3245]
(1) Pease Library Off-street Parking Lot. The parking area on the east
side of the Pease Library Building fronting Garber Square shall be
reserved for tenants occupying Pease Library under a valid
executed lease agreement and their visitors.
(a) Tenants and visitors only: nine spaces.
(b) Tenants and visitors, handicap accessible only: one space.
J. Designated parking spaces at the train station. The intent of the
following subsection is to provide designated parking spaces at the
train station for the station's New Jersey transit representative and the
operator of the station concession stand. [Added 10-7-2019 by Ord.
No. 3749]
(1) Train station parking lot (Station Plaza).
(a) Designated New Jersey Transit representative parking space:
one head-on parking space at the southwest corner of the
station building, signed as such, for use between the hours of
4:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(b) Designated concession stand/social services representative
parking space: one head-on parking space at the southwest
corner of the station building adjacent to the New Jersey
Transit parking space between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 6:30
p.m., Monday through Friday.
§ 265-42 TAXATION § 265-42
254:1115

ARTICLE VI
Emergency No Parking
§ 265-43. Designation of emergency no-parking areas. [Amended
3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3461]
§ 265-44. Posting of signs.
A. Whenever an emergency condition or situation has developed or is to
occur in the Village, as determined by the Village Manager in
consultation with the Village Office of Emergency Management and the
Village Chief of Police, the Village Manager shall have the sole authority
to designate "No Parking Areas." Such designation can be applicable
Village-wide or to specific streets or areas. When the "No Parking
Areas" are designated by the Village Manager, they shall mean that no
vehicle shall be parked on either side of any such street or parts thereof
until such time the emergency condition is deemed ended. Duration of
the "No Parking Areas" shall be determined by the conditions that
warranted the designation.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect until after the
emergency condition or situation has ceased. In the event of a snow or
ice incident, the parking prohibitions shall remain in effect until the
streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent that vehicle
parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
C. Any person in violation of the provisions of § 265-43, of Article VI,
Designation of emergency no-parking areas, shall be liable to the
following penalties, in addition to having his/her vehicle being towed:
Number of Violations per Calendar
Year Penalty for Each Violation
1 to 5 $100
6 to 10 $150
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or parts of streets where temporary emergency no-parking signs
are displayed. The Chief of Police, or in his absence the ranking police
officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting
of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 265-43 TAXATION § 265-45
254:1117
§ 265-45. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 265-46. Effectiveness of article. [Amended 3-11-2015 by Ord. No.
3464]
The effectiveness of this article is contingent upon signs being erected as
required by law, however that does not relieve a person parking a vehicle
from paying the required parking fee via one of the approved methods.
§ 265-45 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-46
254:1118
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 265-47. Violations and penalties.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by statute, every person in
violation of a provision of this chapter shall be liable to a penalty of not
more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both. [Amended 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3295]
B. Violation of certain sections. [Amended 3-10-2004 by Ord. No. 2869;
6-21-2006 by Ord. No. 3003; 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3295;
9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3542]
(1) Any person in violation of §§ 265-23; 265-29; 265-32; 265-33;
265-34A, B, D, E, F, G and H; 265-38; 265-48; and 265-80 of this
chapter shall be liable to the following penalties: [Amended
1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 3575]
Number of Violations per
Calendar Year Penalty for Each Violation
1st through 5th ticket $25
6th through 10th ticket $50
11th through 20th ticket $75
Over 20 tickets $100
(2) Any person in violation of §§ 265-34C and 265-39 of this chapter
shall be liable to the following penalties:
Number of Violations per
Calendar Year Penalty for Each Violation
1st ticket $25
2nd through 5th ticket $50
6th through 10th ticket $75
11th through 20th ticket $100
Over 20 tickets $125
C. Certain parking violations. [Added 2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2925;
amended 4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 3245; 8-11-2010 by Ord. No.
3258]
(1) Any person in violation of the provisions of § 265-33, Subsection D,
On-street commuter parking sites, of this chapter shall be liable to
the following penalties: [Amended 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3295]
§ 265-47 TAXATION § 265-47
254:1119
§ 265-48. Removal of disabled or illegally parked vehicles.
[Amended 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 3575]
Number of Violations per
Calendar Year Penalty for Each Violation
1 to 5 $50
6 to 10 $75
11 to 15 $100
16 or more $125
(2) Any person convicted of a violation of Chapter 265-33, Subsection
F, "Off-street nonmetered permit parking sites for motorized twowheeled
vehicles, of this chapter shall be liable to the following
penalties:
Number of Convictions per
calendar year Penalty for each conviction
1 to 5 $50
6 to 10 $75
11 to 15 $100
16 or more $125
D. Any person, entity, or business in violation of § 265-42G, Portions of
public parking lots designated for refuse enclosure, of this chapter shall
be required to appear in court and be liable to the following penalties:
[Amended 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3295]
Number of Violations per
Calendar Year Penalty for Each Violation
1 to 5 $100
6 to 10 $200
11 to 15 $400
16 or more $500
E. Any person in violation of the provisions of § 265-33, Subsection C,
Unlimited prepaid parking, of this chapter shall be liable to the
following penalties: [Added 5-11-2011 by Ord. No. 3295]
Number of Violations per
Calendar Year Penalty for Each Violation
1 to 5 $100
6 to 10 $150
11 to 15 $200
16 or more $500
§ 265-47 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-48
254:1120
§ 265-49. Impoundment or immobilization of vehicles with
outstanding warrants.
A. Any vehicle upon any roadway in the Village of Ridgewood which is:
(1) Disabled to the extent that the operator cannot move it.
(2) Whose operator fails to move said vehicle from a roadway in the
Village of Ridgewood when instructed to do so by an officer of the
Village of Ridgewood Police Department.
(3) Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of the traffic
regulations prescribed by Title 39, Motor Vehicles and Traffic, of
the State of New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
(4) Any vehicle observed in violation of any of the provisions of Chapter
265, Vehicles and Traffic.
(5) Any vehicle observed to not have a valid registration sticker or
valid inspection sticker from the jurisdiction in which it was
registered.
(6) Determined to be a nuisance, a hazard to public safety, and a
menace to the public and to the proper regulation of traffic by a
Ridgewood Police Officer.
B. Upon any of the above determination, any police officer of the Village of
Ridgewood shall issue the appropriate violation(s) and provide for the
removal of such vehicle by a towing firm authorized to do business in
the Village of Ridgewood. The registered owner of the vehicle shall pay
all costs of the removal and storage of the vehicle, resulting from its
removal, before reclaiming possession of the vehicle.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 12 of the Parking Offenses
Adjudication Act (P.L. 1985, c. 14, N.J.S.A. 39:4-139.13), the Department
of Police of the Village of Ridgewood is hereby authorized to impound or
immobilize any vehicle found within the Village of Ridgewood in the
event that there is an outstanding warrant issued against the vehicle.
B. Except for vehicles owned by lessors who have complied with Section
4b(1) and (2) of the Parking Offenses Adjudication Act (N.J.S.A.
39:4-139.5), if the outstanding warrant or warrants are not paid by
midnight on the 30th day following the day on which the vehicle was
impounded or immobilized, the vehicle may be sold at a public auction.
The Department of Police shall give notice of the sale by certified mail
to the owner, if his name and address are known, and to the holder of
any security interest filed with the Director and by publication in a form
to be prescribed by the Director by one insertion, at least five days
before the date of the sale, in one or more newspapers published in this
state and circulating in the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 265-48 TAXATION § 265-49
254:1121
§ 265-50. Post-storage hearings for impounded vehicles.
C. At any time prior to the sale, the owner of the motor vehicle or other
person entitled to the motor vehicle may claim possession of the motor
vehicle upon payment of the reasonable costs of removal and storage of
the motor vehicle, any fine or penalty and court costs assessed against
him for a violation that gave rise to the impoundment or immobilization
of the motor vehicle and any outstanding warrants against the vehicle;
however, the owner-lessor of a motor vehicle who has complied with
Section 4b(1) and (2) of the Parking Offenses Adjudication Act (N.J.S.A.
39:4-139.5) shall be entitled to reclaim possession without payment and
the lessee shall be liable for any fine, penalty, court costs and
outstanding warrants against the vehicle.
D. Any proceeds obtained from the sale of a vehicle at public auction
pursuant to this section in excess of the amount owed to the Village for
the reasonable costs of removal and storage of the motor vehicle, any
fine or penalty and court costs assessed for any violation that gave rise
to the impoundment or immobilization of the vehicle and any
outstanding warrants against the vehicle shall be returned to the owner
of the vehicle, if his name and address are known.
E. The Village may enter into a contract with a public agency or private
organization for services to be rendered in the processing of parking
offenses under this section. Any contract entered into pursuant to this
section for processing services shall first be submitted to the Supreme
Court. Said contract shall describe the services to be provided and the
procedures to be used and shall be approved by the Supreme Court
prior to implementation.
A. Right to hearing. As to any vehicle impounded pursuant to the
Ridgewood Village Code or to state statute, by or at the request of the
Village of Ridgewood, its agents or employees, a person who has a legal
entitlement to possession of the vehicle has a right to a post-seizure
administrative hearing to determine whether there was probable cause
to impound the vehicle, if such person files a written demand with the
Village Manager of the Village of Ridgewood within 10 days after such
person has learned such vehicle has been impounded or within 10 days
after the mailing of the notice of stored vehicle, whichever occurs first.
The notice of stored vehicle shall be sent in the mail to the legal and
registered owner and to the garage where the vehicle is stored within
48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, after impounding and
storage of the vehicle.
B. Conduct of the hearing.
(1) A hearing shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by
the Village Manager within 48 hours of receipt of a written demand
therefor from the person seeking the hearing, unless such person
waives the right to a speedy hearing. Saturdays, Sundays and state
holidays are to be excluded from the calculation of the forty-eight-
§ 265-49 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-50
254:1122
hour period. The hearing officer shall be someone other than the
person who directed the impounding and storage of the vehicle.
The sole question before the hearing officer shall be whether there
was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. The phrase
"probable cause to impound" shall mean such a state of facts as
would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to believe that
there was sufficient breach of local, state or federal law to grant
legal authority for the removal of the vehicle.
(2) The hearing officer shall conduct the hearing in an informal
manner and shall not be bound by technical rules of evidence. The
person demanding the hearing shall carry the burden of
establishing that such person has the right to possession of the
vehicle. The Village shall carry the burden of establishing that
there was probable cause to impound the vehicle in question. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a
written decision. A copy of such decision shall be provided to the
person demanding the hearing and the registered owner of the
vehicle (if not the person requesting the hearing). The hearing
officer's decision in no way affects any criminal or motor vehicle
proceeding in connection with the impounding question and any
criminal or motor vehicle charges involved in such proceeding may
only be challenged in the appropriate court. The decision of the
hearing officer is final. Failure of the registered or legal owner or
his agent to request a hearing within the provisions of this section
or to attend a scheduled post-seizure hearing shall be deemed a
waiver of the right to such hearing.
C. Decisions of the hearing officers and their effect. The hearing officer
shall only determine that, as to the vehicle in issue, either there was
probable cause to impound the vehicle or there was no such probable
cause. In the event that the hearing officer determines that there was
no probable cause, the hearing officer shall prepare and date a
certificate of no probable cause, copies of which shall be given to the
possessor (owner or other person entitled to possession) of the vehicle
and the Village of Ridgewood. Upon receipt of the possessor's copy of
such certificate, the custodian, towing company, or such, of the vehicle
shall release the vehicle to its possessor. Upon a finding of no probable
cause, towing and storage fees shall be paid by the Village. If the
possessor fails to present such certificate to the person having custody
of the vehicle within 24 hours of its receipt, excluding such days when
the custodian of the vehicle is not open for business, the possessor shall
assume liability for all subsequent storage charges. Such certificate
shall advise the possessor of such requirement.
§ 265-50 TAXATION § 265-50
254:1123

ARTICLE VIII
Schedules
§ 265-51. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals. [Amended 11-12-1996
by Ord. No. 2585]
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-4, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
East Glen Avenue and Oak Street (Flashing Signal)
East Ridgewood Avenue and Brookside Avenue
East Ridgewood Avenue and North/South Maple Avenue
East Ridgewood Avenue and North/South Van Dien Avenue
Franklin Avenue and Oak Street
Grove Street and Prospect Street
Grove Street and South Pleasant Avenue
Linwood Avenue and North Van Dien Avenue
Linwood Avenue and Oak Street (flashing signal)
Linwood Avenue and Paramus Road
North Maple Avenue and East Glen Avenue
North Maple Avenue and Linwood Avenue
North Monroe Street and Morningside Road (flashing signal)
North Monroe Street and West Glen Avenue
South Maple Avenue and Prospect Street
South Maple Avenue, Spring Avenue and Union Street
Van Emburgh Avenue and East Glen Avenue
West Ridgewood Avenue, Wilsey Square and Garber Square
West Ridgewood Avenue and North/South Monroe Street
§ 265-52. Schedule II: Midblock Crosswalks.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-5, midblock crosswalks are
hereby established on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
Bogert Avenue [Added
10-13-2004 by Ord. No. 2901;
repealed 8-8-2012 by Ord. No.
3352]
Godwin Avenue At a point 235 feet west of Wilsey
Square
§ 265-51 TAXATION § 265-52
254:1125
Name of Street Location
Heermance Place [Added
10-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2757]
At a point 525 feet north of East
Ridgewood Avenue
Linwood Avenue At a point 396 feet west of Northern
Parkway
North Irving Street [Added
8-8-2001 by Ord. No. 2748]
At a point 128 feet north of Warren
Place
North Maple Avenue At a point 300 feet north of Marshall
Street
Passaic Street At a point 232 feet east of its
intersection with South Broad Street
South Hillside Place [Added
11-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3621]
At a point 195 feet west of South
Monroe Street
South Pleasant Avenue [Added
5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 2630]
At a point 420 feet south of East
Ridgewood Avenue
West Ridgewood Avenue [Added
5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 2998]
At a point 149 linear feet west of the
west curbline of Clinton Avenue at its
intersection with West Ridgewood
Avenue
§ 265-53. Schedule III: Speed Limits. [Amended 6-26-2012 by Ord.
No. 3344]
The speed limit on all streets and roads under the ownership of the Village
of Ridgewood shall be no more than 25 miles per hour at all times.
§ 265-54. Schedule IV: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-7, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Barnett Place North From First Street to a point 50 feet
south of the intersection of Barnett
Place and First Street
Gateway Road [Added
8-23-1999 by Ord. No.
2678; amended
2-16-2000 by Ord. No.
2686]
South From East Glen Avenue to Linwood
Avenue
§ 265-52 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-54
254:1126
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Heermance Place North From East Ridgewood Avenue to a
point 266 feet south from the
intersection of the east side of
Heermance Place with the south
side of Beverly Road
Hudson Street [Added
10-8-1996 by Ord. No.
2584]
West From Prospect Street to South
Broad Street
Leonard Place West From Woodside Avenue to South
Broad Street
Library Place North/East From West Ridgewood Avenue to
Garber Square
Morningside Road West From North Monroe Street to
Jackson Terrace
Passaic Street [Added
10-8-1996 by Ord. No.
2584]
East From South Broad Street to
Prospect Street
South Hillside Place South/East From West Ridgewood Avenue to
South Monroe Street
Spring Avenue East From Prospect Street to South
Maple Avenue
Stilwell Place [Added
6-25-1998 by Ord. No.
2637]
North From the Village of Ridgewood
municipal boundary with the
Borough of Glen Rock to South
Maple Avenue
Union Street North From South Maple Avenue to
Dayton Street
§ 265-55. Schedule V: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-8, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
California Street [Added
9-16-2015 by Ord. No.
3499]
Between Morningside Road and Heights Road
Chestnut Street [Added
8-12-2015 by Ord. No.
3485]
Between Franklin Avenue and East Ridgewood
Avenue
§ 265-54 TAXATION § 265-55
254:1127
Name of Street Location
Fairfield Avenue [Added
4-14-2010 by Ord. No.
3248]
Between East Glen Avenue and Meadowbrook
Avenue
Kenilworth Road [Added
6-8-2011 by Ord. No.
3298]
From East Ridgewood Avenue south to Spring
Avenue
Morningside Road
[Added 9-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 3499]
Between Phelps Road and Hamilton Road
North Broad Street Between Franklin Avenue and East Ridgewood
Avenue
Oak Street [Added
8-12-2015 by Ord. No.
3485]
Between Franklin Avenue and East Ridgewood
Avenue
Pomander Walk [Added
6-8-2016 by Ord. No.
3539]
From Godwin Avenue to end of street
Racetrack Road [Added
11-10-2010 by Ord.
No. 3269]
Between northbound Route 17 and West Saddle
River Road
South Pleasant Street
[Added 12-2013 by
Ord. No. 3269]
Between East Ridgewood Avenue and Spring
Avenue
Village Hall entrance
driveway [Added
10-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 3613]
From North Maple Avenue eastward to the 90°
turn
§ 265-56. Schedule VI: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-9, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
§ 265-55 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-56
254:1128
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
121 Franklin
Avenue
[Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3656]
East Left All Onto Franklin Avenue
Bedford Road
[Added
8-8-2012 by
Ord. No.
3352]
East Left 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday,
from
September 1 to
June 30
Morningside Road
Benjamin
Franklin
Middle School
drop-off
driveway
[Added
10-14-2015
by Ord. No.
3501]
North Left All East Glen Avenue
Chestnut
Street
South Left All East Ridgewood
Avenue
East
Ridgewood
Avenue
East Left All Chestnut Street
East
Ridgewood
Avenue
West Left All Prospect Street
Franklin
Avenue
[Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3656]
East Left All Into the driveway of
121 Franklin Avenue
Lake Avenue East Left All Godwin Avenue
Linwood
Avenue
West Right 4:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
Pershing Avenue
§ 265-56 TAXATION § 265-56
254:1129
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours At Intersection of
Linwood
Avenue
West Right 4:00 p.m. to
7:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday
Walthery Avenue
North Maple
Avenue
[Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3657]
South Left All Into the driveway of
305 East Ridgewood
Avenue
North Maple
Avenue
[Added
8-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
3657]
North Right All Into the driveway of
305 East Ridgewood
Avenue
Prospect Street North Left All East Ridgewood
Avenue
Ridgewood
High School
parking lot
(Block 3614,
Lot 1)
South Left All East Ridgewood
Avenue
Stop and Shop
exit [Added
9-16-2009 by
Ord. No.
3218]
North Left All Cottage Place
Van Neste
Square [Added
1-11-2017 by
Ord. No.
3571]
North Left All East Ridgewood
Avenue
West
Ridgewood
Avenue
[Added8-8-2012
by Ord. No.
3352]
East Left 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday,
from
September 1 to
June 30
North Hillside Place
§ 265-56 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-57
254:1130
§ 265-57. Schedule VII: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-10, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Hours Location
Brookside Avenue
[Added 12-9-2009
by Ord. No. 3232]
North 7:00 a.m. to
8:30 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday,
from
September 1 to
June 30
East Ridgewood
Avenue
East Glen Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
North Maple Avenue
East Ridgewood
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
North Maple Avenue
East Ridgewood
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
Pleasant Avenue
East Ridgewood
Avenue
Both 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
Van Dien Avenue
Franklin Avenue Both All North Maple Avenue
Franklin Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
Oak Street
Godwin Avenue Both All Lincoln Avenue
Grove Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
South Pleasant
Avenue
Lincoln Avenue Both All Godwin Avenue
Linwood Avenue East All North Van Dien
Avenue
Linwood Avenue East All Paramus Road
North Broad Street North All Franklin Avenue
North Maple Avenue Both All East Glen Avenue
§ 265-57 TAXATION § 265-57
254:1131
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Hours Location
North Maple Avenue South All East Ridgewood
Avenue
North Monroe Street Both 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
West Ridgewood
Avenue
North Pleasant
Avenue
South All Linwood Avenue
North Van Dien
Avenue
North All Linwood Avenue
Oak Street South 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
Franklin Avenue
Paramus Road North All Linwood Avenue
Paramus Road South All Linwood Avenue
Pleasant Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
East Ridgewood
Avenue
South Maple Avenue
[Amended
7-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 2832]
North All East Ridgewood
Avenue
South Maple Avenue North All Prospect Street
South Maple Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
Spring Avenue
South Maple Avenue South All Union Street
South Pleasant
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
Grove Street
South Pleasant
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
Spring Avenue
Spring Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
South Pleasant
Avenue
Spring Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
South Maple Avenue
Spring Avenue West All South Maple Avenue
§ 265-57 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-57
254:1132
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Hours Location
Van Dien Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
East Ridgewood
Avenue
West Ridgewood
Avenue
Both 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
weekdays
North Monroe Street
§ 265-58. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-11, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street, except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations.
Name of Street Limits
Dayton Street Between Prospect Street and South Maple
Avenue
Doremus Avenue [Amended
8-8-2001 by Ord. No.
2746]
Between Godwin Avenue and Ackerman
Avenue
East Ridgewood Avenue Between the westerly right-of-way of
Maple Avenue and the Erie railroad tracks
Fairfield Avenue [Added
11-28-2018 by Ord. No.
3677]
From East Glen Avenue to Franklin
Turnpike
Franklin Avenue Between a point 50 feet east of North
Maple Avenue and a point 50 feet west of
North Irving Street
Grove Street Between a point 50 feet east of Prospect
Street and the Village of Ridgewood -
Borough of Paramus line
Heights Road [Amended
8-8-2001 by Ord. No.
2746]
Between Avondale Road and California
Street.
Heights Road Between Madison Place and Crest Road
Heights Road [Amended
8-8-2001 by Ord. No.
2746]
Between West Glen Avenue and California
Street
Hillcrest Road Between a point 50 feet north of West Glen
Avenue and a point 50 feet east of North
Monroe Street
§ 265-57 TAXATION § 265-58
254:1133
Name of Street Limits
Kenilworth Road Between Grove Street and Spring Avenue
Linwood Avenue Between a point 50 feet east of Oak Street
and a point 50 feet west of North Maple
Avenue
Morningside Road Between Hamilton Road and North Monroe
Street
Morningside Road Between Hillcrest Road and Hamilton Road
Northern Parkway
[Amended 8-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 2746]
Between East Glen Avenue and Franklin
Turnpike
Northern Parkway Between Irving Street and Linwood Avenue
Northern Parkway Between Linwood Avenue and East Glen
Avenue
North Monroe Street
[Amended 8-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 2746]
Between West Glen Avenue and the
Ridgewood, Midland Park and Waldwick
corporate lines
North Monroe Street
[Amended 8-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 2746]
Between West Ridgewood Avenue and West
Glen Avenue.
North Pleasant Avenue
[Amended 8-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 2746]
Between East Ridgewood Avenue and
Linwood Avenue
North Pleasant Avenue Between Linwood Avenue and East Glen
Avenue
North Van Dien Avenue Between East Ridgewood Avenue and
Linwood Avenue
North Van Dien Avenue Between Linwood Avenue and Glen Avenue
Oak Street Between a point 50 feet south of Robinson
Lane and a point 50 feet north of Mastin
Place
Prospect Street Between a point 50 feet south of East
Ridgewood Avenue and a point 50 feet
west of South Maple Avenue
South Broad Street Between East Ridgewood Avenue and the
Ridgewood - Glen Rock corporate line
South Monroe Street
[Amended 8-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 2746]
Between Godwin Avenue and West
Ridgewood Avenue
§ 265-58 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-58
254:1134
Name of Street Limits
South Pleasant Avenue
[Amended 8-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 2746]
Between Grove Street and Spring Avenue
Walthery Avenue [Repealed
2-14-2007 by Ord. No.
3040]
Walthery Avenue Between Ridgewood Avenue and Linwood
Avenue
Washington Place Between South Monroe Street and West
Ridgewood Avenue
West Ridgewood Avenue Between the Village of Ridgewood -
Borough of Midland Park line and Wisley
Square
West Saddle River Road
[Amended 8-8-2001 by
Ord. No. 2746]
Between Route 17 and Racetrack Road
§ 265-59. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-12, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
A. Stop intersections.
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Avondale Road [Added
1-15-2014 by Ord. No.
3401]
West Belmont Road
Bellair Road [Added
12-13-2017 by Ord. No.
3624]
West West End Avenue
Belmont Road [Added
12-10-2014 by Ord. No.
3442]
North Hamilton Road
Belmont Road [Added
1-15-2014 by Ord. No.
3401]
South Bedford Road
Bogert Avenue Both Meadowbrook Avenue
Bryden Place [Added
1-15-2014 by Ord. No.
3401]
West Oak Street
§ 265-58 TAXATION § 265-59
254:1135
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Burnside Place [Added
1-15-2014 by Ord. No.
3401]
East Van Buren Street
California Street [Added
12-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3516]
East Fairmount Road
Cantrell Road East Highland Avenue
Cantrell Road [Added
12-13-2017 by Ord. No.
3624]
East West End Avenue
Cantrell Road [Added
12-10-2008 by Ord. No.
3160]
West Mountain Avenue
Claremont Road [Added
12-12-2018 by Ord. No.
3689]
North Cantrell Road
Claremont Road [Added
12-12-2018 by Ord. No.
3689]
South Cantrell Road
Cliff Street [Added
12-13-2017 by Ord. No.
3623]
North First Street
Colonial Road [Added
10-7-2019 by Ord. No.
3747]
East Collingwood Place
Colonial Road [Added
10-7-2019 by Ord. No.
3747]
West Collingwood Place
Colonial Road Both Hampton Place
Corella Court [Added
6-10-2015 by Ord. No.
3478]
East Stevens Avenue
Crest Road South Valley View Avenue
Dayton Street [Added
5-9-2007 by Ord. No.
3056]
East Hope Street
Dean Street [Added
8-8-2012 by Ord. No.
3352]
West South Broad Street
§ 265-59 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-59
254:1136
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Delaware Avenue [Added
5-9-2012 by Ord. No.
3338]
West South Pleasant Avenue
Dorchester Road [Added
5-9-2012 by Ord. No.
3338]
West South Pleasant Avenue
Douglas Place [Added
6-9-2004 by Ord. No.
2884]
West Chestnut Street
Exit driveway from
Habernickel Family Park
[Added 2-13-2013 by Ord.
No. 3371]
South Hillcrest Road
Fairmount Road [Added
12-12-2018 by Ord. No.
3690]
East Upper Boulevard
Fairway Road Both Hampton Place
Fairway Road [Added
10-7-2019 by Ord. No.
3747]
East Collingwood Place
Fairway Road [Added
10-7-2019 by Ord. No.
3747]
West Collingwood Place
Franklin Avenue Both North Irving Street
Glenwood Road [Added
1-15-2014 by Ord. No.
3401]
East Belmont Road
Glenwood Road [Added
7-12-2017 by Ord. No.
3601]
East Glenwood Road
Glenwood Road [Added
7-12-2017 by Ord. No.
3601]
East Upper Boulevard
Glenwood Road [Added
7-12-2017 by Ord. No.
3601]
West Upper Boulevard
Heights Road [Added
11-13-2013 by Ord. No.
3395]
North California Street
§ 265-59 TAXATION § 265-59
254:1137
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Heights Road [Added
8-13-2014 by Ord. No.
3427]
North Madison Place
Heights Road [Added
11-13-2013 by Ord. No.
3395]
South California Street
Heights Road [Added
8-13-2014 by Ord. No.
3427]
South Madison Place
Highland Avenue [Added
12-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3516]
North Gardner Road
Hope Street [Added
11-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3622]
Both Gilbert Street
Houston Lane Both Stevens Avenue
John Street Both Fairway Road
John Street [Added
9-16-2009 by Ord. No.
3216]
South Wyndemere Avenue
Katherine Road [Added
11-13-2013 by Ord. No.
3396]
South Bellair Road
Kenilworth Road Both Spring Avenue
Leroy Place [Added
12-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2810]
West South Broad Street
Libby Avenue [Added
10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
2715]
Both Meadowbrook Avenue
Meadowbrook Avenue Both Fairfield Avenue
Meadowbrook Avenue East North Van Dien Avenue
Melrose Place [Added
12-13-2017 by Ord. No.
3624]
West West End Avenue
McKinley Place Both Mountain Avenue
Morningside Road [Added
10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
3505]
Both Hamilton Road
§ 265-59 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-59
254:1138
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Morningside Road [Added
1-11-2012 by Ord. No.
3324]
West Jackson Terrace
Mountain Avenue [Added
9-16-2009 by Ord. No.
3216]
North Gardner Road
Mountain Avenue [Added
9-16-2009 by Ord. No.
3216]
South Knollwood Road
Northern Parkway, North
Irving Street, Overbrook
Road [Added 1-9-2002 by
Ord. No. 2770]
All All 3 approaches
Northern Parkway [Added
6-13-2001 by Ord. No.
2741; repealed 1-9-2002
by Ord. No. 2770]
North Irving Street [Added
6-13-2001 by Ord. No.
2741; repealed 1-9-2002
by Ord. No. 2770]
Orchard Place [Added
10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
2714]
West Demarest Street
Orchard Place [Added
10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
2714]
East Doremus Avenue
Overbrook Road [Added
6-13-2001 by Ord. No.
2741; repealed 1-9-2002
by Ord. No. 2770]
Parsons Road Both Hamilton Road
Pearsall Avenue [Added
10-25-2000 by Ord. No.
2715]
Both Meadowbrook Avenue
Robert Street [Added
5-9-2012 by Ord. No.
3338]
West South Pleasant Avenue
Robinson Lane Both Cottage Place
Robinson Lane Both North Walnut Street
§ 265-59 TAXATION § 265-59
254:1139
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Robinson Lane West Chestnut Street
Shelton Road [Added
11-9-2005 by Ord. No.
2958]
East Pershing Avenue
Sherman Place Both Washington Place
South Van Dien Avenue Both Spring Avenue
Spencer Place [Added
11-13-2013 by Ord. No.
3396]
South Bellair Road
Spring Avenue Both South Van Dien Avenue
Sterling Place [Added
11-12-2014 by Ord. No.
3441]
North Kensington Drive
Stevens Avenue [Added
10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
3504]
North Laurel Road
Walthery Avenue [Added
11-9-2005 by Ord. No.
2958]
Both Shelton Road
Wellington Road [Added
8-11-2010 by Ord. No.
3257]
North Shelbourne Terrace
Westbrook Road [Added
8-12-2015 by Ord. No.
3486]
North Norgate Drive
Westbrook Road [Added
8-12-2015 by Ord. No.
3486]
South Norgate Drive
West End Avenue [Added
12-13-2017 by Ord. No.
3624]
South Cantrell Road
Wyndemere Avenue [Added
9-16-2009 by Ord. No.
3216]
West John Street
B. Village Hall and Library Parking Lot Stop Intersections. [Added
8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2949]
§ 265-59 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-59
254:1140
§ 265-60. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-13, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Albert Place [Added 9-27-2000
by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Eastside Avenue
Albin Court [Added 9-27-2000
by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Banta Street
Beveridge Road North Hamilton Road
Bogert Avenue [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
West Fairfield Avenue
Boyce Place [Added 9-27-2000
by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Woodside Avenue
Brainard Place [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
East Woodside Avenue
Cantrell Road West Highland Avenue
Cliff Street [Repealed
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 3623]
Colonial Road [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709;
repealed 10-7-2019 by Ord.
No. 3747]
Stop Sign Location
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Exiting the Police
Department Parking Lot
North Entrance driveway
Exiting the Village Hall and
Library Parking Lot
West North Maple Avenue
Main lot circulation road
near Village Hall entrance
East Main lot circulation road
alongside Vets Field
C. Habernickel Family Park, a.k.a. The Horse Farm. [Added 11-28-2018
by Ord. No. 3678]
Stop Sign Location
Direction
of Travel At Intersection with
Park Exit Driveway South Hillcrest Road
§ 265-59 TAXATION § 265-60
254:1141
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Fairway Road [Amended
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709;
repealed 10-7-2019 by Ord.
No. 3747]
Glenwood Road [Added
6-17-1999 by Ord. No. 2673;
repealed 7-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 3601]
Glenwood Road (ramp from
northbound Upper Boulevard)
[Added 6-17-1999 by Ord. No.
2673; repealed 7-12-2017 by
Ord. No. 3601]
Graydon Terrace [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
East Fairfield Avenue
Hampton Place South Overbrook Road
Heights Road [Added
11-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2805;
repealed 11-13-2013 by Ord.
No. 3395]
Heights Road [Added 5-8-2002
by Ord. No. 2781; repealed
8-13-2014 by Ord. No. 3427]
Heights Road North Crest Road
Highland Avenue Both Manor Avenue
Hope Street [Repealed
11-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3622]
Jackson Terrace [Repealed
1-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3324]
Kemah Road [Added 9-27-2000
by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Carlton Terrace
Libby Avenue [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709;
repealed 10-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 2715]
Madison Avenue [Added
5-8-2002 by Ord. No. 2781]
East Crest Road
Madison Place West North Hillside Place
Morningside Road [Repealed
10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 3505]
§ 265-60 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-60
254:1142
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Mountain Avenue [Added
5-17-2000 by Ord. No. 2695;
repealed 9-16-2009 by Ord.
No. 3216]
Orchard Place [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
Both West End Avenue
Pearsall Avenue [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709;
repealed 10-25-2000 by Ord.
No. 2715]
Phelps Road [Added 9-27-2000
by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Summit Street
Pine Street [Added 5-12-2004
by Ord. No. 2879]
West Cliff Street
Ponfield Place [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Fairfield Street
Richards Road [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Parsons Road
Second Street [Added
5-12-2004 by Ord. No. 2879]
West Cliff Street
South Van Dien Avenue [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Amsterdam Avenue
Unadilla Road (east leg) [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
North Valley View Avenue
Unadilla Road (west leg) [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Valley View Avenue
Waiku Road [Added 9-27-2000
by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Carlton Terrace
Wastena Terrace [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
South Valley View Avenue
Westbrook Road [Added
4-13-1999 by Ord. No. 2659;
repealed 8-12-2015 by Ord.
No. 3486]
Windsor Terrace [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Waiku Road
Windsor Terrace [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
South Carlton Terrace
§ 265-60 TAXATION § 265-60
254:1143
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Woodland Avenue [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Sunset Avenue
Woodside Avenue [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Carlisle Terrace
Wyndemere Avenue [Added
9-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2709]
Both Pershing Avenue
§ 265-61. Schedule XI: Lane Use Reservations. [Amended
11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 2585]
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-14, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Intersection Movement
East Glen Avenue and Van
Emburgh Avenue
a. Eastbound left lane of East Glen Avenue
reserved for left turn only
b. Westbound left lane of East Glen Avenue
reserved for left turn only
Franklin Avenue and
North Broad Street
Westbound left lane of Franklin Avenue
reserved for left turn only
Franklin Avenue and
North Maple Avenue
Eastbound left lane of Franklin Avenue
reserved for left turn only
Franklin Avenue and Oak
Street
a. Westbound left lane of Franklin Avenue
reserved for left turn only
b. Eastbound left lane of Franklin Avenue
reserved for left turn only
Godwin Avenue and Lake
Avenue
Westbound left lane of Godwin Avenue
reserved for left turn only
Grove Street and Prospect
Street
Westbound left lane of Grove Street
reserved for left turn only
Linwood Avenue and
North Van Dien Avenue
[Added 12-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 3231]
a. Eastbound left lane of Linwood Avenue
reserved for left turn only
Paramus Road and
Linwood Avenue
a. Southbound left lane of Paramus Road
reserved for left turn only
b. Westbound left lane of Linwood Avenue
reserved for left turn only
§ 265-60 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-61
254:1144
Intersection Movement
Van Neste Square and
East Ridgewood Avenue
[Added 6-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 2887]
All northbound traffic on Van Neste
Square approaching East Ridgewood
Avenue shall turn right onto East
Ridgewood Avenue only
§ 265-62. Schedule XII: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-15, no-passing zones are hereby
established and shall be maintained upon the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Sketch Dated
Sketch
Number
Grove Street 5-13-1980 NPZ-506-B
North Monroe Street and South Monroe
Street
7-23-1975 NPZ-1854
§ 265-63. Schedule XIII: Trucks Over Certain Weights Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-16, trucks in excess of the gross
weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts of
streets, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
Banta Street 4 From Franklin Turnpike to Race
Track Road
Bellair Road 4 From Ackerman Avenue to Lincoln
Avenue
Bellair Road 4 From Lincoln Avenue to West End
Avenue
Bingham Road 4 From East Saddle River Road to
Westbrook Road
Bogert Avenue 4 From East Glen Avenue to Cambridge
Road
Bogert Avenue 4 From Meadowbrook Avenue to East
Glen Avenue
Bryden Place 4 From North Maple Avenue to Oak
Street
Carlton Terrace 4 From North Monroe Street to
Windsor Terrace
Cedar Avenue 4 From Prospect Street to Hope Street
§ 265-61 TAXATION § 265-63
254:1145
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
Chestnut Street 4 From Franklin Avenue to Douglas
Place
Claremont Road 4 From Godwin Avenue to Cantrell
Road
Cliff Street 4 From First Street to Pine Street
Corsa Terrace 4 From West Ridgewood Avenue to
Madison Place
Cottage Place 4 From Franklin Avenue to Linwood
Avenue
Dayton Street 4 From South Maple Avenue to Hope
Street
Dayton Street 4 From South Walnut Street to South
Maple Avenue
Doremus Avenue 4 From Godwin Avenue to Ackerman
Avenue
Eastgate Road 4 From Van Emburgh Avenue to
Norgate Road
Ethelbert Place 4 From Doremus Avenue to end
Fairfield Avenue 4 From East Glen Avenue to Franklin
Turnpike
Fairfield Avenue 4 From Meadowbrook Avenue to East
Glen Avenue
Fairmount Road 4 From North Monroe Street to
Morningside Road
Fairview Street 4 From North Monroe Street to the
Midland Park line
Franklin Avenue 4 From North Maple Avenue to North
Irving Street
Gardner Road 4 From Lincoln Avenue to Highland
Avenue
Garfield Place
[Added
5-10-2006 by
Ord. No. 2994]
4 From Godwin Avenue north to
Washington Place
Gateway Road 4 From Linwood Avenue to East Glen
Avenue
Glenwood Road
[Added
2-13-2013 by
Ord. No. 3370]
4 From Morningside Road to the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus municipal
border
§ 265-63 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-63
254:1146
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
Grant Street 4 From Lake Avenue to Cantrell Road
Greenway Road 4 From Lincoln Avenue to the By-Way
Grove Street 10 Entire length
Heights Road 4 From Crest Road to West Glen Avenue
Heights Road 4 From West Glen Avenue to Phelps
Road
Heights Road 4 From West Ridgewood Avenue to
Madison Place
Hempstead Road 4 From Lincoln Avenue to Highland
Avenue
Highland Avenue 4 From Godwin Avenue to Cantrell
Road
Highland Avenue 4 From Lincoln Avenue to the By-Way
Hillcrest Road 4 From North Monroe Street to West
Glen Avenue
Hope Street 4 From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Dayton Street
Jackson Terrace 4 From North Monroe Street to
Morningside Road
Library Place 4 From Garber Square to West
Ridgewood Avenue
Linwood Avenue 4 From North Maple Avenue to Oak
Street
Lotte Road 4 From Lincoln Avenue to Highland
Avenue
Lynn Street 4 From Franklin Turnpike to Race
Track Road
Madison Place 4 From North Hillside Place to North
Monroe Street
Madison Place 4 From North Monroe Street to Park
Slope
Manor Road 4 From Lincoln Avenue to Highland
Avenue
Marshall Street 4 From North Maple Avenue to Franklin
Avenue
Mastin Place 4 From North Maple Avenue to Oak
Street
McKinley Place 4 From Lincoln Avenue to Grandview
Circle
§ 265-63 TAXATION § 265-63
254:1147
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
Meadowbrook
Avenue
4 From North Maple Avenue to
Northern Parkway
Melrose Place 4 From Godwin Avenue to Cantrell
Road
Monte Vista
Avenue
4 From North Monroe Street to Park
Slope
Morningside Road 4 From Midland Park Borough line to
North Monroe Street
Morningside Road 4 From North Monroe Street to Phelps
Road
Mountain Avenue 4 From Midland Park Borough line to
Cantrell Road
Nagle Street 4 From Franklin Turnpike to Race
Track Road
Norgate Drive 4 From East Saddle River Road to
Westbrook Road
Northern Parkway 4 From East Glen Avenue to Franklin
Turnpike
Northern Parkway 4 From Linwood Avenue to East Glen
Avenue
Northern Parkway 4 From Overbrook Road to Linwood
Avenue
North Hillside
Place
4 From West Ridgewood Avenue to
North Monroe Street
North Irving Street 4 From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Overbrook Road
North Van Dien
Avenue
4 From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Linwood Avenue
North Van Dien
Avenue
4 From Linwood Avenue to East Glen
Avenue
North Walnut
Street
4 From Franklin Avenue to Linwood
Avenue
Oak Street 4 From Bryden Place to East Glen
Avenue
Oak Street 4 From Franklin Avenue to East Glen
Avenue
Orchard Place 4 From Lincoln Avenue to West End
Avenue
§ 265-63 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-63
254:1148
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
Pershing Avenue 4 From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Wyndemere Avenue
Pine Street 4 From North Maple Avenue to Cliff
Street
Robinson Lane 4 From Cottage Place to North Maple
Avenue
Second Street 4 From North Maple Avenue to Cliff
Street
Sherman Place
[Added
5-10-2006 by
Ord. No. 2994]
4 From Godwin Avenue west and then
north to Washington Place
Smith Place 4 From North Monroe Street to
Midland Park Borough line
Somerville Road 4 From Spring Avenue to East
Ridgewood Avenue
South Irving Street 4 From Grove Street to East Ridgewood
Avenue
South Murray
Avenue
4 From Godwin Avenue to West
Ridgewood Avenue
South Van Dien
Avenue
4 From Grove Street to East Ridgewood
Avenue
Spencer Place 4 From Ackerman Avenue to Bellair
Road
Spring Avenue 4 From Prospect Street to South Maple
Avenue
Spring Avenue 4 From South Maple Avenue to South
Pleasant Avenue
Spring Avenue 4 From South Pleasant Avenue to
Somerville Road
Union Street 4 From South Walnut Street to South
Maple Avenue
Upper Boulevard 4 From West Glen Avenue to Fairmount
Road
Walthery Avenue 4 From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Frederick Street
Walthery Avenue 4 From Linwood Avenue to East Glen
Avenue
Walthery Avenue 4 From Wall Street to Linwood Avenue
§ 265-63 TAXATION § 265-63
254:1149
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
Washington Place
[Added
5-10-2006 by
Ord. No. 2994]
4 From South Monroe east to West
Ridgewood Avenue
West End Avenue 4 From Godwin Avenue to Cantrell
Road
West End Avenue 4 From Lincoln Avenue to Grandview
Circle
West Saddle River
Road
4 From Route 17 to Race Track Road
§ 265-64. Schedule XIV: Streets Closed to Traffic.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-17, the following streets or parts
of streets shall be closed to traffic between the hours listed on the days
indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Days/Times Location
Bogert Avenue
[Added
12-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 3156]
North 8:00 a.m. to 3:45
p.m., Monday through
Friday, when
Ridgewood Public
Schools are in session
Entire length
from East Glen
Avenue to
Meadowbrook
Avenue
California Street
[Added
12-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 3156]
East 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30
p.m., Monday through
Friday, when
Ridgewood Public
Schools are in session
Entire length
from
Morningside
Road to Heights
Road
Clinton Avenue
[Amended
5-21-1996 by
regulation;
7-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 3604]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 2:30 p.m. to 3:45
p.m., school days;
Exception: days when
Ridgewood Public
Schools are not in
session
From Godwin
Avenue to West
Ridgewood
Avenue
Heermance Place
[Repealed
8-8-2001 by Ord.
No. 2747]
§ 265-63 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-65
254:1150
§ 265-65. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-19, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
A. Parking prohibited at all times.
Name of Street Side Location
Ackerman Avenue Both From Godwin Avenue to the
Village of Ridgewood-Borough of
Glen Rock line
Beverly Road [Added
8-8-2001 by Ord. No.
2747]
North From the west curb of
Heermance Place to a point 53
feet east thereof
Bogert Avenue [Added
5-10-2017 by Ord.
No. 3596]
East Within 25 feet of the 90° inside
corner in the road north of East
Glen Avenue
Bogert Avenue
[Amended 8-8-2012
by Ord. No. 3352]
West From a point 248 feet south of
East Glen Avenue to a point 568
feet south of East Glen Avenue
Cambridge Road
[Added 5-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 3596]
West Within 25 feet of the 90° inside
corner in the road north of East
Glen Avenue
Chestnut Street East From Franklin Avenue north to
the dead end of Chestnut Street
Chestnut Street West From Franklin Avenue north to a
point 600 feet south of the
northerly terminus of Chestnut
Street
Circle Avenue East From Spring Avenue to East
Ridgewood Avenue
Claremont Road West From Godwin Avenue south for a
distance of 200 feet
Collingwood Place East From Northern Parkway to
Linwood Avenue
Colonial Road North From Northern Parkway to North
Van Dien Avenue
Corella Court [Added
6-10-2015 by Ord.
No. 3478]
North From the centerline of the
pedestrian bridge easement at
the west end of Corella Court,
northward along the cul-de-sac's
curbline, then to west side gutter
line of Stevens Avenue
Cottage Place Both From Robinson Lane to a point
400 feet north of Franklin Avenue
§ 265-65 TAXATION § 265-65
254:1151
Name of Street Side Location
Cottage Place East From Robinson Lane to Linwood
Avenue
Cottage Street Corsa
Terrace
East Both From Godwin Avenue to Lake
Avenue From West Ridgewood
Avenue to Madison Place
Crest Road East From Woodland Avenue to Valley
View Road
Crest Road West From Woodland Avenue to Monte
Vista Avenue
Dayton Street North From South Walnut Street to
Hope Street
Dayton Street South From Union Street to South
Maple Avenue
Dean Street, High
Street and South
Broad Street
Triangle Immediately adjacent to the
triangle in the intersection
Demarest Place West From northerly dead end south
for a distance of 440 feet
Doremus Avenue East From Ackerman Avenue to
Godwin Avenue
Doremus Avenue West From Godwin Avenue to a point
50 feet south of Ethelbert Place
Douglas Place Both From Oak Street to Chestnut
Street
Durar Avenue [Added
9-10-2003 by Ord.
No. 2847]
North From Prospect Street to a point
413 feet east
Eastbrook Road North/
West
From a point 259 feet from the
southerly curbline of North Road
east and north to the southerly
curbline of Bingham Road
East Glen Avenue Both From Route 17 to the Ridgewood-
Washington Township line
East Glen Avenue Both From a point 300 feet west of Van
Emburgh Avenue to a point 300
feet east of Van Emburgh Avenue
East Glen Avenue North From the Erie Railroad east to a
point 200 feet east of North
Maple Avenue
East Glen Avenue South From the Erie Railroad east to
Route 17
§ 265-65 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-65
254:1152
Name of Street Side Location
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Repealed
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Repealed
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Repealed
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
North From North Irving Street 318
feet eastward
East Ridgewood
Avenue
North From North Maple Avenue to a
point 135 feet east thereof
East Ridgewood
Avenue
North From North Maple Avenue to a
point 150 feet west thereof
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
North From Reynen Court to the Village
of Ridgewood – Borough of
Paramus municipal line
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Repealed
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Repealed
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
East Ridgewood
Avenue
South From South Maple Avenue to a
point 150 feet west thereof
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
South From Reynen Court to the Village
of Ridgewood – Borough of
Paramus municipal line
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
South From South Maple Avenue to
Southern Parkway
§ 265-65 TAXATION § 265-65
254:1153
Name of Street Side Location
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Repealed
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
Edward Street South From South Broad Street to High
Street
Essex Street South From South Broad Street to dead
end
Fairfield Avenue
[Amended 4-14-2010
by Ord. No. 3248]
East From a point 451 feet south of
East Glen Avenue to a point 103
feet south thereof
Fairmount Road South From Hillcrest Road to a point 50
feet west of California Street
Fairway Road North From Northern Parkway to North
Van Dien Avenue
Franklin Avenue
[Added 4-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 3287]
North From Cottage Place to North
Maple Avenue
Franklin Avenue North From the Erie Railroad
underpass to Chestnut Street
Franklin Avenue
[Added 9-10-1996 by
Ord. No. 2578]
North From North Maple Avenue to
North Irving Street
Franlin Avenue
[Added 4-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 3287]
North From 210 feet east of the east
curb of North Walnut Street to
335 feet east of the east curb of
North Walnut Street
Franklin Avenue
[Repealed 4-13-2011
by Ord. No. 3287]
Franklin Avenue
[Added 4-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 3287]
North From Oak Street to 145 feet east
to the east curb or North Walnut
Street
Franklin Avenue South From a point 170 feet east of
Cottage Place to North Maple
Avenue
Franklin Avenue
[Added 3-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 3459]
South From a point 155 feet east of the
east curb of North Irving Street
to the eastern end of the street
Franklin Avenue South From North Maple Avenue to a
point 200 feet east thereof
§ 265-65 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-65
254:1154
Name of Street Side Location
Franklin Avenue
[Added 4-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 3287]
South From 145 feet east of the east
curb of North Walnut Street to
Cottage Place
Franklin Avenue South From Oak Street to a point 120
feet west thereof
Franklin Avenue
[Added 4-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 3287]
South From Oak Street to 100-feet east
of the east curb of North Walnut
Street
Franklin Avenue
[Repealed 4-13-2011
by Ord. No. 3287]
Franklin Turnpike Northeast Between the boundary line of the
Village of Ridgewood and the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus on the
northwest and its terminus at
Route 17 on the southeast
Franklin Turnpike Southwest Between the boundary line of the
Village of Ridgewood and the
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus on the
northwest and a point 1,343 feet
southeast of Darby Court
Garber Square Both From the Erie Railroad
underpass to West Ridgewood
Avenue
Garfield Place West From Godwin Avenue to
Washington Place
Gilbert Street North Entire length
Godwin Avenue North From Sherman Place west to the
Village of Ridgewood-Midland
Park Borough line
Godwin Avenue South From the intersection of the east
curbline of Pomander Walk
extended to meet the south
curbline of Godwin Avenue a
distance of 155 feet east
Godwin Avenue South From Pomander Walk west to the
Village of Ridgewood-Midland
Park Borough line
Godwin Avenue South From Wilsey Square to a point
226 feet east of Pomander Walk
Graydon Terrace North From Northern Parkway to
Fairfield Avenue
§ 265-65 TAXATION § 265-65
254:1155
Name of Street Side Location
Grove Street North From Eastside Avenue to the
Village of Ridgewood-Borough of
Paramus line
Grove Street North From Prospect Street to the
boundary line of the Borough of
Paramus
Grove Street South From a point 685.5 feet east of
Berkshire Road to the boundary
line of the Borough of Paramus
Grove Street South From the boundary line of Glen
Rock to a point 526.5 feet east of
Berkshire Road
Hampton Place East From Overbrook Road to
Linwood Avenue
Hanks Avenue South From Brookside Avenue east to
South Van Dien Avenue
Heermance Place East From Beverly Road to a point 266
feet south thereof
Heermance Place West From the north curb of Beverly
Road to a point 260 feet south
thereof
Heights Road West From West Ridgewood Avenue to
Madison Place
Hillcrest Road East From Barrington Road to a point
395 feet north thereof
Hillcrest Road East From the curbline of Glenwood
Road extended to a point 154 feet
south thereof
Hillcrest Road West From Barrington Road to a point
375 feet north thereof
Hillcrest Road West From Barrington Road north to a
point 50 feet north of Sherwood
Road
Hillcrest Road West From Hamilton Road to a point
400 feet north thereof
Hope Street West From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Dayton Street
Houston Lane South From Stevens Avenue to a point
680 feet east thereof
Hudson Street South From South Broad Street to
Prospect Street
§ 265-65 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-65
254:1156
Name of Street Side Location
Jackson Terrace East From North Monroe Street to
Morningside Road
John Street East From Linwood Avenue to Fairway
Road
Kemah Road [Added
12-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 3399]
South From North Monroe Street to a
point 100 feet east thereof
Lakeview Drive East From Lake Street south to the
dead end of Lakeview Drive
Lenox Avenue South From Ackerman Avenue east to
the dead end
Leroy Place [Added
4-19-2006 by Ord.
No. 2988]
North From the dead end west to South
Broad Street
Library Place East From West Ridgewood Avenue to
a point 175 feet north thereof
Liberty Street East From East Ridgewood Avenue to
a point 375 feet south thereof
Lincoln Avenue Both From Godwin Avenue to a point
200 feet south thereof
Lincoln Avenue East From Godwin Avenue to the
Village of Ridgewood-Borough of
Glen Rock line
Linwood Avenue
[Repealed 2-11-1997
by Ord. No. 2592]
Linwood Avenue
[Added 2-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 2592]
North From Cottage Place to Gateway
Road
Linwood Avenue North From Gateway Road to the
Washington Township-Village of
Ridgewood boundary line
Linwood Avenue
[Added 2-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 2592]
North From Oak Street to a point 100
feet east thereof
Linwood Avenue South From Hampton Place to John
Street
Linwood Avenue South From the extension of the
easterly curbline of John Street to
the extension of the westerly
curbline of Emmett Place
§ 265-65 TAXATION § 265-65
254:1157
Name of Street Side Location
Linwood Avenue
[Added 2-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 2592]
South From Oak Street to Northern
Parkway
Maltbie Avenue
[Added 3-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 2595]
East From the south curbline of West
Ridgewood Avenue to a point 169
feet southerly
Marshall Street South/
West
From North Maple Avenue to
Franklin Avenue
Meadowbrook Avenue Both From North Van Diem Avenue to
Bogart Avenue
Meadowbrook Avenue South From North Maple Avenue to
Northern Parkway
Morningside Road Both From North Monroe Street to a
point 200 feet east thereof
Morningside Road
[Repealed 9-16-2015
by Ord. No. 3499]
Morningside Road
[Amended 9-16-2015
by Ord. No. 3499]
West From Fairmont Road to Glenwood
Road
Northern Parkway Both From Linwood Avenue to
Overbrook Road
Northern Parkway East From East Glen Avenue to a point
92 feet south of East Glen Avenue
Northern Parkway East From Linwood Avenue to
Meadowbrook Avenue
Northern Parkway West From Linwood Avenue to a point
400 feet north thereof
North Irving Street East From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Overbrook Road
§ 265-65 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-65
254:1158
Name of Street Side Location
North Maple Avenue
[Amended
12-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 3159]
Both From East Ridgewood Avenue to
the Village of Ridgewood -
Borough of Ho-Ho-Kus Municipal
Line, with the exception of the
westerly side of North Maple
Avenue between First Street and
a point 200 feet south thereof,
and with the exception of the
easterly side of North Maple
Avenue from a point 458 feet
south of the south curb of
Linwood Avenue to a point 400
feet south thereof
North Monroe Street Both From Hillcrest Road north to the
Ridgewood, Waldwick and
Midland Park corporate line
North Monroe Street Both From Morningside Road north to
the Ridgewood, Waldwick and
Midland Park corporate line
North Monroe Street East From Wastena Terrace north to a
point 330 thirty feet north of
West Glen Avenue
North Monroe Street East From West Ridgewood Avenue to
Madison Place
North Monroe Street West From West Glen Avenue to a
point 140 feet north thereof
North Monroe Street West From West Glen Avenue to a
point opposite the southerly line
of Wastena Terrace
North Monroe Street West From West Ridgewood Avenue to
North Hillside Place
North Pleasant Avenue Both From East Ridgewood Avenue to
a point 300 feet north thereof
North Pleasant Avenue East From a point 300 feet south of
Linwood Avenue to a point 200
feet north of Linwood Avenue
North Pleasant Avenue West From a point 200 feet south of
Linwood Avenue to a point 300
feet north of Linwood Avenue
North Van Dien
Avenue
Both From the southerly curbline of
Linwood Avenue south to the
northerly curbline of East
Ridgewood Avenue
§ 265-65 TAXATION § 265-65
254:1159
Name of Street Side Location
North Van Dien
Avenue
East From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Wyndemere Avenue
North Van Dien
Avenue
East From Fairway Road to East Glen
Avenue
North Van Dien
Avenue
East From Fairway Road to
Wyndemere Avenue
North Van Dien
Avenue
West From East Ridgewood Avenue to
a point 50 feet north of Reynen
Court
North Van Dien
Avenue
West From Fairway Road to a point
115 feet north of Linwood Avenue
North Van Dien
Avenue
West From Linwood Avenue to
Meadowbrook Avenue
North Walnut Street Both From Franklin Avenue to a point
129 feet south thereof
North Walnut Street East From Franklin Avenue to
Linwood Avenue
North Walnut Street West From Franklin Avenue to a point
330 feet north thereof
Oak Street East From East Glen Avenue to a point
120 feet south thereof
Oak Street East From Franklin Avenue to a point
120 feet south thereof
Oak Street East From Franklin Avenue to a point
140 feet north of Douglas Place
Oak Street [Added
8-13-2003 by Ord.
No. 2842]
East From Mastin Place to a point 260
feet south
Oak Street West From East Glen Avenue to a point
165 feet south thereof
Oak Street West From Franklin Avenue to a point
430 feet north thereof
Oak Street West From Franklin Avenue to a point
110 feet south thereof
Oak Street West From Robinson Lane to a point
50 feet south thereof
Oak Street West From a point 548 feet south of
Robinson Lane to a point 50 feet
south thereof
§ 265-65 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-65
254:1160
Name of Street Side Location
Oak Street West From Robinson Lane to a point
130 feet north of Douglas Place
Orchard Place South From Briarcliff Road to a point
510 feet east thereof
Orchard Place South From Doremus Avenue to
Demarest Place
Orchard Place Center
Circle
Interior Interior directional circle in culde-
sac at east end of Orchard
Place
Overbrook Road
[Added 9-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 3663]
North From North Irving Street to
North Van Dien Avenue
Phoenix Avenue Both From Ethelbert Place to
Christopher Place
Pine Street South From North Maple Avenue to
Cliff Street
Prospect Street East From Dayton Street to a point
opposite the southerly side of
Passaic Street
Prospect Street East From East Ridgewood Avenue to
a point 56 feet south thereof
Prospect Street East From the west side of South
Maple Avenue to a point 110 feet
north thereof
Prospect Street East From South Maple Avenue to a
point 50 feet south of Cedar
Avenue
Prospect Street West From East Ridgewood Avenue to
a point 51 feet south thereof
Prospect Street West From Hudson Street to South
Maple Avenue
Prospect Street West From South Maple Avenue to the
Village of Ridgewood-Borough of
Glen Rock line
Richmond Avenue South From Ackerman Avenue east to
the dead end
Robinson Lane North From Chestnut Street to North
Maple Avenue
Robinson Lane South From Chestnut Street to Oak
Street
§ 265-65 TAXATION § 265-65
254:1161
Name of Street Side Location
Sherman Place
[Added 3-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 3581]
North From the curbline of westbound
Godwin Avenue north for a
distance of 95 feet
Sherman Place
[Added 3-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 3581]
North From a point 194 feet north of
the curbline of westbound
Godwin Avenue to a point 311
feet north thereof
Sherman Place
[Added 3-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 3581]
North From the 90° corner in Sherman
Place to a point 50 feet therefrom
Sherman Place
[Added 8-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 3130]
South From Godwin Avenue to Stanley
Place
South Broad Street East From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Hudson Street
South Broad Street East From High Street to Edwards
Street
South Broad Street East From Hudson Street to a point 41
feet south thereof
South Broad Street East From Passaic Street to a point 40
feet north thereof
South Broad Street East From Passaic Street to a point 50
feet south thereof
South Broad Street
[Repealed 8-14-2002
by Ord. No. 2793]
Southern Parkway Both From Addison Place to its
southerly terminus
Southern Parkway East From East Ridgewood Avenue to
a point opposite the southerly
line of Addison Place
South Hillside Place North/East From South Monroe Street to
West Ridgewood Avenue
South Hillside Place
[Amended 11-8-2017
by Ord. No. 3621]
South From South Monroe Street to a
point 255 feet west thereof
South Irving Street East From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Addison Place
South Maple Avenue Both From East Ridgewood Avenue to
the Village of Ridgewood-
Borough of Glen Rock line
§ 265-65 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-65
254:1162
Name of Street Side Location
South Monroe Street East From Godwin Avenue to West
Ridgewood Avenue
South Monroe Street West From Godwin Avenue to a point
193 feet north thereof
South Pleasant Avenue East From a point 200 feet south of
Grove Street to a point 100 feet
north of Grove Street
South Pleasant Avenue East From Spring Avenue to a point
300 feet south thereof
South Pleasant Avenue East From Spring Avenue to East
Ridgewood Avenue
South Pleasant Avenue
[Amended 4-10-2002
by Ord. No. 2778]
West From East Ridgewood Avenue to
a point 35 feet south thereof
South Pleasant Avenue West From a point 100 feet south of
Grove Street north to a point 50
feet north of a point opposite the
north side of Maxwell Place
South Pleasant Avenue
[Amended 4-10-2002
by Ord. No. 2778]
West From Spring Avenue to a point
180 feet north thereof
South Pleasant Avenue West From Spring Avenue to a point
135 feet south thereof
South Van Dien
Avenue
Both From the southerly curbline of
East Ridgewood Avenue to the
northerly curbline of Spring
Avenue
South Van Dien
Avenue
East From East Ridgewood Avenue to
Grove Street
South Van Dien
Avenue
West From Hanks Avenue to East
Ridgewood Avenue
Spring Avenue Both From a point 300 feet west of
South Pleasant Avenue to a point
300 feet east of South Pleasant
Avenue
Spring Avenue North From the east curbline of
Brookside Avenue 100 feet
easterly therefrom
Spring Avenue North From the west curbline of
Brookside Avenue 100 feet
westerly therefrom
§ 265-65 TAXATION § 265-65
254:1163
Name of Street Side Location
Spring Avenue North From Prospect Street to Hope
Street
Spring Avenue North From a point 160 feet west of
South Pleasant Avenue to a point
300 feet east of South Pleasant
Avenue
Spring Avenue North From South Van Dien Avenue to a
point 150 feet east thereof
Spring Avenue North From South Van Dien Avenue to a
point 200 feet west thereof
Spring Avenue South From Prospect Street to a point
35 feet east of South Maple
Avenue
Spring Avenue South From a point 70 feet east of
South Maple Avenue to Hope
Street
Spring Avenue South From South Pleasant Avenue to a
point 130 feet east thereof
Spring Avenue South From South Pleasant Avenue to a
point 300 feet west thereof
Spring Avenue South From South Van Dien Avenue to a
point 130 feet east thereof
Spring Avenue South From South Van Dien Avenue to a
point 200 feet west thereof
Station Plaza East Northbound lane
Stevens Avenue East From Grove Street to the
southerly dead end of Stevens
Avenue
Stevens Avenue
[Added 12-13-2006
by Ord. No. 3033]
West From Corella Court to a point
190 feet south
Union Street East From South Maple Avenue to a
point 100 feet north thereof
Union Street South From Dayton Street to a point
150 feet south thereof
Union Street West From Dayton Street to Spring
Avenue
Upper Boulevard East From Glenwood Road to a point
300 feet south thereof
§ 265-65 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-65
254:1164
Name of Street Side Location
Van Buren Street North/
West
From a point 340 feet west of
Northern Parkway extended to a
point 190 feet west and south
thereof
Van Buren Street South/East From a point 242 feet west of
Northern Parkway extended to a
point 230 feet west and south
thereof
Van Emburgh Avenue Both From East Glen Avenue north to
the Ridgewood-Washington line
Van Emburgh Avenue Both From Route 17 north to a point
300 feet north of East Glen
Avenue
Van Emburgh Avenue Both From Route 17 to Hammond
Road
Walthery Avenue
[Added 6-11-2003 by
Ord. No. 2826]
West From East Ridgewood Avenue
north to Wyndemere Street
Walton Street North/East From South Maple Avenue to
Dayton Street
Warren Place Both From Irving Street to the dead
end of Warren Place
Washington Place South/East From South Monroe Street to
West Ridgewood Avenue
West End Avenue East From Godwin Avenue to a point
100 feet south thereof
West End Avenue West From Godwin Avenue to a point
50 feet south thereof
West Glen Avenue North From the Erie Railroad west to a
point 200 feet west of Heights
Road
West Glen Avenue North From the Erie Railroad west to
the Midland Park-Ridgewood line
West Glen Avenue North From a point 150 feet east of
North Monroe Street to a point
150 feet west of North Monroe
Street
West Glen Avenue South From the Borough of Midland
Park-Village of Ridgewood line to
the Erie Railroad
§ 265-65 TAXATION § 265-65
254:1165
Name of Street Side Location
West Ridgewood
Avenue [Repealed
7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2608]
West Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2608; repealed
3-10-2004 by Ord.
No. 2871]
West Ridgewood
Avenue
North From Heights Road to a point
82.5 feet east thereof
West Ridgewood
Avenue
North From a point 62 feet east of
Heights Road to a point 62 feet
west of Heights Road
West Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2608]
North From Maltbie Avenue to a point
87 feet east thereof
West Ridgewood
Avenue
North From a point 200 feet east of
North Monroe Street to a point
200 feet west of North Monroe
Street
West Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2608; repealed
8-13-2008 by Ord.
No. 3129]
West Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
8-13-2008 by Ord.
No. 3129]
North From North Murray Avenue to
the center line of the Ridge
School entrance driveway
West Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2608]
South From Maltbie Avenue to a point
35 feet east thereof
West Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
7-8-1997 by Ord. No.
2608]
South From a point 110 feet east of
Maltbie Avenue to a point 100
feet east of South Murray Avenue
§ 265-65 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-65
254:1166
§ 265-66. Schedule XVI: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-20, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Bogert Avenue Both From Meadowbrook Avenue to a point
50 feet north thereof
Bogert Avenue Both From Meadowbrook Avenue to a point
50 feet south thereof
Bogert Avenue
[Repealed
12-14-2016 by Ord.
No. 3563]
Brookside Avenue Both From East Ridgewood Avenue to a
point 125 feet south thereof
Downs Street
[Repealed 8-8-2012
by Ord. No. 3352]
Downs Street
[Repealed 8-8-2012
by Ord. No. 3352]
East Glen Avenue Both From a point east of Van Emburgh
Avenue to a point 100 feet west of Van
Emburgh Avenue
East Glen Avenue North From Fairfield Avenue to Bogert
Avenue
Name of Street Side Location
West Ridgewood
Avenue
South From a point 200 feet east of
South Monroe Street to a point
200 feet west of South Monroe
Street
Woodside Avenue North From Prospect Street to a point
50 feet west thereof
Woodside Avenue South/East From Prospect Street to a point
opposite the southerly line of
Leonard Place
B. Habernickel Family Park, a.k.a. The Horse Farm. [Added 11-28-2018
by Ord. No. 3678]
Name of Street Side Location
Park Entrance Drive Both Hillcrest Road to parking lot
§ 265-65 TAXATION § 265-66
254:1167
Name of Street Side Location
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
North From Brookside Avenue 741 feet
eastward
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
North From Brookside Avenue 800 feet
eastward to Reynen Court
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
South From Brookside Avenue 800 feet
eastward
East Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
6-10-2009 by Ord.
No. 3186]
South From Brookside Avenue 741 feet
westward to Southern Parkway
Elm Court East From a point 95 feet south of West Glen
Avenue to the southern terminus of Elm
Court
Elm Court West From West Glen Avenue to its southerly
terminus
Fairfield Avenue Both From Meadowbrook Avenue to a point
50 feet north thereof
Fairfield Avenue Both From Meadowbrook Avenue to a point
50 feet south thereof
Fairfield Avenue East From East Glen Avenue to a point 50
feet north thereof
Fairfield Avenue
[Repealed 8-8-2012
by Ord. No. 3352]
Glenwood Road Both From Upper Boulevard easterly to the
Village of Ridgewood - Borough of Ho-
Ho-Kus line
Goffle Road East From the northerly corporate line
between the Borough of Midland Park
and Village of Ridgewood to a point 500
feet south of Wyckoff Avenue - Lake
Avenue
Grove Street North From the easterly curbline of Prospect
Street to the easterly curbline of
Hopper Avenue
§ 265-66 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-66
254:1168
Name of Street Side Location
Linwood Avenue North From the easterly curbline of Paramus
Road extended to a point 300 feet east
thereof
Linwood Avenue North From the westerly curbline of Paramus
Road extended to a point 300 feet west
thereof
Meadowbrook Avenue Both From Bogert Avenue to a point 50 feet
east thereof
Meadowbrook Avenue Both From Bogert Avenue to a point 50 feet
west thereof
Meadowbrook Avenue Both From North Van Dien Avenue to a point
100 feet west thereof
Meadowbrook Avenue North From Fairfield Avenue to a point 50 feet
west thereof
Meadowbrook Avenue South From Fairfield Avenue to a point 50 feet
east thereof
Morningside Road Both From North Monroe Street to a point
200 feet east thereof
Morningside Road
[Repealed 9-16-2015
by Ord. No. 3499]
North Irving Street
[Added 4-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 3290]
West From East Ridgewood Avenue north to
Overbrook Road
North Monroe Street Both From Morningside Road to a point 200
feet north thereof
North Monroe Street Both From Morningside Road to a point 200
feet south thereof
North Pleasant Avenue Both From Linwood Avenue to a point 100
feet north thereof
North Pleasant Avenue Both From Linwood Avenue to a point 100
feet south thereof
North Van Dien
Avenue
West From East Glen Avenue to a point 100
feet south thereof
North Van Dien
Avenue
West From Meadowbrook Avenue to a point
280 feet north thereof
North Van Dien
Avenue
West From Meadowbrook Avenue to a point
100 feet south thereof
Paramus Road Both From the northerly curbline of Linwood
Avenue extended to a point 300 feet
north thereof
§ 265-66 TAXATION § 265-66
254:1169
Name of Street Side Location
Racetrack Road
[Added 11-10-2010
by Ord. No. 3269]
South From the northbound Route 17 curbline
to a point 260 feet east thereof
Red Birch Court East From East Glen Avenue to a point 50
feet north thereof
South Broad Street
[Added 6-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 3298]
West From southerly gutter line of Passaic
Street south to a point 608 feet south
thereof
South Monroe Street West From West Ridgewood Avenue
southerly to a point 451 feet south of
South Hillside Place
Village Hall entrance
driveway [Added
10-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 3613]
Both From North Maple Avenue eastward to
the 90° turn
Village Hall parking lot
[Added 10-11-2017
by Ord. No. 3613]
Along
East
Field
Edge
Within 3 feet of any ramp from the
parking lot to the walking/access path
around Veterans Field
West Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
3-10-2004 by Ord.
No. 2871; repealed
8-13-2008 by Ord.
No. 3129]
West Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
8-9-2017 by Ord. No.
3610]
Both From the easterly right-of-way limit line
of North and South Murray to the
westerly right-of-way limit line
West Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
3-10-2004 by Ord.
No. 2871]
North From the center line of the Ridge
School exit driveway to a point
approximately 100 feet east
West Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
3-10-2004 by Ord.
No. 2871]
North From the center line of the Ridge
School entrance driveway to a point
approximately 60 feet to the west
West Ridgewood
Avenue [Added
3-10-2004 by Ord.
No. 2871]
North From the center line of the Ridge
School exit driveway to a point
approximately 80 feet west
§ 265-66 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-67
254:1170
§ 265-67. Schedule XVII: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-21, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Addison Place North 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
Entire length
Addison Place South 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
Entire length
Bedford Road
[Added 7-13-1999
by Ord. No. 2674]
North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Tuesday and
Thursday
From Belmont Road to
Morningside Road
Bedford Road
[Added 7-13-1999
by Ord. No. 2674]
South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday,
Wednesday and
Friday
From Belmont Road to
Morningside Road
Beverly Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday to
Friday, from
September 1 to
June 30
Entire length
Bogert Avenue
[Added 8-8-2012
by Ord. No. 3352]
West 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From East Glen Avenue to a
point 248 feet south thereof
Brookside Avenue
[Amended
6-8-2016 by Ord.
No. 3534]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
through June 30
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to Spring Avenue
Coventry Court Both 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Chestnut Street
Parking Site
— 1:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
—
§ 265-67 TAXATION § 265-67
254:1171
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Circle Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to Spring Avenue
Collingwood Place West 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From Linwood Avenue to
Northern Parkway
Colonial Road South 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From Northern Parkway to
North Van Dien Avenue
Crest Road
[Amended
1-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 2912]
Both 8:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From Wildwood Road to
Valley View Avenue
Crest Road East 8:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From Woodland Avenue to
Monte Vista Avenue
Crest Road West 8:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From Valley View Avenue to
Woodland Avenue
Dayton Street North 6:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m./All
From South Walnut Street
to Van Neste Square
Dayton Street South 6:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m./All
From Prospect Street to
Union Street
Eastgate Road
[Added 8-10-2005
by Ord. No. 2951]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 12:00 p.m.
to 1:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
from September 1
to June 30
From the westerly curbline
of Van Emburgh Avenue to
the intersection with the
southerly curbline of Roslyn
Road
Emmett Place Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
Entire length
§ 265-67 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-67
254:1172
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Fairfield Avenue
[Added 8-8-2012
by Ord. No. 3352]
East 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:30 p.m.
to 3:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From a point 280 feet south
of East Glen Avenue to a
point 426 feet south of East
Glen Avenue
Fairmount Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From California Street to
Heights Road
Fairmount Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From Hillcrest Road to
Upper Boulevard
Fairway Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From North Van Dien
Avenue to John Street
Fairway Road South 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From Northern Parkway to
North Van Dien Avenue
Foster Terrace
[Added 9-18-2002
by Ord. No. 2794]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./All, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays
From Prospect Street to the
dead end
Franklin Avenue Both 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
East of North Irving Street
Glenwood Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From Heights Road to
Upper Boulevard
Gordon Road Both 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
through June 30
From Brookside Avenue to
South Van Dien Avenue
§ 265-67 TAXATION § 265-67
254:1173
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Gordon Road North 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mondays,
Wednesdays and
Fridays, from
September 1 to
June 30
Entire length
Gordon Road South 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tuesdays and
Thursdays, from
September 1 to
June 30
Entire length
Hampshire Road
[Added 8-10-2005
by Ord. No. 2951]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 12:00 p.m.
to 1:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
from September 1
to June 30
Entire length in the Village
Hampton Place West 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From Linwood Avenue to
Overbrook Road
Hanks Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
through June 30
From Brookside Avenue to
South Van Dien Avenue
Heights Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./Monday
through Friday,
except holidays
From Madison Place to
Vista Avenue
Heermance Place
[Repealed
8-8-2001 by Ord.
No. 2747]
Henrietta Court Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m.
to 4:30
p.m./weekdays,
from September 1
to June 30
Entire length
§ 265-67 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-67
254:1174
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Hickory Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
Entire length
Hillcrest Road East 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From Fairmount Road to a
point 154 feet south of the
point of intersection of the
southerly curbline of
Glenwood Road extended to
meet the easterly curbline
of Hillcrest Road
Hillcrest Road East 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From Fairmount Road to a
point 285 feet south thereof
Hillcrest Road East 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From Glenwood Road to
Hamilton Road
Hillcrest Road
[Added 6-14-2006
by Ord. No. 2993;
amended
1-13-2016 by Ord.
No. 3517]
South 9:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./All
From the easterly property
line of No. 1013 Hillcrest
Road west to the
intersection with Andover
Terrace
Hillcrest Road West 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From a point 50 feet north
of Sherwood Road to
Hamilton Road
Hope Street East 6:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From the northerly curbline
of Dayton Street extended
to East Ridgewood Avenue
Houston Lane
[Repealed
8-8-2012 by Ord.
No. 3352]
Jefferson Street
[Added 8-10-2005
by Ord. No. 2951]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 12:00 p.m.
to 1:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
from September 1
to June 30
From the southerly curbline
of Hampshire Road to the
intersection with the
southerly curbline of
William Street
John Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to Fairway Road
§ 265-67 TAXATION § 265-67
254:1175
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
John Street West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Linwood Avenue to
Fairway Road
Kenilworth Road
[Amended
6-8-2011 by Ord.
No. 3298]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to Spring Avenue
Knickerbocker Road
[Amended
6-7-1999 by Ord.
No. 2672]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
Entire length
Libby Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
Entire length
North Irving Street
[Repealed
4-13-2011 by Ord.
No. 3290]
North Irving Street
[Repealed
4-13-2011 by Ord.
No. 3290]
North Murray
Avenue [Added
3-10-2004 by Ord.
No. 2872]
East 8:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From a point 60 feet north
of the north side curbline of
West Ridgewood Avenue to
a point approximately 550
feet north
North Murray
Avenue [Added
3-10-2004 by Ord.
No. 2872]
West 8:30 a.m. to 3:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From the north side
curbline of West Ridgewood
Avenue to a point
approximately 100 feet
north
North Van Dien
Avenue
West 10:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m./All
From Fairway Road to a
point 50 feet north of the
northerly curbline of
Reynen Court, if extended
§ 265-67 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-67
254:1176
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
North Van Dien
Avenue [Repealed
11-8-2000 by Ord.
No. 2724]
Overbrook Road
[Amended
9-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 3663]
South 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From North Van Dien
Avenue to Northern
Parkway
Pomander Walk
[Added 6-8-2016
by Ord. No. 3539;
amended
5-10-2017 by Ord.
No. 3597]
South/
West
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All
From Godwin Avenue to the
end
Red Birch Court Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 1:30 p.m.
to 2:30 p.m./All
Entire length
Red Rock Court Both 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
Entire cul-de-sac
Reynen Street North/
East
8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
Entire length
Ridge Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From Crest Road to Heights
Road
Ridge Road [Added
2-9-2005 by Ord.
No. 2925]
North 6:30 a.m. to 7:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From the intersection of
Crest Road east to the dead
end
Robinson Lane South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From North Walnut Street
to Oak Street
Sherwood Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From Hillcrest Road to
Heights Road
South Broad Street
[Added 8-14-2002
by Ord. No. 2793;
amended 6-8-2011
by Ord. No. 3298]
East 6:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m./All
From a point 458 feet south
of Passaic Street to Passaic
Street
§ 265-67 TAXATION § 265-67
254:1177
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
South Broad Street
[Repealed
8-14-2002 by Ord.
No. 2793]
Southern Parkway East 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
Entire length north of
Addison Place
Southern Parkway West 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
Entire length north of
Addison Place
South Hillside Place
[Repealed
11-8-2017 by Ord.
No. 3621]
South Irving Street East 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Addison Place to
Spring Avenue
South Irving Street East 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00
p.m. to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September
1 to June 30
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to Spring Avenue
South Irving Street West 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From Hanks Avenue to
Spring Avenue
§ 265-67 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-67
254:1178
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
South Pleasant
Avenue [Amended
1-8-2020 by Ord.
No. 3757]
East 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:30 p.m.
to 3:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From Dorchester Road to
Houston Lane
South Van Dien
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
through June 30
From Hanks Avenue to
Spring Avenue
Spring Avenue
[Added 5-13-1996
by Ord. No. 2564]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
through June 30
From the east curbline of
Hope Street to the west
curbline of South Irving
Street
Spring Avenue
[Added 5-13-1996
by Ord. No. 2564]
North 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
through June 30
From the east curbline of
Brookside Avenue easterly
to a point 200 feet westerly
from the west curbline of
South Van Dien Avenue
Spring Avenue
[Added 5-13-1996
by Ord. No. 2564]
North 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
through June 30
From the east curbline of
South Irving Street easterly
to a point 100 feet westerly
from the west curbline of
Brookside Avenue
Spring Avenue
[Added 2-9-2005
by Ord. No. 2924;
repealed
8-10-2005 by Ord.
No. 2952]
Spring Avenue
[Added 5-13-1996
by Ord. No. 2564]
South 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
through June 30
From the east curbline of
Brookside Avenue easterly
to a point 200 feet westerly
from the west curbline of
South Van Dien Avenue
Spring Avenue
[Added 5-13-1996
by Ord. No. 2564]
South 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
through June 30
From the east curbline of
South Irving Street easterly
to a point 107 feet westerly
from the west curbline of
Brookside Avenue
§ 265-67 TAXATION § 265-67
254:1179
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Steilen Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Linwood Avenue
north to the cul-de-sac
Sunset Avenue Both 8:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From Woodland Avenue to
Valley View Avenue
Upper Boulevard Both 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From Fairmount Road to a
point 335 feet south thereof
Upper Boulevard East 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From Fairmount Road to a
point 300 feet south of
Glenwood Road
Upper Boulevard East 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From a point 95 feet north
of Glenwood Road to the
northerly dead end of
Upper Boulevard
Upper Boulevard West 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./All
From Fairmount Road to
the northerly dead end of
Upper Boulevard
Valley View Avenue South 8:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m./All
From Sunset Avenue to a
point 150 feet west thereof
Wall Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m./All
Entire length
Woodland Avenue Both 8:00 p.m. to 2:00
a.m./All
From Crest Road to Sunset
Avenue
Wyndemere Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
to 2:30
p.m./Monday
through Friday,
from September 1
to June 30
From John Street to North
Pleasant Avenue
Wyndemere Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m./Monday
through Friday
From John Street to North
Van Dien Avenue
Wyndemere Avenue South 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From North Van Dien
Avenue to John Street
§ 265-67 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-68
254:1180
§ 265-68. Schedule XVIII: No Stopping or Standing Certain Hours.
[Amended 4-9-1996 by Ord. No. 2563; 9-10-1996 by Ord. No. 2578;
12-10-1996 by Ord. No. 2586; 3-31-1997 by Ord. No. 2596; 7-8-1997
by Ord. No. 2608; 11-8-2000 by Ord. No. 2724; 4-10-2002 by Ord.
No. 2778; 8-14-2002 by Ord. No. 2793; 6-11-2008 by Ord. No. 3122;
4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 3248]
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-22, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle, unless loading or unloading a passengers only, between the times
specified upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Albin Court Both 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./Monday through
Friday
From the westerly dead end
to the easterly dead end,
including westerly and
easterly culs-de-sac
Banta Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./Monday through
Friday
From Franklin Turnpike to
Race Track Road
Bogert Avenue
[Added
12-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 3563;
amended
5-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 3596]
West 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m./Monday
through Friday,
September 1 to June
30
From the curbline of East
Glen Avenue to a point
approximately 219 feet
north thereof
California Street South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From Morningside Road to
a point 376 feet east
thereof
Cambridge Road
[Added
12-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 3563;
amended
5-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 3596]
East 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m./Monday
through Friday,
September 1 to June
30
From the curbline of East
Glen Avenue to a point
approximately 224 feet
north thereof
Downs Street North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday, from
September 1 to June
30
Entire length
Downs Street
[Added 8-8-2012
by Ord. No.
3352]
South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./ Monday
through Friday, from
September 1 to June
30
From Fairfield Avenue to
Pearsall Avenue
§ 265-68 TAXATION § 265-68
254:1181
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Fairfield Avenue
[Repealed
8-8-2012 by Ord.
No. 3352]
Fairfield Avenue West 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday, from
September 1 to June
30
From East Glen Avenue to a
point 120 feet south of
Downs Street
Franklin Avenue South 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday, from
September 1 through
June 30
From North Maple Avenue
of North Irving Street
Franklin Turnpike North 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./Monday through
Friday
From Banta Street to Lynn
Street
Houston Lane
[Added 8-8-2012
by Ord. No.
3352]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m./Monday
through Friday, from
September 1 to June
30
From South Pleasant
Avenue to Stevens Avenue
Lynn Street
[Repealed
7-17-2013 by
Ord. No. 3386]
Marshall Street North 8:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m. and 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday, from
September 1 through
June 30
Commencing at a point 403
feet East of the intersection
of the North side of
Marshall Street with the
East side of North Maple
Avenue and running from
thence to Franklin Avenue
Morningside Road
[Added
9-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 3499]
East 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m./Monday
through Friday from
September 1 to June
30
From California Street to
Glenwood Road
Nagle Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./Monday through
Friday
From Franklin Turnpike to
Race Track Road
§ 265-68 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-68
254:1182
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
North Hillside
Place [Added
8-8-2012 by Ord.
No. 3352]
East 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m./Monday
through Friday, from
September 1 to June
30
From West Ridgewood
Avenue to Madison Place
North Van Dien
Avenue
West 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m./Monday to
Friday, from
September 1 to June
30
From Meadowbrook Avenue
to East Glen Avenue
Race Track Road South 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./Monday through
Friday
From Nagle Street to Route
17
South Broad
Street
East All/All, except
Sundays from 8:00
a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
From Highwood Avenue to
Edwards Street
South Pleasant
Avenue [Added
1-8-2020 by Ord.
No. 3757]
West 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m./ Monday
through Friday from
September 1 to June
30
From Houston Lane to a
point 500 feet north thereof
Stevens Avenue
[Added 1-8-2020
by Ord. No.
3757]
West 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m./ Monday
through Friday from
September 1 to June
30
From Houston Lane to a
point 450 feet south thereof
§ 265-69. Schedule XIX: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-23, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Barnett Place East/West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From First Street south
to Mulberry Place
Bedford Road
[Added
7-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 2674]
North 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday,
Wednesday and Friday
From Belmont Road to
Morningside Road
§ 265-68 TAXATION § 265-69
254:1183
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Bedford Road
[Added
7-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 2674]
South 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Tuesday and
Friday
From Belmont Road to
Morningside Road
Beverly Road Both 3 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From North Van Dien
Avenue to Heermance
Place
Brainard Place Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From South Broad
Street to Woodside
Avenue
Brookside Avenue
[Amended
6-8-2016 by
Ord. No. 3534;
10-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 3548]
Both 3 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday through
Friday From September
1 through June 30
Entire length from
Spring Avenue
southward
Chestnut Street
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 41 feet
north of East Ridgewood
Avenue to a point 129
feet south of Franklin
Avenue
Chestnut Street
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From a point 90 feet
north of East Ridgewood
Avenue to a point 69
feet south of Franklin
Avenue
Cliff Street Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From First Street to
Pine Street
Cottage Place
[Amended
6-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 3298;
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
Both 3 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 9:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From Franklin Avenue
to a point 400 feet north
thereof
Cottage Place
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to Franklin
Avenue
§ 265-69 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-69
254:1184
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Cottage Place
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to Franklin
Avenue
Crest Road Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Madison Place to
Monte Vista Avenue
Dayton Street
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
North 3 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From Van Neste Square
to South Walnut Street
Dayton Street
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
South 3 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From Prospect Street to
Union Street
Dayton Street South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From South Maple
Avenue to Hope Street
Dean Street North 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From High Street to
South Broad Street
Doremus Avenue West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point opposite
the southerly line of
Ethelbert Place to
Richmond Avenue
East Ridgewood
Avenue
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From the Erie Railroad
to a point 150 feet west
of Maple Avenue
East Ridgewood
Avenue
North 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 135 feet
east of North Maple
Avenue to North Irving
Street
Essex Street North 4 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From South Broad
Street to dead end
Ethelbert Place Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Doremus Avenue
to dead end
§ 265-69 TAXATION § 265-69
254:1185
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Fairfield Avenue
[Added
4-14-2010 by
Ord. No. 3248]
East 1 hr.; 4:00 p.m. to 9:00
p.m./Monday through
Friday
From a point 280 feet
south of East Glen
Avenue to a point 426
feet south of East Glen
Avenue
First Street South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From North Maple
Avenue east to the west
side of the Ho-Ho-Kus
Brook
First Street South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From North Maple
Avenue to the Ho-Ho-
Kus corporate line
Foster Terrace
[Added
2-13-2002 by
Ord. No. 2771;
repealed
9-18-2002 by
Ord. No. 2794]
Franklin Avenue
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 40 feet
east of Chestnut Street
to a point 95 feet west
of Oak Street
Franklin Avenue
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
South 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 81 feet
east of Chestnut Street
to a point 120 feet west
of Oak Street
Franklin Avenue
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From Cottage Place to a
point 170 feet east
thereof
Franklin Avenue
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From North Broad
Street to Chestnut
Street
Franklin Avenue South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 200 feet
east of North Maple
Avenue to North Irving
Street
§ 265-69 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-69
254:1186
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Garfield Place East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Godwin Avenue
north to the dead end
George Street East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From East Glen Avenue
to a point 108 feet north
thereof
Gilbert Street South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
Entire length
Godwin Avenue North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 35 feet
west of Garfield Place to
a point opposite the
easterly line of
Ackerman Avenue
Godwin Avenue
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Wilsey Square to a
point 150 feet east of
Doremus Avenue
Godwin Avenue
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
South 3 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From Pomander Walk to
a point 220 feet east
thereof
Grove Street South 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 562.5 feet
east of Berkshire Road
to a point 685.5 feet
east of Berkshire Road
Heights Road East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From West Ridgewood
Avenue to Ridge Road
Hillcrest Road Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From and around the
cul-de-sac at the south
end of Hillcrest Road to
a point 800 feet north
thereof
Hope Street Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Dayton Street to
Evergreen Place
§ 265-69 TAXATION § 265-69
254:1187
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Hope Street Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Monday through
Friday
From the southerly line
of Evergreen Place if
extended westerly to the
intersection with the
northerly side of Cedar
Avenue
Hudson Street
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 33 feet
west of Prospect Street
to a point 67 feet
thereof
Hudson Street
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 35 feet
east of South Broad
Street to a point 60 feet
thereof
LeRoy Place
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From the dead end west
to South Broad Street
Liberty Street West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to a point 375
feet south thereof
Library Place
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Garber Square
along its entire
northerly line
Library Place
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
South 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Garber Square to
a point 150 feet west
thereof
Library Place
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
Along its entire westerly
side from West
Ridgewood Avenue
north
Linwood Avenue
[Repealed
2-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 2592]
Linwood Avenue
[Added
2-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 2592]
North 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 100 feet
east of Oak Street to
Cottage Place (east side
extended northerly)
§ 265-69 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-69
254:1188
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Lynn Street
[Added
7-17-2013 by
Ord. No. 3386]
Both 3 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m./Monday through
Friday
From Franklin Turnpike
to Race Track Road
Madison Place
[Added
9-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3735]
Both 4 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Monday through
Friday, except holidays
From North Hillside
Place to Crest Road
Madison Place
[Repealed
9-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3735]
Madison Place
[Added
11-26-1995 by
Ord. No. 2544]
North 4 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From the westerly
curbline of North
Monroe Street, 166.80
feet westerly
Maltbie Avenue
[Added
10-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 3614]
East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 169 feet
southerly of the south
side curbline of West
Ridgewood Avenue to a
point 25 feet northerly
from the north curbline
of Godwin Avenue
Marshall Street East/North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From North Maple
Avenue to Franklin
Avenue
Marshall Street North/East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From North Maple
Avenue to Franklin
Avenue
Monte Vista
Avenue
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m./All, except
Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays
Between Heights Road
and Crest Road
Monte Vista
Avenue [Added
9-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3735]
Both 4 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Monday through
Friday, except holidays
Between Heights Road
and North Monroe
Street
Mulberry Place North/West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
Around the cul-de-sac at
the northern end thereof
§ 265-69 TAXATION § 265-69
254:1189
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Mulberry Place South/East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From North Maple
Avenue easterly along
the entire length of
Mulberry Place
North Broad
Street [Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Franklin Avenue
to East Ridgewood
Avenue
North Broad
Street [Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From Franklin Avenue
to East Ridgewood
Avenue
North Hillside
Place [Added
9-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3735]
Both 4 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Monday through
Friday, except holidays
From North Monroe
Street to West
Ridgewood Avenue
North Irving
Street [Repealed
4-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 3290]
North Maple
Avenue [Added
5-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 3057;
amended
12-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 3159;
10-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 3613]
East 2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m/All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 458 feet
south of the south curb
of Linwood Avenue to a
point 404 feet south
thereof
North Maple
Avenue
[Repealed
5-9-2007 by
Ord. No. 3057]
North Maple
Avenue [Added
12-11-2002 by
Ord. No. 2808]
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All
Between First Street
and a point 200 feet
south thereof
North Van Dien
Avenue
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Linwood Avenue
north to East Glen
Avenue
§ 265-69 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-69
254:1190
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
North Walnut
Street [Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to a point 129
feet south of Franklin
Avenue
North Walnut
Street
East 15 mins.; 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
Northerly from the
intersection of East
Ridgewood Avenue, if
projected westerly and
North Walnut Street
projected southerly, 1
space commencing 35
feet north of said
intersection and running
for a distance of 17.5
feet interspaced by a
break of 8.2 feet and a
second space running
northerly therefrom for
a distance of 20 feet
being the 2 most
southerly parking
spaces on the easterly
side of North Walnut
Street, north of East
Ridgewood Avenue
North Walnut
Street [Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to a point 185
feet south of Franklin
Avenue
North Walnut
Street [Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
West 3 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From Franklin Avenue
to a point 185 feet south
of Franklin Avenue
North Walnut
Street
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 230 feet
north of Franklin
Avenue to Linwood
Avenue
Oak Street
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to a point 120
feet south of the
southerly curbline of
Franklin Avenue
§ 265-69 TAXATION § 265-69
254:1191
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Oak Street
[Added
3-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 3463;
amended
9-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 3544]
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 147 feet
south of Franklin
Avenue to a point 216
feet south thereof
Oak Street
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453;
3-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 3463;
9-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 3544]
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From a point 76 feet 7
inches north of East
Ridgewood Avenue to a
point 216 feet south of
Franklin Avenue
Oak Street West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 450 feet
north of Franklin
Avenue to Robinson
Lane
Park Slope
[Amended
9-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3735]
Both 4 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Monday through
Friday, except holidays
From Monte Vista
Avenue to Madison
Place
Passaic Street
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From South Broad
Street to Prospect
Street
Pine Street North 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From North Maple
Avenue to Cliff Street
Pomander Walk
[Repealed
6-8-2016 by
Ord. No. 3539]
Prospect Street
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 56 feet
south of East Ridgewood
Avenue to Dayton Street
Pomander Walk
[Added
5-10-2017 by
Ord. No. 3597]
North/East 2 hrs.; 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Godwin Avenue to
the end
§ 265-69 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-69
254:1192
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Prospect Street
[Added
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. to 8:00 p.m./All,
except Sundays and
holidays
From a point opposite
the southerly line of
Passaic Street to a point
opposite the northerly
curbline of Woodside
Avenue
Prospect Street
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From the northerly
curbline of Woodside
Avenue to a point 110
feet north of South
Maple Avenue
Prospect Street
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
West 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 51 feet
south of East Ridgewood
Avenue to Hudson
Street
Ridge Road
[Amended
2-9-2005 by
Ord. No. 2925]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./Saturdays and
Sundays
From the intersection of
Crest Road east to the
dead end
Robinson Lane South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Oak Street to
North Maple Avenue
Second Street North 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 125 feet
west of North Maple
Avenue to Cliff Street
Second Street South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From North Maple
Avenue to Cliff Street
Sherman Place
[Repealed
8-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 3130]
Sherman Place
[Added
8-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 3130]
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Stanley Place to
the dead end north of
Washington Place
Sherman Place
[Added
8-13-2008 by
Ord. No. 3130]
North 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Godwin Avenue to
Stanley Place
§ 265-69 TAXATION § 265-69
254:1193
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
South Broad
Street [Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From LeRoy Place to a
point 211 feet north
South Broad
Street
East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From LeRoy Place to
Leonard Place
South Broad
Streets
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 40 feet
north of Passaic Street
to a point 41 feet south
of Hudson Street
South Broad
Street [Amended
8-14-2002 by
Ord. No. 2793;
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
East 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 423 feet
south of Passaic Street
to a point 50 feet south
of Passaic Street
South Broad
Street [Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
West 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to a point
opposite the northerly
curbline of Hudson
Street
South Broad
Street [Amended
8-14-2002 by
Ord. No. 2793;
6-8-2011 by
Ord. No. 3298]
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 608 feet
south of a point opposite
the southerly line of
Passaic Street south to
the Village line
South Hillside
Place [Added
2-3-2012 by
Ord. No. 2771;
amended
11-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 3621 ]
South/west 2 hours; 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./Monday
through Friday
From a point 255 feet
west thereof to a point
350 feet west thereof
South Monroe
Street
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 193 feet
north of Godwin Avenue
to a point 377 feet north
of Godwin Avenue
§ 265-69 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-69
254:1194
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
South Pleasant
Avenue [Added
4-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 2778]
West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and
From a point 35 feet
south of East Ridgewood
Avenue to a point 275
feet south of East
Ridgewood Avenue
South Pleasant
Avenue [Added
6-11-2008 by
Ord. No. 3122]
West 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday through
Friday
From a point 275 feet
south of East Ridgewood
Avenue to a point 502
feet south of East
Ridgewood Avenue
South Pleasant
Avenue [Added
6-11-2008 by
Ord. No. 3122]
West 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m. to 2:00
p.m./Monday through
Friday
From a point 502 feet
south of East Ridgewood
Avenue to a point 820
feet south of East
Ridgewood Avenue
South Walnut
Street [Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
Both 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to Dayton Street
Spring Avenue South 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Prospect Street to
Hope Street
Station Plaza Both and
southbound
lane
3 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Erie Railroad
Station to Wilsey Square
Station Plaza Westerly/
and
northbound
lane
3 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From the Erie Railroad
Station to Wilsey Square
Sunset Avenue Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to
11:00 a.m./All, 11:00
except Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays
Between Monte Vista
Avenue and Woodland
Avenue
Union Street East 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Dayton Street to
South Maple Avenue
Van Neste Square
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
All 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to Dayton Street
§ 265-69 TAXATION § 265-69
254:1195
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Walton Street
[Amended
6-8-2011 by
Ord. No.
3298;9-14-2011
by Ord. No.
3305]
South/West 4 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From South Maple
Avenue to Dayton Street
Washington Place West/North 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From West Ridgewood
Avenue to South Monroe
Street
West Ridgewood
Avenue
Both 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Heights Road to a
point 200 feet east of
Monroe Street
West Ridgewood
Avenue
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Corsa Terrace to
Heights Road
West Ridgewood
Avenue
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
North 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Garber Square to
Library Place
West Ridgewood
Avenue
North 15 min.; 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From Library Place to
Corsa Terrace
West Ridgewood
Avenue
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
South 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point opposite
the easterly curbline of
Heights Road to Wilsey
Square
West Ridgewood
Avenue
South 15 min.; 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 25 feet
east of Washington
Place to a point 40 feet
east thereof
Wilsey Square
[Amended
1-14-2015 by
Ord. No. 3453]
All 1 hr.; 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From East Ridgewood
Avenue to Godwin
Avenue
§ 265-69 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-69
254:1196
Name of Street Side
Time Limit; Hours/
Days Location
Wilsey Square
[Added
7-16-2003 by
Ord. No. 2838]
West 15 min.; 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 34.5 feet
north of Godwin Avenue
to a point approximately
55 feet north of Godwin
Avenue toward West
Ridgewood Avenue
Woodside Avenue North/ West 2 hrs.; 7:00 a.m. to 8:00
p.m./All, except
Sundays and holidays
From a point 50 feet
west of Prospect Street
to Leonard Place
§ 265-70. Schedule XX: Special Holiday Parking Restrictions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-24, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours of 12:00 noon and 12:00 midnight on July 4 (or, in the
event that July 4 falls on a Sunday, on July 5) upon any of the following
described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Carlton Terrace Both From Kemah Road to Windsor Terrace
Colonial Road Both From North Van Dien Avenue to Northern
Parkway
Corsa Terrace Both Entire length
Crest Road Both Entire length
Fairway Road Both From North Van Dien Avenue to Northern
Parkway
Heights Road Both From West Glen Avenue to West
Ridgewood Avenue
Hillcrest Road Both From West Glen Avenue southwardly to its
terminus
Kemah Road Both Entire length
Madison Place Both From Crest Road to North Monroe Street
Monte Vista Avenue Both Entire length
Northern Parkway Both From Irving Street to Meadowbrook
Avenue
North Monroe Street Both From Kemah Road to West Ridgewood
Avenue
Park Slope Both Entire length
Ridge Road Both Entire length
Robinson Lane Both From Maple Avenue to Chestnut Street
Sheridan Terrace Both Entire length
South Hill Road Both Entire length
§ 265-69 TAXATION § 265-70
254:1197
Name of Street Side Location
Sunset Avenue Both Entire length
Unadilla Road Both Entire length
Upper Boulevard Both From Hillcrest Road to West Glen Avenue
Valley View Avenue Both Entire length
Waiku Road Both From North Monroe Street to Wastena
Terrace
West Ridgewood
Avenue
Both From North Monroe Street to Wilsey
Square
Wildwood Road Both Entire length
Windsor Terrace Both Entire length
Woodland Avenue Both From Crest Road to North Monroe Street
§ 265-71. Schedule XXI: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-25, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 265-72. Schedule XXII: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-26, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Chestnut Street
[Added
7-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 3479]
East 5:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m./All
days
From the southerly curb cut for
the entrance to the Chestnut
Street Parking Lot, to a point 32
feet south thereof with a width at
right angles to the curb of 7 feet
for the use by a valet service
Chestnut Street
[Added
7-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 3479]
East 5:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m./All
days
From a point 54 feet north of the
northerly curb line of East
Ridgewood Avenue, to a point
109 feet north thereof with a
width at right angles to the curb
of 7 feet for the use by a valet
service
§ 265-70 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-72
254:1198
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Chestnut Street
[Added
8-13-2014 by
Ord. No. 3431]
East 6:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m./All
days
From a point 123 feet north of
the curbline of East Ridgewood
Avenue to a point 37 north
thereof with a width at right
angles to the curb of 10 feet
Chestnut Street
[Added
8-12-2015 by
Ord. No. 3487;
amended
9-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 3544]
East 5:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m./All
days
From a point 52 feet north of
East Ridgewood Avenue to a
point 159 feet north thereof with
a width at right angles to the
curb of 7 feet for the use by a
valet service
Chestnut Street
[Added
9-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 3544]
East 5:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m./All
days
From a point 293 feet north of
East Ridgewood Avenue to a
point 336 feet north thereof with
a width at right angles to the
curb of 7 feet for the use by a
valet service
Chestnut Street
[Added
10-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 3554]
West 5:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m./All
days
From a point 34 feet north of
East Ridgewood Avenue to a
point 155 feet north thereof with
a width at right angles to the
curb of 7 feet for the use by a
valet service
Chestnut Street
[Amended
10-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 3554]
West 3:01 a.m. to
4:49
p.m./days
From a point 34 feet 3 inches
north of East Ridgewood Avenue
to a point 24 feet 10 inches north
thereof with a width at right
angles to the curb of 7 feet for
delivery vehicles only
Chestnut Street
facility off-street
parking
East From a point 81 feet south of the
extreme northeast corner of the
site and running southerly 19
feet
East Ridgewood
Avenue
North From a point 41.4 feet east of
Broad Street to a point 47 feet
east thereof with a width at right
angles to the curb of 7 feet
Oak Street West From a point 240 feet north of
East Ridgewood Avenue to a
point 24 feet north thereof with a
width at right angles to the curb
of 7 feet
§ 265-72 TAXATION § 265-72
254:1199
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Oak Street
[Added
3-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 3463;
amended
9-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 3544]
West 5:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m./All
days
From a point 147 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Franklin
Avenue, to a point 216 feet south
thereof with a width at right
angles to the curb of 7 feet for
the use by a valet service
Prospect Street
[Added
7-15-2015 by
Ord. No. 3479;
amended
12-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3512]
West 5:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m./All
days
From a point 50 feet south of the
southerly curbline of East
Ridgewood Avenue, to a point
150 feet south thereof with a
width at right angles to the curb
of 7 feet for the use by a valet
service
Second Street North From a point 35 feet west of
North Maple Avenue to a point
100 feet west thereof with a
width at right angles to the curb
of 7 feet
Second Street South From a point 35 feet west of
North Maple Avenue to a point
100 feet west thereof with a
width at right angles to the curb
of 7 feet
Train Station
Parking Lot
[Added
9-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3745]
North 3:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m./All
days
The marked area at the
northwest corner of the Station
Building (Baggage Building) for
use by entities conducting
business in the Train Station
Buildings
Wilsey Square West From a point 92 feet south of
West Ridgewood Avenue to a
point 48 feet south thereof with a
width at right angles to the curb
of 7 feet
§ 265-73. Schedule XXIII: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-27, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
§ 265-72 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-73
254:1200
Name of Street Side Location
North Broad Street
[Amended
1-25-2017 by Ord.
No. 3575]
West Two parking spaces as designated by the
Village Council
§ 265-74. Schedule XXIV: Bus Stops. [Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord.
No. 2631; 12-8-1998 by Ord. No. 2654; 4-13-1999 by Ord. No. 2660;
12-10-2008 by Ord. No. 3146; 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 3326; 3-8-2017
by Ord. No. 3585]
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-28, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
A. State highways. [Amended 9-12-2018 by Ord. No. 3666]
(1) State Route 17, northbound, on the easterly side at:
(a) Bus stop ID No. 30672, between West Saddle River Road and
the pedestrian overpass at milepost 17.54 (mid-block),
beginning at a point 1,360 feet north of the concrete gore
between Route NJ 17 NB and West Saddle River Road and
extending 250 feet northerly therefrom, in designated bus
turnout.
(2) State Route 17, southbound, on the westerly side at:
(a) Bus stop ID No. 13368, between Paramus Road (County Road
62) and Linwood Avenue (County Road 110) (mid-block),
beginning at a point 390 feet south of the center line of
Paramus Road (County Road 62) overpass and extending 170
feet southerly thereof, in designated bus turnout.
(b) Bus stop ID No. 12985, between Linwood Avenue (County Road
110) and the pedestrian overpass at milepost 16.47 (midblock),
beginning at a point 230 feet south of the center line of
Linwood Avenue (County Road 110) overpass and extending
190 feet southerly therefrom, in designated bus turnout.
B. County roads.
(1) East Ridgewood Avenue, eastbound, on the southerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13336, South Irving Street (far side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of South Irving Street and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom.
(b) Bus Stop No. 13337, South Van Dien Avenue (far side),
beginning at the easterly curbline of South Van Dien Avenue
and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
§ 265-73 TAXATION § 265-74
254:1201
(c) Bus Stop No. 13338, South Pleasant Avenue (far side),
beginning at the easterly curbline of South Pleasant Avenue
and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(d) Bus Stop No. 30504, Somerville Road across from Pershing
Avenue (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Somerville Road across from Pershing Avenue and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom.
(2) East Ridgewood Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13339, North Pleasant Avenue (far side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of North Pleasant Avenue
and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(b) Bus Stop No. 13340, North Van Dien Avenue (far side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of North Van Dien Avenue
and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(c) Bus Stop No. 13341, North Irving Street (far side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of North Irving Street and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom.
(d) Bus Stop No. 30505, Pershing Avenue across from Somerville
Road (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of Pershing
Avenue across from Somerville Road and extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom.
(3) Franklin Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13343, North Walnut Street (near side),
beginning at the easterly curbline of North Walnut Street and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(4) Franklin Turnpike, northbound, on the easterly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13344, Nagle Avenue (far side), beginning at the
northerly curbline of Nagle Avenue and extending 100 feet
northerly therefrom.
(5) Franklin Turnpike, southbound, on the westerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13345, Lynn Street (near side), beginning at the
prolongation of northerly curbline of Lynn Street and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(6) Godwin Avenue, eastbound, on the southerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13346, Maltbie Avenue (near side), beginning at
the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Maltbie Avenue
and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
§ 265-74 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-74
254:1202
(b) Bus Stop No. 13347, Lincoln Avenue (near side), beginning at
the westerly curbline of Lincoln Avenue and extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom.
(7) Godwin Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13348, South Monroe Street (far side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of South Monroe Street and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom.
(b) Bus Stop No. 13349, Maltbie Avenue (near side), beginning at
the easterly curbline of Maltbie Avenue and extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom.
(8) Goffle Road, northbound, on the easterly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13350, Ravine Avenue (near side), beginning at
the prolongation of southerly curbline of Ravine Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(b) Bus Stop No. 32722, between Ravine Avenue and Liberty
Street (mid-block), approximately 450 feet north from the
northerly curbline of Ravine Avenue and extending an
additional 135 feet north thereof (to in front of No. 401 Goffle
Road). [Added 10-11-2017 by Ord. No. 3615]
(9) Lincoln Avenue, northbound, on the easterly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13351, McKinley Place (far side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of McKinley Place and extending 100
feet northerly therefrom.
(10) Lincoln Avenue, southbound, on the westerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13352, McKinley Place (far side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of McKinley Place and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom.
(11) Linwood Avenue, eastbound, on the southerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13353, North Maple Avenue (far side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of North Maple Avenue and ending 150
feet easterly therefrom.
(b) Bus Stop No. 13354, North Van Dien Avenue (far side),
beginning at the easterly curbline of North Van Dien Avenue
and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(c) Bus Stop No. 13355, Sollas Court (far side), beginning at the
prolongation of the easterly curbline of Sollas Court and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(12) Linwood Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side at:
§ 265-74 TAXATION § 265-74
254:1203
(a) Bus Stop No. 13356, Sollas Court (near side), beginning at the
easterly curbline of Sollas Court and extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom.
(b) Bus Stop No. 13357, North Van Dien Avenue (near side),
beginning at the easterly curbline of North Van Dien Avenue
and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(13) North Maple Avenue, southbound, on the westerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13360, Linwood Avenue (far side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Linwood Avenue and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom.
(14) South Maple Avenue, northbound, on the easterly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13370, Prospect Street (near side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Prospect Street and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom.
(15) South Maple Avenue, southbound, on the westerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13369, Prospect Street (far side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Prospect Street and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom.
C. Local roads.
(1) East Ridgewood Avenue, eastbound, on the southerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13335, South Maple Avenue (near side),
beginning at the westerly curbline of South Maple Avenue and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) East Ridgewood Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13342, North Maple Avenue (far side), beginning
at the westerly curbline of North Maple Avenue and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom.
(3) Morningside Road, northbound, on the easterly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13358, Fairmount Avenue (far side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of Fairmount Avenue and extending 100
feet northerly therefrom.
(b) Bus Stop No. 13378, Richards Road (near side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Richards Road and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom.
(4) Morningside Road, southbound, on the westerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13359, California Street (near side), beginning at
the prolongation of the northerly curbline of California Street
and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
§ 265-74 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-74
254:1204
(b) Bus Stop No. 30446, Richards Road (near side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of Richards Road and extending 105 feet
northerly therefrom.
(c) Bus Stop No. 13377, Avondale Road (far side), beginning at the
southerly curbline of Avondale Road and extending 100 feet
southerly therefrom.
(5) North Monroe Street, northbound, on the easterly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13361, Woodland Avenue (near side), beginning
at the southerly curbline of Woodland Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom.
(b) Bus Stop No. 13362, West Glen Avenue (far side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of West Glen Avenue and extending 100
feet northerly therefrom.
(c) Bus Stop No. 30448, Monte Vista Avenue (far side), beginning
at the northerly curbline of Monte Vista Avenue and extending
100 feet northerly therefrom.
(d) Bus Stop No. 30449, Carlton Terrace/Windsor Terrace (far
side), beginning at the northerly curbline of Carlton Terrace/
Windsor Terrace and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(6) North Monroe Street, southbound, on the westerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13363, West Glen Avenue (near side), beginning
at the northerly curbline of West Glen Avenue and extending
105 northerly therefrom.
(b) Bus Stop No. 13364, Woodland Avenue (near side), beginning
at the northerly curbline of Woodland Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom.
(c) Bus Stop No. 30450, Carlton Terrace/Windsor Terrace (far
side), beginning at the northerly curbline of Carlton Terrace/
Windsor Terrace and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(d) Bus Stop No. 30451, North Hillside Place, from the northerly
curbline of North Hillside Place extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
(7) Oak Street, northbound, on the easterly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13365, Franklin Avenue (near side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Franklin Avenue and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom.
(8) Oak Street, southbound, on the westerly side at:
§ 265-74 TAXATION § 265-74
254:1205
§ 265-75. Schedule XXV: Emergency No-Parking Areas. [Amended
3-11-2015 by Ord. No. 3461]
In accordance with the provisions of § 265-43, The Village Manager, in
consultation with the Office of Emergency Management and the Chief of
Police, shall designate any streets or parts thereof in the Village as "No
Parking Areas" during an emergency condition for the duration deemed
necessary to ameliorate the said emergency conditions for the safety of the
public.
(a) Bus Stop No. 13366, Franklin Avenue (far side), beginning at
the southerly curbline of Franklin Avenue and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom.
(9) West Ridgewood Avenue, eastbound, on the southerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13372, South Monroe Street (far side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of South Monroe Street and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom.
(10)West Ridgewood Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13373, North Monroe Street (near side),
beginning at the easterly curbline of North Monroe Street and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(11)Wilsey Square, northbound, on the easterly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13374, Wilsey Square (midblock), beginning at
65 feet south of the southerly curbline of West Ridgewood
Avenue and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(12)Wilsey Square, southbound, on the westerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13375, West Ridgewood Avenue (far side),
beginning at the southerly curbline of West Ridgewood Avenue
and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(13) Van Neste Square, southbound, on the westerly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 13371, Dayton Street (near side), beginning at
the northerly curbline of Dayton Street and extending 150 feet
northerly therefrom.
(14) Hillcrest Road, westbound, on the easterly side at:
(a) Bus Stop No. 30452, Morningside Road (near side), beginning
at the easterly curbline of Morningside Road and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom.
§ 265-74 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-75.1
254:1206
§ 265-75.1. Schedule XXVI: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours for
Commercial Vehicles. [Added 8-10-2005 by Ord. No. 2952]
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Spring Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./Monday
through Friday
From the east curbline of
Van Dien Avenue to the
west curbline of Circle
Avenue
§ 265-75.1 TAXATION § 265-75.1
254:1207

ARTICLE IX
Provisions Applicable to Semipublic and Private Property
[Added 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2846]
§ 265-76. Ridgewood Senior Citizens Housing Corporation.
[Amended 2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2918]
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 and on the request of The
Ridgewood Senior Citizens Housing Corporation, Inc., that the provisions of
Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes shall be made applicable to the
semi-public or private roads, streets, driveways and parking areas and other
roadways open to or used by the public, tenants, employees and members
of The Ridgewood Senior Citizens Housing Corporation, Inc., the Village
of Ridgewood has determined that the provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39, of
the Revised Statutes should be made applicable to The Ridgewood Senior
Citizens Housing Corporation, Inc., for the premises located at 7-11 Ridge
Road, shown as Block 2004, Lot 10.01 on the current Tax Map of the Village
of Ridgewood.
A. General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below, except in areas covered by other
parking restrictions:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Road "A" Both All As indicated on site
plan
(3) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
(reserved parking sign and penalty plate), in designated parking
areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped parking
permit by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
B. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Road "A" 15 Entire length
(2) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
§ 265-76 TAXATION § 265-76
254:1209
§ 265-77. Stop & Shop Supermarket Company. [Added 9-8-2004 by
Ord. No. 2896; amended 2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2919]
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 and on the request of The Stop
& Shop Supermarket Company, L.L.C. that the provisions of Subtitle 1, Title
39 of the Revised Statutes shall be made applicable to the semi-public or
private roads, streets, driveways and parking areas and other roadways
open to or used by the public, tenants, employees and members of The
Stop & Shop Supermarket Company, L.L.C., the Village of Ridgewood has
determined that the provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes
should be made applicable to The Stop & Shop Supermarket Company,
L.L.C. for the premises located at 175 Franklin Avenue, shown as Block
2011, Lot 9 on the current Tax Map of the Village of Ridgewood.
C. Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading
zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or present in any
way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
D. Loading zone(s). The locations described are hereby designated as
loading zones. No person shall park a vehicle in said location during the
times indicated other than for the loading or unloading of goods and
materials.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Road "A" Both All As indicated on site plan
E. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
F. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey
statutes, every person convicted of a violation of this section or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to the violations and penalties
provisions of § 1-15 of the Ridgewood Village Code. No person,
however, shall receive a jail sentence for any single offense in excess of
15 days.
A. General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described below, except in areas covered by other
parking restrictions:
§ 265-76 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-77
254:1210
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All roads and
aisles
Both All As indicated on site
plan
(3) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
(reserved parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped
parking permit by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
B. Through streets and stop intersections.
(1) Through streets. The following streets or parts are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the
near right side of each street intersecting the through street,
except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Location
Road "A" Between Road "B" and Franklin Avenue (C.R.
No. 6)
Road "B" Entire length
Road "D" Between Road "A" and Road "B"; between
Road "B" and North Walnut Street
(2) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are
hereby designated at stop intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Road "D" and North Walnut
Street
Road "D"
Road "B" and Cottage Place Road "B"
C. One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Location
Road "B" West Between Road "A" and Road "D"
D. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s)
shall be 15 mph.
(2) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways is:
§ 265-77 TAXATION § 265-77
254:1211
§ 265-78. Ridgewood Cycle Shop, Inc. [Added 8-9-2006 by Ord. No.
3010]
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 and on the request of Donald
W. McKinnon and The Ridgewood Cycle Shop, Inc. that the provisions of
Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes shall be made applicable to the
semipublic or private roads, streets, driveways and parking areas and other
roadways open to or used by the public, tenants, employees and members of
The Ridgewood Cycle Shop, Inc., the Village of Ridgewood has determined
that the provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes should
be made applicable to The Ridgewood Cycle Shop, Inc., for the premises
located at 35 North Broad Street, shown as Block 3804, Lot 21, on the
current Tax Map of the Village of Ridgewood.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
All roads and aisles 15 Entire length
(3) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to
effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
E. Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing so as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading
zones, oil fills, any grassy area pedestrian walkway, or present in any
way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
F. Loading zone(s). The locations described are hereby designated as
loading zones. No person shall park a vehicle in said location during the
times indicated other than the loading or unloading of goods and
materials.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Road "D" South All As indicated on site plan
G. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
H. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by the New Jersey
statutes, every person convicted of a violation of this section, or
supplement thereto, shall be liable to the violations and penalties
provisions of § 1-15 of the Ridgewood Village Code. No person,
however, shall receive a jail sentence for any single offense in excess of
15 days.
§ 265-77 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-79
254:1212
§ 265-79. Pondview Medical Center of Ridgewood, LLC. [Added
2-14-2007 by Ord. No. 3037]
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 and on the request of Dr.
Dinesh Khosla, managing member, Pondview Medical Center of Ridgewood,
LLC, that the provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes shall
be made applicable to the semipublic or private roads, streets, driveways
and parking areas and other roadways open to or used by the public,
tenants, employees and clients of Pondview Medical Center of Ridgewood,
LLC, the Village of Ridgewood has determined that the provisions of
Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes should be made applicable to
Pondview Medical Center of Ridgewood, LLC, for the premises located at
1124 East Ridgewood Avenue, shown as Block 4205, Lot 3, on the current
Tax Map of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 265-79.1. Ridgewood Public Schools. [Added 8-9-2017 by Ord. No.
3611]
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 and on the request of Dr. Daniel
Fishbein, Superintendent of Ridgewood Public Schools, that the provisions
of Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes shall be made applicable
to the semipublic or private roads, streets, driveways and parking areas
and other roadways open to or used by the public, tenants, employees,
students, and parents of students of Ridgewood Public Schools, the Village
of Ridgewood has determined that the provisions of Subtitle 1, Title 39,
of the Revised Statutes should be made applicable to all premises and
properties operated by the Ridgewood Public Schools in the Village of
Ridgewood.
§ 265-79 TAXATION § 265-79.1
254:1213

ARTICLE X
Central Business District Employee Parking
[Added 10-22-2014 by Ord. No. 3438; amended 12-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 3448; 11-9-2015 by Ord. No. 3508; 1-11-2017 by Ord. No. 3572]
§ 265-80. General requirements.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the
permitting for the parking of motor vehicles either owned or operated
by employees, staff or persons working at business and/or office
locations in the Central Business District of the Village, so as to
alleviate repeat parking violations of such vehicles in the metered
parking spaces on the public thoroughfares and parking lots of the
Village in the Central Business District.
B. Permit required. No vehicle either owned or operated by employees,
staff or persons working at businesses and/or offices located in the
Central Business District shall be parked or remain in parking spaces at
the designated CBD employee parking locations without having first
obtained a parking permit from the Village Manager or the Manager's
designee. Permits issued are as follows:
(1) Annual CBD employee parking permit: Payment for this permit will
allow the permit holder to park in the designated CBD employees
parking spaces only in the Cottage Street and North Walnut Street
parking lots. The permit users shall be responsible for payment of
any and all parking meter fees. This permit is not transferable.
C. Permit fees.
(1) All such vehicles either owned or operated by employer, staff or
persons working in the Central Business District desiring to park in
furtherance of the purpose of this article shall pay for their parking
utilizing one of the following approved methods: [Amended
1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 3575]
(a) Monthly hang tags: Issued by the Village of Ridgewood.
(b) Payment by means of a wireless system: Payment by means of a
wireless cellular communication device through a designated
vendor authorized by the Village of Ridgewood.
(c) Payment by cash: Depositing the requisite amount of coins to
pay for time spent in a metered parking space where there is a
parking meter.
(2) Parking permit hang tags (monthly) can be obtained by filing a
registration form and satisfying all necessary fees pursuant to
§ 265-47F of the Code of the Village of Ridgewood. Such
registration form and payment of such fees shall be filed and paid
at the Village Hall reception desk or to such other person at such
§ 265-80 TAXATION § 265-80
254:1215
other location within the Municipal Building as may be designated
by the Village Manager.
D. Required information. Each registration form shall identify the name of
the business or office location at which the individual works and the
month(s) for which the vehicle shall be parked at the location. The
registration form shall also identify a contact person, including a
telephone number and email address, and any other information which
shall be deemed necessary from time to time by the Village Manager.
E. Locations. Parking of such vehicles shall be permitted in certain
designated parking spaces at the following locations:
(1) Annual CBD employee parking permit holders: The 60 identified
parking spaces in the Cottage Parking Lot.
(2) Annual CBD employee parking permit holders: The 30 identified
spaces in the North Walnut Street Parking Lot.
F. Hours. Parking of such vehicles shall be permitted for up to eight hours
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday. [Amended 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 3575]
G. Violations. [Amended 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 3575]
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 and the provisions of Subtitle 1, Title
39 of the New Jersey Statutes, the provisions of this article shall be
enforceable at the subject locations by any member of the
Ridgewood Police Department or a Ridgewood Parking
Enforcement Officer.
(2) Any violations of this section shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 265-47.
§ 265-80 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 265-80
254:1216
Chapter 269
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 145. Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 238.
§ 265-80 TAXATION § 265-80
254:1217

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 269-1. Applicability.
Any person receiving a supply of water for any purpose from the
Department of Water Supply of the Village shall be subject to rules and
regulations as set forth herein.
§ 269-2. Definitions. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CUSTOMER —
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Water Supply of the Village.
FIRE SERVICE LINE — Any line which receives water supplied to a fire
hydrant, standpipe, sprinkler system or any combination of the foregoing,
located on private property.
SERVICE CONNECTION — Either a service line or a fire service line.
SERVICE LINE — A line used to supply a single customer only, for use
other than fire service, and no customer shall be supplied by more than one
service line unless agreed upon between the customer and the Department.
§ 269-3. Responsibility for payment of charges.
The owner of any house, tenement, building or lot shall each be liable for
the payment of the price or rent as fixed herein for the use of water by such
owner or by the occupier and for the installation, purchase price, repair
and testing of any water meter, water service, connections, appliances or
The party contracting for service to a property as hereinafter classified:
A building under one roof owned by one party and occupied as one
business or residence.
(1)
A combination of buildings owned by one party in one common
enclosure, occupied by one family or business.
(2)
An individual dwelling unit, owned or rented by one party, which
may or may not be separated by a fire-resistant wall and ceiling.
(3)
A building owned by one party having a number of apartments or
offices and using in common one hall and one or more means of
entrance.
(4)
A.
Where two or more customers are supplied through a single service
line, any violation of the rules of the Department with reference to
either or any of such customers shall be deemed a violation as to all,
and the Department may take such action as could be taken if it were
used by a single customer.
B.
§ 269-1 TAXATION § 269-3
254:1219
parts and renewals thereof heretofore or hereafter furnished or made by the
Department in or upon such house, tenement, building or lot or connecting
with such house, tenement, building or lot and the interest and penalties
charged; and such price or rent and other costs, expenses, interest and
penalties as fixed herein shall be a lien upon such house, tenement, building
or lot until the same shall be paid and satisfied.
§ 269-4. Application for water service; conditions for acceptance.
§ 269-5. Service connection.
A. Application for water service must be made on forms prescribed by the
Department by the owner of the premises to be supplied or by a lessee.
In the case of a metered supply, if made by a lessee it must be
accompanied by a deposit of the maximum estimate credit to be
extended, which will be returned to the depositor with legal interest
from the date of the deposit on satisfactory proof that has terminated
and his account has been settled in full and either that the meter has
been removed and the water shut off or that application has been duly
made for continued supply by the owner or by a new lessee who has
been accepted as a customer with respect to such premises by the
Department. Each customer shall notify the Department promptly of
any change of ownership of the property supplied under his application.
B. No person having an undisputed delinquent account with the
Department will be accepted as a customer until such account is paid in
full or until the Department has been secured by a deposit for future
service.
C. Owners or their agents applying for water, whether it be for the
introduction of water or for the alteration and extension of the
arrangements for supplying the same, shall state fully and truly the
purpose for which such water is required.
D. A supply of water for building or other special purposes, except on a lot
or premises already supplied with water by meter, must be especially
applied for.
A. Written application for service connection on the form prescribed by
the Water Department shall be made to the Department a reasonable
time before any such connection shall be installed.
B. Service pipes will not be installed when the service pipe passes over or
through premises which at the time may be the property of persons
other than the owner of the premises to be supplied, unless the owner
of the premises supplied guarantees the Department against all liability.
C. No service installation will be made from the first day of December to
the first day of March following, except at the option of the Department.
When installations are made during such period, the charge for the
same will be increased by 50%.
§ 269-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 269-6
254:1220
§ 269-6. Tapping of mains; charges. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
Connections for a fire service line will be made to the mains of the
Department upon application, in writing, upon forms furnished by the
Department by the owner of any building or premises as follows:
§ 269-7. Unauthorized connections.
§ 269-8. Piping system compliance; right of access.
A. Upon receipt of such application, except as otherwise provided by this
chapter, the tapping of the main will be done and the service line from
the main to the curb, curb stop and curb box will be furnished and
placed by the Department or its agent at its expense; also, any increase
in size of an existing service connection to cover an expansion of the
premises served shall be done at the owner's expense, including that
portion of the service connection from the main to the curb; the
remainder of the service connection from the curb line to the building
will be placed by the Department at the owner's expense. Under no
condition shall the Department connect to their mains services laid by
other than the Department or its agent. Under no condition will the
Department lay service pipes in trenches with other subsurface
structures, except in cases where the service line is to be laid in rock; in
which case it may be done at the option of the Department.
B. The charge, if any, for a street opening permit shall be paid in advance
by the applicant.
C. Whenever a tap is made through which regular service is not
immediately desired, the applicant shall bear the entire expense of
tapping the main and laying and maintaining the service pipes,
couplings and connections, but shall be entitled to a refund for such
part as the Department agrees to assume whenever regular service is
begun.
D. Estimates of cost of laying the pipe from the curb to the house and of
fittings and materials will be furnished upon request.
A. Stopcocks at the curbline and in branch service are for the exclusive
use of the Department, and any person who shall, without permission,
connect or disconnect the meter pipe or conduits of the Department or
in any other manner without a permit tamper or interfere with the
meters, pipes or conduits or who shall without permit connect with the
meter, pipes or conduits of such Department by pipes, conduits or other
instruments for the purpose of obtaining water, with intent to defraud
such Department, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. No plumber, owner or other unauthorized person shall turn the water
on or off at any corporation stop or curb stop or disconnect or remove
the meter without the consent of the Department.
§ 269-6 TAXATION § 269-8
254:1221
§ 269-9. Work done by owner to be inspected by Department.
No person except an employee of the Department will be allowed under
any circumstance to tap the mains or distribution pipes or insert stopcocks
therein. If the service pipe and fittings between the curb and the cellar
are installed by the owner or his agent, the work shall be left uncovered
until inspected by the Department, which inspection will be made by the
Department after it receives a request to do so.
§ 269-10. Service pipes from curb cock to meter.
Service pipes from the curb cock to the meter must be of material and
quality approved by the Department and laid at least four feet below the
established grades. Such service pipes are the property of the customer and
must be maintained by him.
§ 269-11. House boilers.
House boilers should be provided with vacuum valves in new work, and
when old boilers are taken out and replaced by others, they shall be
provided with a stopcock to shut off supply.
§ 269-12. Owner to report on repair work.
Owners or their agents making repairs when the water has been shut off
by the Department on account of leak, defect, misuse or disuse shall report,
in writing, to the Department that all plumbing work, both new and old, is
in complete working order and pay all expenses, otherwise the water will
not be turned on, and no person shall turn on the water unless he receives
permission.
A. A customer's piping system should comply with the regulations of the
Village and the rules of the Department.
B. The Department shall have the right of access to a customer's premises
and to all property furnished by it at reasonable times for the purpose of
reading meters or inspecting or replacing appliances used in
connection with the supply or service or for the removal of its property
at the time service is to be terminated. The customer shall obtain or
cause to be obtained all necessary permits needed by the Department
in giving access to the appliances referred to. Customers shall not
permit access to the meter and other appliances of the Department
except by authorized employees of the Department or properly qualified
state or local inspectors. In case of defective service, customers should
immediately notify the office of the Department.
C. Any plumbing in a residential or nonresidential facility providing water
for human consumption which is connected to the mains of the
Department shall be lead-free in accordance with the BOCA National
Plumbing Code. [Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
§ 269-8 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 269-13
254:1222
§ 269-13. Opening of stopcock. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375]
In opening the stopcock to let the water through the meter, such cock shall
be opened gradually, leaving some convenient faucet on the outlet side open
to allow the water to escape and to avoid damage to the meter.
§ 269-14. Disconnection and sealing of water fixtures.
No water fixture shall be considered cut off until it is disconnected so that
it cannot be used again or until sealed in a manner satisfactory to the
Department.
§ 269-15. Use of fire hydrants.
No person, unless authorized by the Department, shall take water from any
public fire hydrant or hose plug, except for fire purposes or for the use of
the fire department in case of fire, and no public fire hydrant shall be used
for sprinkling the streets, flushing sewers or gutters, or for any other than
fire purposes without a permit from the Department.
§ 269-16. Private fire service connections.
A. Connections for private fire service will be installed by the Department
and will be paid for by the customer. The size of the fire service line
shall be in accordance with the Department's approval, but in no case
shall exceed six inches. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
B. Connections may be used jointly for fire service and domestic purposes,
provided that the piping for the two services is separated immediately
outside the building. Where an independent supply for fire protection is
owned or maintained for fire protection, there shall be no connection
between it and the public water supply. Where an independent supply is
used, the fire service from the mains shall discharge into either a
cistern or elevated tank at or above the floor line. The domestic supply
will be metered. No meter will be required for the fire service supply
unless it is found that unauthorized use is being made of the supply, in
which case the Department reserves the right to install a meter, at the
owner's expense, in a housing provided by the customer. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
C. No water shall be used through the fire service supply, except for
testing purposes and in case of fire.
D. All hydrants, hose connections and outlets other than sprinkler heads
will be sealed by the Department. Seals may be broken in case of fire or
in the presence of a representative of the Department for testing
purposes. When seals are broken for any other purpose, a charge will
be made for resealing.
E. Rates for fire service connections shall be as follows:
§ 269-13 TAXATION § 269-16
254:1223
§ 269-17. Inspection of pipes, meters and fixtures.
All pipes, meters and fixtures shall be subject at all reasonable hours to
inspection by employees of the Department, identified by proper badges or
written permits.
§ 269-18. Prevention of unauthorized use.
All use of water other than by the customer or for any purpose or upon any
premises not stated or described in the application must be prevented by
him. The customer will be liable for the amount of water used in conformity
with the schedule of rates or tariffs of the Department.
§ 269-19. Grounds for discontinuance of service.
A customer's service may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:
(1) A yearly charge will be made for each fire service connection equal
to the average current rate per hydrant charged to the Village.
(2) A charge as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, will be made for
resealing outlets. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
A. For the use of water for any other property or purposes than that
described in the application.
B. For willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures
or otherwise.
C. For failure to maintain in good order connections, service lines or
fixtures owned by the customer.
D. For molesting any service pipe, meter, curb stopcock or seal or any
other appliance of the Department.
E. In case of vacancy of premises.
F. For neglecting to make or renew advance payments or for nonpayment
of water service charges or any other charges accruing under the
application.
G. For refusal of access at reasonable hours to property for purposes of
inspecting or for reading, caring for or removing meters.
H. For connecting or operating any piping or other facility, including but
not limited to lawn sprinkling on the customer's premises in such a
manner as to adversely affect the safety or adequacy of service
provided to other customers, present or prospective. [Added
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
I. For failure to comply with any state law or the rules, regulations, orders
or restrictions of any governmental authority having jurisdiction.
[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
§ 269-16 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 269-20
254:1224
§ 269-20. Renewal of service.
Service will be renewed under a proper application when the conditions
under which service was discontinued are corrected and upon the payment
of all proper charges due from the customer as provided for in the schedule
of rates or tariffs of the Department.
§ 269-21. Turnoff of water upon order of customer. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
Water will be turned off during normal business hours from any premises
upon the written order of the customer without in any way affecting the
existing agreement for service.
§ 269-22. Turnoff of service for repairs.
As necessity may arise, in case of breakdown, emergency or for any other
unavoidable cause, the Department may temporarily discontinue the water
supply to make necessary repairs, connections, etc., using all reasonable
and practicable measures to notify the customers of such discontinuance of
service and the probable duration of the discontinuance. In such case, the
Department will not be liable for any damage or inconvenience suffered.
All persons having boilers within their premises not supplied by a tank or
cistern are hereby cautioned against collapse.
§ 269-23. Authority to bind Department.
No agent or employee of the Department shall have the authority to bind
it by any promise, agreement or representation not provided for in this
chapter.
§ 269-24. Obligation of Department to supply; Department liability.
The Department undertakes only to use reasonable care and diligence to
provide a constant supply of water through its pipes, but does not undertake
to render any special service or to maintain any fixed or definite quantity
or pressure, and in the event of the occurrence of any break, failure or
accident, the Department shall not be liable for any damage resulting
therefrom.
§ 269-25. Temporary service.
A. This service shall be for water supplied through temporary connections
or other means for the construction of buildings, sewers, storm drains,
street paving, concrete sidewalks, curbs and gutters, puddling trenches
or fills, flushing sewers or any other purpose not otherwise classified.
B. Service for any purpose under this classification shall be especially
applied for at the office of the Water Department on blanks supplied by
the Department.
C. Under this classification, water service shall be through a meter.
§ 269-20 TAXATION § 269-25
254:1225
§ 269-26. Right to limit quantity; modification of regulations .
§ 269-27. Complaint procedure.
Complaints with regard to the character of the service furnished or the
reading of meters or of the bills rendered may be made at the Department's
office and should be in writing, and a record thereto will be kept by the
Department.
§ 269-28. Registration of private wells.
D. Where it is necessary to make special connections for this service, a
charge as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, will be made.
E. When water is supplied through a meter, the applicant will be
responsible for the meter, and all charges for repairs due to outside
causes will be paid by the applicant. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
F. When necessary to use a fire hydrant for flushing sewers or similar
work, the Department will furnish a meter and a man to operate the
hydrant at the expense of the applicant.
G. A deposit as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, will be required on each
application to cover the cost of water consumed, damages to meter and
cost of connection. The amount of the deposit will be determined by the
estimated amount of water required. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
H. Bills will be rendered monthly, and if unpaid within 30 days after
rendering, the deposit will be applied to the bill and service
discontinued.190
A. The Department reserves the right to decrease or limit the quantity of
water used whenever, in the judgment of the Department, it is
necessary or expedient to do so.
B. The Department also reserves the right to add to or modify its rules and
regulations at any time.
A. It shall be unlawful for any well heretofore or hereafter driven, drilled,
dug or constructed within the Village to be used for any purpose
whatsoever without first registering the same with the Division of
Health upon forms provided by it, setting forth the information required
by this section.
B. The person who registers each and every well shall furnish the
following information to the Division of Health of the Village:
190. Editor's Note: Former provisions regarding discount and rates, which immediately
followed this section, were deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
§ 269-25 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 269-28
254:1226
§ 269-29. Required sanitary quality of water.
No person shall use or make available for the use of any other person for
drinking, bathing, culinary purposes or for the cleaning of utensils or for
other domestic or potable purposes any water unless the same shall be
of a quality safe for the use to which the same is intended to be put and
unless such water shall fully meet the standards of quality for such purposes
as fixed by the Director of Health of the state or by any other officer or
department having the right or the power to fix or determine such quality.
§ 269-30. Pollution prohibited.
No person shall pollute or permit to be polluted any spring, well, cistern,
reservoir or other source of domestic or potable water supply or any surface
waters which drain into any such source of supply.
§ 269-31. Notice to discontinue.
Whenever the Division of Health shall have satisfactory evidence that any
spring, well or cistern or other source of water, the water of which is used
for domestic or potable purposes or for any of the purposes set forth in
§ 269-29, has become polluted or rendered unsafe for the use to which
the same is being put, written notice to discontinue the use of such water
and the well, cistern or other sources may be sent to the owner, agent or
person in charge of such spring, well or cistern or other source of water, and
such owner, agent or person shall forthwith, on receipt of such notice, close
(1) The name and address of the owner of and the location of the
property on which the well is situated by street address and lot and
block number from the current assessment atlas of the Village.
(2) The location of the well on such property, measured in feet from the
two nearest property lines thereof.
(3) The depth and diameter of such well.
(4) The diameter, length and material of the casing thereof.
(5) The diameter and length of the well screen, if any.
(6) The name, address and state license number of the well driller.
(7) The date the well was completed.
(8) The type of pump.
(9) The connections to and from such well, together with their sizes
and locations.
(10) The uses to which the water therefrom is or shall be put.
(11) The nature and extent of purification, if any, applied to the water
therefrom.
§ 269-28 TAXATION § 269-31
254:1227
such spring, well or cistern or other source and discontinue and cause the
discontinuance of the use of such water until the cause of the pollution has
been abated and until such water shall be rendered safe and of the quality
provided for in § 269-29.
§ 269-31 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 269-31
254:1228
ARTICLE II
Billing and Charges
§ 269-32. Billing for metered service.
§ 269-33. Responsibility of customer; notice of discontinuance.
§ 269-34. Rates and charges for metered service. [Amended
12-10-1974 by Ord. No. 1553; 2-27-1979 by Ord. No. 1701;
A. Bills for metered service shall be rendered at least once each quarter
and shall show the readings of the meter at the beginning and end of
the period for which the bill is rendered and shall give the dates on
which the readings were taken.
B. When a bill is rendered a second time covering a period for which a bill
has been rendered, the period shall be clearly stated on the bill.
C. Where access to a meter cannot be had, the Department may bill the
amount charged for the corresponding quarter of the preceding year or
for the period corresponding to that for which access is impossible, and
in such cases the amount paid will be treated as a credit, the amount
due being determined by the next meter reading. Estimated bills
rendered under this subsection will indicate the fact that the same are
estimated.
D. Whenever a meter is placed on any service pipe for which water rent
has been paid in advance at flat rate prices, the owner or user shall be
credited on his bill at meter rates for the amount paid in advance at the
time of placing the meter. The amount paid in advance shall be
computed on a per diem basis. After any meter has been so placed, the
owner or user shall be subject to all rules, regulations and rates set
forth herein with regard to metered service.
A. Customers will be held responsible for all charges accruing for water
service until written notice has been given to the office of the
Department to discontinue the supply.
B. If a bill remains unpaid for a period of 30 days or more after mailing or
presentation, notice will be served or mailed to the consumer stating
that unless the bill is paid within seven days from the date of such
notice, the water supply will be discontinued. When the water is turned
off under such conditions, it will remain off until the amount owing is
paid in full or until arrangements for payment satisfactory to the
Department have been made. If it is necessary to call at the premises
after such seven-day notice, a charge as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees,
will be made to cover the cost of the call.191 [Amended 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 2375]
191. Editor's Note: Former Section 34 of the 1974 Code, regarding unmetered sprinkling carts,
which immediately followed this section, was deleted 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375.
§ 269-32 TAXATION § 269-34
254:1229
5-22-1979 by Ord. No. 1714; 5-26-1981 by Ord. No. 1800; 9-8-1981
by Ord. No. 1815; 6-8-1982 by Ord. No. 1848; 8-9-1983 by Ord. No.
1899; 4-10-1984 by Ord. No. 1922; 3-11-1986 by Ord. No. 2020;
4-25-1991 by Ord. No. 2312; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375;
1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2587; 1-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2816; 8-13-2003
by Ord. No. 2845; 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3236; 6-9-2010 by Ord.
No. 3252; 12-8-2010 by Ord. No. 3272; 7-3-2012 by Ord. No. 3319;
6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3636]
The rate or charge for water supplied from the supply system of the Village
Water Department shall be upon a metered basis, except as provided in
§ 269-35. The rates or charges for the supply of water on a metered basis
to all customers effective for the 2010 calendar year to the present, shall
be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, in those amounts set forth for those
respective years.192
§ 269-35. Rates and charges for unmetered service. [Amended
2-27-1979 by Ord. No. 1701; 5-22-1979 by Ord. No. 1714; 5-26-1981
by Ord. No. 1800; 8-9-1983 by Ord. No. 1899; 4-25-1991 by Ord. No.
2312; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375; 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2587;
8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2845; 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3236; 6-9-2010
by Ord. No. 3252; 12-8-2010 by Ord. No. 3272; 7-3-2012 by Ord. No.
3319; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3636]
Unmetered service allowed by the Village Water Department within the
Village shall be provided at the rates or charges for all service billed for the
2010 calendar year to the present, all as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
§ 269-36. Rates and charges for service connections and
installations. [Amended 5-26-1981 by Ord. No. 1800; 8-9-1983 by
Ord. No. 1899; 4-25-1991 by Ord. No. 2312; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
2375; 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2587; 1-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2816;
8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2845; 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3236; 6-9-2010
by Ord. No. 3252; 12-8-2010 by Ord. No. 3272; 7-3-2012 by Ord. No.
3319; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3636]
From and after January 1, 2010, and to the present in accordance with those
respective rates set forth in Chapter 145, rates or charges shall be made
for any of the following service connections and installations as set forth in
Chapter 145, Fees.
A. For the extension of any main installed by the Village Department or its
authorized agents.
B. For any premises service connection installed by the Village
Department or its authorized agents. In addition, and where required,
the cost of trenching by the Village Department or its authorized agents
192. Editor's Note: The rates set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, were taken from Exhibit E of Ord.
No. 3636, adopted 6-27-2018, as they were the most current at time of amendment. For
the rates effective from the 2010 calendar year to the present, Exhibits A through E of
said ordinance are on file with the Village Clerk.
§ 269-34 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 269-36
254:1230
§ 269-36.1. Water service connections. [Added 8-13-2003 by Ord.
No. 2845; amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 3236; 6-9-2010 by Ord.
No. 3252; 12-8-2010 by Ord. No. 3272; 7-3-2012 by Ord. No. 3319;
6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3636; 4-10-2019 by Ord. No. 3709]
and the cost of rock excavation by the Village Department or its
authorized agents shall be as set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.
C. Permits from the Village Department for use of water during
construction periods shall be issued for a period not to exceed 90 days
and shall not be transferable by the consumer. Extensions of such
permits may be secured on like terms and upon payment of an
additional fee for each ninety-day extension period or fraction thereof.
D. If any applicant shall have been required by the Village Department to
finance the cost of any main extension and shall have done so, he shall
be refunded for each premises connection, when the premises is
occupied, made to the main extension contracted for if such premises
connection and service shall have been made within 10 years from the
date of the commencement of the work on such main extension.
E. Any applicant for a stub connection shall pay therefor, and if any
applicant who shall have been required by the Village Department to
pay for any stub connection shall make a premises connection thereto,
he shall be refunded such sum when the premises is occupied if the
premises connection or service shall be made within a period of 10
years from the date the work on such stub connection was commenced.
A. There shall be a service connection fee to place new customers on equal
footing with existing customers. The formula for said fee shall be in
accordance with that set forth in Section 1 of P.L. 1989 c. 109 (N.J.S.A.
40A:31-11) concerning connection charges by county and municipal
authorities. The formula for the connection fee shall be described as
follows:
(1) The amount representing all debt service, including but not limited
to sinking funds, reserve funds, the principal and interest on bonds,
and the amount of any loans and the interest thereon, paid by the
local unit or units to defray the capital cost of developing the
system as of the end of the immediately preceding budget year
shall be added to all capital expenditures made by a local unit or
units not funded by a bond ordinance or debt for the development
of the system as of the end of the immediately preceding budget
year.
(2) Any gifts, contributions or subsidies to the local unit or units
received from, and not reimbursed or reimbursable to, any federal,
state, county or municipal government or agency or any private
person, and that portion of amounts paid to the local unit or units
by a public entity under a service agreement or service contract
§ 269-36 TAXATION § 269-36.1
254:1231
which is not repaid to the public entity by the local unit or units,
shall then be subtracted.
(3) The remainder shall be divided by the total number of service units
served by the local unit or units at the end of the immediately
preceding budget year, and the results shall then be apportioned to
each new connector according to the number of service units
attributed to that connector. In attributing service units to each
connector, the estimated average daily flow of water for the
connector shall be divided by the average daily flow of water to the
average single-family residence in the area served by the local unit
or units, to produce the number of service units to be attributed.
(4) The connection fee shall be recomputed at the end of each budget
year, after a public hearing is held. The revised connection fee may
be imposed upon those who subsequently connect in that budget
year to the system.
(5) The combination of the connection fee or tapping fee and the
aforesaid water service charges shall be such that the revenues of
water supply facilities shall be adequate to pay the expenses of
operation and maintenance of the water supply facilities, including
improvements, extensions, enlargements and replacements to
water supply facilities, reserves, insurance, principal and interest
on any bonds, and to maintain such reserves or sinking funds
therefor as may be required under the bond covenants or any
contracts, or as may be deemed necessary or desirable.
B. For each connection to a water main, the fee shall be calculated at the
actual cost for the service plus 20%, plus an amount calculated per
connection unit, in accordance with Subsection A of this section and as
set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
C. For reconstruction of all connections, the following rate or charge shall
be made by the Village Water Department, or its authorized agents: as
set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
D. From and after January 1, 2010, and consistent herewith, for the
extension of any main installed by the Village Water Department or its
authorized agents: as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
E. From and after January 1, 2010, and consistent herewith, for any
premises service connection installed by the Village Water Department
or its authorized agents: as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
F. In addition and where required, the cost of trenching by the Village
Water Department or its authorized agents, and the cost of rock
excavation by the Village Water Department or its authorized agents,
shall be as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
G. Permits from the Village Water Department for use of water during
construction periods shall be as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees, per each
§ 269-36.1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 269-36.1
254:1232
§ 269-37. Rates and charges for miscellaneous services. [Amended
6-24-1975 by Ord. No. 1578; 5-22-1979 by Ord. No. 1714; 5-26-1981
by Ord. No. 1800; 8-9-1983 by Ord. No. 1899; 4-25-1991 by Ord. No.
2312; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375; 1-14-1997 by Ord. No. 2587;
1-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2816; 8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2845; 12-14-2009
by Ord. No. 3236; 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 3252; 12-8-2010 by Ord. No.
3272; 7-3-2012 by Ord. No. 3319; 6-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3636]
From and after January 1, 2010, through to the present in accordance
herewith, the rates or charges made for miscellaneous services shall be as
set forth in Chapter 145, Fees.193
premise under construction, and shall be issued according to meter
size. Extensions of such permits shall be as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees,
for each ninety-day extension period or fraction thereof for a period not
to exceed 90 days. A meter is installed and charged according to meter
size. The cost of extensions of such permits shall be as set forth in Ch.
145, Fees, for each ninety-day extension period or fraction thereof.
H. All other work performed by the Village Water Department not
accredited for in specific reference herein shall be performed at a rate
as set forth in Ch. 145, Fees.
193. Editor's Note: The rates set forth in Chapter 145, Fees, were taken from Exhibit E of Ord.
No. 3636, adopted 6-27-2018, as they were the most current at time of amendment. For
the rates effective from the 2010 calendar year to the present, Exhibits A through E of
said ordinance are on file with the Village Clerk.
§ 269-36.1 TAXATION § 269-37
254:1233

ARTICLE III
Water Meters
§ 269-38. Meters required.
§ 269-39. Installation; maintenance; liability. [Amended 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 2375]
The Department will, without charge, furnish and install each customer
supplied with water on a measured basis with a suitable meter and
couplings and will keep the same in repair, except in case of misuse or
damage by frost, hot water, water hammer, or external causes, in which
case the expense of repair must be borne by the customer. Instructions as
to reading meters will be given at the office of the Department.
§ 269-40. Placement and installation specifications.
§ 269-41. Testing and replacement.
A. On and after May 19, 1922, each new pipe put into service for supplying
water shall be equipped with a meter, and thereafter all charges for the
use of water through such services shall be based upon the meter rates
as established herein.
B. Meters will be installed on all service pipes in use on May 19, 1922, as
soon and as fast as the Department deems advisable.
A. All meters hereafter placed in buildings shall be located in the cellar or
first floor, as near as possible to the point of entrance of the service, in a
clean, dry, safe place, not subject to great variation in temperature, so
located as to be easily accessible for installation or disconnection and
for reading.
B. Meters must not be placed in improper positions, difficult of access. The
proposed location of each meter must be inspected and approved by the
Inspector of the Department before the meter will be set.
C. The meter, if installed outside the building, must be set opposite the
service box in a pit setting approved by the Department. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
D. A proper place and protection for the meter shall be provided by the
customer. Approved valves shall be placed on the service line on the
street side of and near the meter and a stop- and waste cock or valve on
the outlet side of the meter. A suitable check valve may be placed
between the stop- and waste cock or valve and the meter on all sizes up
to and including a two-inch meter. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord.
No. 2375]
E. Where a check valve is installed, a safety valve should be inserted at
some convenient point on the house piping to relieve excess pressure
due to heating of the water.
§ 269-38 TAXATION § 269-41
254:1235
§ 269-42. Correction of bills; meter presumed accurate. [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
A. Customer's tests. Customers may test the accuracy of a meter at any
time, in the case of meters reading in cubic feet, by drawing water until
the meter registers one or more cubic feet (each cubic foot of water
equals approximately 7 1/2 gallons and weighs 62 1/2 pounds); in the
case of meters reading in gallons, by drawing 10 gallons, or any
multiple thereof (each gallon of water weighs approximately 8 1/3
pounds).
B. Request tests. The Department will, at a fee as set forth in Chapter 145,
Fees, make a test of the accuracy of a meter upon request of a customer,
provided that such customer does not make a request for a test more
frequently than once a year. A report giving the results of such tests will
be made to the customer and a record of such tests will be kept.
[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
C. Periodical tests. The Department will make periodical tests of its
meters.
D. Allowable error. No water meter shall be placed in service nor kept in
service if on test it registers more than 102% of the water passed or less
than 98% at full capacity. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375]
E. Changing meters. The Department will not make any charge for
replacing a meter where such replacement is requested by a customer
unless the meter first referred to has been in use less than one year, in
which case a reasonable uniform charge will be made.
A. In case of a disputed account involving a question as to the accuracy of
a meter, such meter will be tested upon the request of the applicant
unless there has been an obvious waste of water by accident or neglect
of plumbing. In the event that the meter so tested is found to have an
error in the registration in excess of 2%, the bills will be corrected
accordingly.
B. When water is furnished by a meter, the quantity recorded by it shall be
taken to be the amount passing the meter, except where the meter has
been found to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register. In
such cases, the quantity may be determined by the average registration
of the meter when in order or by such fair and reasonable method as
shall be based upon the best information obtainable.
§ 269-41 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 269-42
254:1236
ARTICLE IV
Irrigation Schedule and Water Emergencies
[Amended 10-28-1980 by Ord. No. 1774; 6-13-1989 by Ord. No.
2210; 6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 2370; 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 2375;
5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 2632; 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 3267; 5-8-2013
by Ord. No. 3379; 4-12-2017 by Ord. No. 3588]
§ 269-43. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to limit, restrict and regulate the use of
water by customers of the Department of Water Supply of the Village of
Ridgewood during periods of use and emergency, as hereinafter defined, in
order to ensure public health and safety.
§ 269-44. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CONVENTIONAL IRRIGATION SYSTEM OR DEVICE — Hose end irrigation
systems and automatic irrigation devices.
DRIP/MICRO IRRIGATION — An irrigation method that saves water and
fertilizer by allowing water to drip slowly to the roots of many different
plants, either onto the soil surface or directly onto the root zone, through a
network of valves, pipes, tubing, and emitters.
EMERGENCY — Any period of water shortage or imminent water shortage
caused by drought; lack or failure of proper pumping equipment, storage or
other facilities; acts of God or public enemies; or excessive demand upon or
use of water facilities or capacity.
HAND-HELD HOSE — A hose designed to be operated while being held
in the hand and equipped with a nozzle that automatically shuts off when
released.
IRRIGATION — The watering or sprinkling (including automatic sprinkling)
of lawns, shrubs and gardens.
NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJPDES — New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
SMART CONTROLLER — A weather-based irrigation controller or soil
moisture based irrigation controller meeting criteria specified and labeled
as being compliant under the United States Environmental Protection
Agency Water Sense Program and meeting the guidelines prescribed by
Ridgewood Water.
WATER — That water obtained, delivered and/or supplied to any persons
by the Department of Water Supply of the Village of Ridgewood or pumped
from private wells for residential irrigation purposes.
§ 269-43 TAXATION § 269-45
254:1237
§ 269-45. Declaration of emergency.
The Village Manager is authorized to enforce the provisions of this article
and, in his discretion, to determine and declare the existence and extent of
an emergency with respect to the water supply of the Village of Ridgewood.
The determination of the Village Manager shall apply to all communities
served by the Department of Water Supply of the Village of Ridgewood, and
notification of the emergency shall be promulgated to all such communities
in the most reasonably expeditious manner. Interim emergency regulations
may be adopted without notice by the Village Manager of the Village of
Ridgewood and shall apply to all communities serviced by the Department
of Water Supply of the Village of Ridgewood and shall be promulgated in the
most reasonably expeditious manner to all the communities.
§ 269-46. Public notice.
Public notice of the declaration of an emergency and the determinations
made by the Village Manager of the Village of Ridgewood shall be made
in the most expeditious manner by publication in the legal newspaper for
the Village of Ridgewood and, for the other communities served by the
Department of Water Supply, by posting in each municipal building and at
such other public places as shall be designated by the Village Manager
and the local administrators or Clerks of the serviced communities. Notice
shall also be disseminated through the press and the public in general. The
emergency shall remain in effect until declared at an end by the Village
Manager of the Village of Ridgewood.
§ 269-47. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful and a violation hereof for any person to use water during
the emergency period in violation of this article. Any property owner(s)
found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine up to a maximum of $2,000 per violation, per individual block and lot
location.
§ 269-48. Regulations.
The following irrigation schedule and water emergency regulations are
hereby adopted to become effective as set forth herein:
A. Irrigation schedule, effective year round:
(1) All nongovernmental properties: Irrigation by a conventional
irrigation system or device may only be done on Tuesday and
Saturday for odd-numbered addresses and Wednesday and Sunday
for even-numbered addresses.
(2) Governmental properties: Irrigation by a conventional irrigation
system or device may only be done on Monday and Friday.
(3) Irrigation using a hand-held hose or drip/micro irrigation system
shall be allowed any day.
§ 269-45 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 269-48
254:1238
B. The emergency stages shall be as follows:
Stage of
Emergency
Regulation
Drought
Emergency
Condition User Restrictions
III Pending/Critical Mandatory restriction of
irrigation for all properties to the
use of a hand-held hose on
Tuesdays and Saturdays for
properties with odd-numbered
addresses and Wednesdays and
Sundays for properties with evennumbered
addresses. No
irrigation of any kind shall be
allowed on Mondays, Thursdays,
or Fridays.
IV Critical Irrigation is prohibited at any
time. Exceptions for irrigation
using a hand-held hose may be
allowed under conditions
prescribed by the Village
Manager of the Village of
Ridgewood.
C. Stage III and Stage IV emergency regulations shall become effective
upon declaration of each stage by the Village Manager of the Village of
Ridgewood. The cleaning of cars, houses or property, filling of
swimming pools or other outdoor water usage shall be prohibited
during Stage III and Stage IV.
D. Exceptions to the user restrictions shall be determined by the Village
Manager of the Village of Ridgewood or a Village of Ridgewood
employee designated by the Village Manager. The request for an
exception shall be submitted on forms prepared by Ridgewood Water
and shall include any required documentation. Exceptions will
automatically be denied for customers with bill balances beyond 120
days. Exceptions are subject to renewal annually and may be voided at
any time due to an emergency. The exceptions may include the
following:
(1) Outdoor irrigation necessary for the establishment of newly sodded
or seeded grass lawns or landscaping within the first 21
consecutive days of planting.
(2) Irrigation of lawns or plantings with smart controllers.
(3) Outdoor water use from rain harvesting (rain barrels, etc.), gray
water, or reclaimed water. Use of gray or reclaimed water must
have an approved NJPDES permit issued through the NJDEP.
§ 269-48 TAXATION § 269-48
254:1239
§ 269-49. Discontinuance of water supply to premises in violation.
In accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:3-3A.1(a), if any person, whether an
inhabitant of the Village of Ridgewood or Township of Wyckoff or of the
Boroughs of Glen Rock or Midland Park, shall violate any provision of this
article in such a manner as to produce disturbing effects on the service of
the utility or other customers, the Village Department of Water Supply shall
have the right and it is hereby empowered to cut off the supply of water
to the premises and meter upon and from which such violation shall have
taken place for such period or periods of time as shall be deemed necessary
to secure compliance with all applicable terms of this article.
§ 269-50. Enforcement.
The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility
of the Director of Water Supply, its Business Manager, Superintendent of
Water, Assistant Superintendent of Water, Supervisor of Water Distribution,
Senior Engineer, Village Engineer, Property Management Officer, any duly
sworn member of the Village of Ridgewood Police Department, and any
other officer and/or Village employee duly appointed by the Village
Manager.
(4) Outdoor irrigation necessary for one day only where treatment with
an application of chemicals require immediate watering to
preserve an existing landscape or to establish a new landscape.
(5) Other outdoor water usage.
E. Irrigation shall not be conducted between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
any day. Irrigation using automatic systems may only be used between
3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on the permissible day.
F. All automatic irrigation systems shall be equipped with an operational
automatic rain sensor device. Each rain sensor device shall be capable
of and programmed to interrupt the automatic irrigation cycle when 1/4
inch of rain has fallen.
§ 269-48 RIDGEWOOD CODE § 269-50
254:1240
Chapter 275
YARD WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 115.
Fees — See Ch. 145.
Garbage, rubbish, refuse and recycling — See
Ch. 168.
Landscapers and landscaping services — See
Ch. 186.
Power tools, landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment — See Ch. 222.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 223.
Trees and shrubs — See Ch. 260.
§ 275-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for the proper
handling of yard waste and the provisions of the yard waste collection
program in the Village of Ridgewood, so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 275-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and nor merely directory.
ANNOUNCED COLLECTION DATE — The scheduled calendar date of
pickup of containerized yard waste and the scheduled calendar date of
placement of noncontainerized yard waste in specified sections of the
Village by the Village of Ridgewood. The announced dates may be modified
by weather or environmental conditions, at which time new dates will be
announced for specified sections of the Village on the Village's website,
cable television access channel, and through the official publications of the
Village of Ridgewood.[Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3550]
BRUSH — Any bushes, shrubs or other woody vegetation.[Added
10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3550]
CONTAINERIZED YARD WASTE — The placement of yard waste in a trash
can, bucket, biodegradable paper bag or other such vessel, such as to
prevent the yard waste from spilling, blowing out, or releasing into the
street and coming into contact with stormwater.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
§ 269-50 TAXATION § 275-2
254:1241
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street right-of-way
limit lines.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, brush, leaves, and other vegetative debris
removed from a property by the occupant or owner, or employee or
contractor of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care, tree or
shrub care, or landscaping services.
§ 275-3. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No.
3550]
§ 275-4. Enforcement. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3550]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Village of Ridgewood Police
Department, the Code Enforcement Officer, Village Engineer,
Superintendent of Public Works, and any other officer and/or Village
employee duly appointed by the Village Manager.
§ 275-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-12-2016 by Ord. No.
3550]
Any property owner(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine up to a maximum of $2,000 per violation,
per individual block and lot location.
Appendix
Chapter A285
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
A. The owner or occupant of any property, or employee or contractor of
such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care, tree or shrub
care, or landscaping services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise
place yard waste, unless the yard waste is containerized, in the street.
Grass clippings cannot be placed in the same container as brush, leaves
and other vegetative debris.
B. Placement of yard waste in the street that is not containerized is only
permitted during the placement dates designated by the annual leaf
collection schedule notice, and at all times shall not be placed closer
than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet, and may not contain any brush
or grass clippings. Placement of noncontainerized yard waste at the
curb or along the street at any other time or in any other manner is a
violation of this chapter. If such placement of yard waste occurs, the
owner of the property in front of which the yard waste is placed is
responsible for any such violations.
§ 275-2 RIDGEWOOD CODE § A285-1
A285:1242
§ A285-1. Grant of consent; approval by Board.
Subject to compliance by the company with lawful Village ordinances
concerning land use, street openings, permits, and all other applicable
ordinances to the extent not preempted by applicable federal or state laws,
the Village grants to the company its nonexclusive consent to place in,
upon, along, across, above, over and under the highways and streets in
the municipality poles, wires, and cables necessary for the maintenance
and operation in the municipality of a cable television system and cable
communications system. Construction, pursuant to said consent, is
conditioned upon prior approval of the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities
(the "Board"). This right of easement is subject to the Village's
determination that the specific highways, streets, etc., allow for the
installation of telecommunications facilities. In complying with the
ordinances of the Village of Ridgewood, the company shall not be required
to pay permit fees, including fees for road openings. Except as preempted
by federal law, the type and design of the cable television facilities to be
placed in the Village streets is subject to the regulation of the Board of
Public Utilities.
§ A285-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions given by the
Federal Communications Commission FCC Rules and Regulations (47 CFR
Subsection 76.1 et seq.) and the Cable Communications Policy Act (47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq.) as amended, the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47
U.S.C. § 609 et seq.) and the Cable Television Act (N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.)
and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with federal
or state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Law of New
Jersey, 1972, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
Cablevision of Oakland, Inc.
FEDERAL ACT — The Communications Act of 1934 and its amendments,
47 U.S.C. 51 et seq.; P.L. 102-385, 1992 and the Telecommunications Act of
1996, 47 U.S.C. 609 et seq.; P.L. 104-104, 1996.
VILLAGE — The Village of Ridgewood, County of Bergen and State of New
Jersey.
§ A285-3. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to the company
was held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions
of the Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and
the Village having received all comments regarding the qualifications of the
company to receive this consent, the Village hereby finds that the company
§ A285-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A285-3
A285:1243
possesses the necessary legal, technical, financial and other qualifications
and that the company's operating and construction arrangements are
adequate and feasible.
§ A285-4. Duration of franchise.
The consent herein granted shall expire 10 years from the date of issuance
of a certificate of approval by the Board of Public Utilities. At the end of
the first three years after the issuance of the certificate of approval by the
Board, the Village shall have the right to conduct a review to determine
whether the company has substantially complied with all material
obligations under this ordinance. In the event the Village shall determine, as
a result of said review, that the company has not substantially complied with
all material obligations under this ordinance, the Village shall provide the
company with written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and
an opportunity to cure same within six months. If the company has not, after
such notice, brought itself into material compliance, then the Village shall
have the right to request that the Board take appropriate action. Nothing
herein shall be deemed a waiver by the company of any rights which it may
possess as a matter of law.
§ A285-5. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If the company seeks a successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration
of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval in
accordance with the Cable Television Act (N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11 and 48:5A-16)
and applicable state and federal rules and regulations. The company shall
also petition the Board for a certificate of approval authorizing continued
operation during the period following expiration of the consent granted
herein and until such time as a decision is made by the governing body of
the Village relative to the renewal of said consent.
§ A285-6. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers to its cable television
reception service in the Village or any amount permitted by the Cable
Television Act or otherwise allowable by law.
§ A285-7. Construction timetable.
The Village requires completion of the proposed upgrade of the current
cable infrastructure that presently serves the Village on or before June 30,
2002.
§ A285-8. Territory.
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the entirety of the
Village and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A285-3 RIDGEWOOD CODE § A285-9
A285:1244
§ A285-9. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service along any public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in those areas of the
franchise territory described herein, in accordance with the proposal for
the provision of services as described in the application. Any additional
extension of the system will be made in accordance with the provisions set
forth in Appendix IV attached to the application filed with the Village.
§ A285-10. Construction requirements.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work and in
accordance with Village ordinances governing the replacement of
pavement in the public right-of-way.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the Village
shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place
or when the Village determines by reason of traffic conditions or public
safety or the construction of any public improvement or structure by
any governmental agency, the company, upon reasonable notice by the
Village, shall remove, relay and relocate its equipment, at the expense
of the company.
C. Movement of building and equipment. The company shall temporarily
move or remove appropriate parts of its facilities to allow moving of
building, machinery or in other similar circumstances when reasonably
requested to do so. The expense shall be borne by the party requesting
such action, except when reasonably requested by the Village, in which
case the company shall bear the cost.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the Village so as to prevent the branches of such trees from
coming in contact with the wires, cables or other equipment of the
company. Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to
maintain proper clearance for the company's facilities and upon prior
notice to the Village, emergency situations excepted.
E. Undergrounding of facilities. Where feasible, the company shall install
its cable or other facilities underground. This requirement shall not
apply to facilities which are required to remain above ground in order
to be functional. This requirement shall not apply to the company if the
Village does not require the undergrounding of its facilities in the
location of all other utilities facilities at the time of installation by the
company.
§ A285-9 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A285-11
A285:1245
§ A285-11. Installation of individual subscribers.
The company shall provide installation to any person's residence or
business in accordance with the terms and conditions of the application
which are incorporated herein as if fully set forth at length.
§ A285-12. Local office.
During the term of this franchise and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality or service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Such local business office
shall be open during normal business hours and in no event less than 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and shall have a phone number
which does not incur a toll charge when called by any extension in the
Village of Ridgewood.
§ A285-13. Municipal complaint officer.
The Village of Ridgewood Clerk is hereby designated as the municipal
complaint officer to receive and act on complaints by subscribers to cable
television reception service provided pursuant to this franchise. All
complaints shall be received and processed in accordance with the New
Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5 et seq.).
§ A285-14. Performance bonds.
§ A285-15. Rates.
The rates proposed in the application for cable television reception service
shall be subject to review and regulation by the New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities to the extent permitted by law.
§ A285-16. Basic service.
The basic service shall be as defined under the federal Act and applicable
regulations.
§ A285-17. Local access and origination cablecasting.
The company shall provide access time to noncommercial public,
governmental and education entities for noncommercial purposes. The
A. During the life of the franchise, the company shall give a performance
bond to the Village of Ridgewood, which bond shall be in the amount of
$25,000 in a form to be approved by the attorney for the Village of
Ridgewood.
B. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of all
undertakings of the company as represented in its application for
municipal consent and incorporated herein.
§ A285-11 RIDGEWOOD CODE § A285-17
A285:1246
company currently offers two public access channels in the Village of
Ridgewood. At the completion of the upgrade noted in § A285-7 above,
the company will provide the Village of Ridgewood with one designated
access channel exclusive to the Village of Ridgewood for noncommercial
use. The company will provide the Village with a second designated access
channel provided the first designated access channel is in use 80% of the
time between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. five days per week for
four consecutive weeks and at least 20 hours of programming each week is
original programming, not character-generated messages or programming
that was previously shown on the cable system. The Village must keep
notarized logs of its daily programming schedule on file at Village Hall to be
inspected upon request by the company. All access programming must be of
a noncommercial nature.
§ A285-18. Free services.
The company shall provide one complimentary outlet and basic monthly
service, including standard installation, to each public school and municipal
library in the Village of Ridgewood. In addition, subject to compliance
with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.1, the company shall provide one complimentary
outlet, including standard installation, and basic monthly service to any
municipally owned senior center in the Village of Ridgewood.
§ A285-19. Reduced rates for senior citizens.
At such time that the company provides for a senior citizen's discount plan
to any of its customers in any Cablevision of Oakland, Inc., municipalities
during the term of this franchise, said plan and all of its terms shall be made
available to qualified Ridgewood residents.
§ A285-20. Equipment and personnel.
The company shall allow the Village to utilize the buying power of their
organization as it relates to the purchase of PEG access equipment, i.e.,
cameras, editing and playback devices. The company shall also provide
technician services at a cost only basis for public, educational or
governmental use at the request of the Village.
§ A285-21. Liability insurance.
The company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent sufficient liability
insurance naming the Village of Ridgewood as an additional insured and
insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or
demand in the minimum amounts of $2,000,000 combined limits for bodily
injury or death to one person or resulting from any one accident and for any
property damages resulting from any one accident.
§ A285-17 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A285-22
A285:1247
§ A285-22. Emergency uses.
The company shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Village pursuant to state and federal requirements. The
company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the Village
or any other person during an emergency if for any reason the Village is
unable to make full use of the cable television system as contemplated
herein. The Village shall also establish reasonable procedures for such uses.
§ A285-23. Miscellaneous provisions.
A. The company agrees that the capabilities of the system shall be
maintained as technologically current throughout the duration of the
franchise as compared with other cablevision systems of comparable
size, measured by the number of subscribers in the system and to the
extent economically reasonable.
B. The company shall make a one-time contribution of $75,000, within 90
days after the adoption of the ordinance, to be utilized to purchase PEG
equipment such as cameras, editing and playback devices and to
provide public, educational and governmental noncommercial
programming.
C. The company acknowledges the Village's right under common law, the
statutes and regulations of the State of New Jersey and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 to control the municipal rights-of-way
and to legislate under the Municipal Land Use Law and the Home Rule
Provisions of the New Jersey Constitution and agrees to comply with all
ordinances and regulations adopted thereunder which are not
specifically superseded by state or federal law, reserving its rights to
challenge any statute or regulation which it considers in good faith to
be unlawful, contrary to this ordinance or otherwise preempted by
applicable state or federal law.
D. The company hereby releases, covenants not to bring suit and agrees to
indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the Village, its officers and
employees, agents and representatives from any and all claims, costs,
judgments, award or liability to any person, including claims by the
company's employees, arising from injury, sickness or death of any
person or damage to property through the negligent acts or omissions
of the company, its agents, servants, officers or employees in
performing the activities authorized by this agreement or the proximate
cause. The company further releases, covenants not to bring suit,
agrees to indemnify and defend and hold harmless the Village, its
officers and employees from any and all claims, costs, judgments,
awards or liability to any person, including claims by the company's
own employees, by virtue of the company's exercise of the rights
granted herein or by virtue of the Village's permitting the company's
use of the Village's rights-of-way or other public property or based upon
the Village's inspection or lack of inspection of work performed by the
§ A285-22 RIDGEWOOD CODE § A285-23
A285:1248
§ A285-24. Internet access service.
When high-speed Internet access via cable modem service from the
company becomes commercially available to residential customers within
the Village, the company shall provide to the Village, free of charge, one
high-speed cable modem and monthly Internet access service, including a
standard installation, to municipal building (the "designated building"). The
Village shall be permitted, at its own cost, to network up to three additional
personal computer terminals in the designated building (four computers
in total) to the cable modem provided by the company. In addition, when
high-speed access via cable modem service from the company becomes
commercially available to residential customers within the Village, the
company shall provide, free of charge, one high-speed cable modem and
monthly Internet access service, including standard installation, to each
public school and municipal library in the Village.
company, its agents or servants, officers, or employees in connection
with the work authorized on the Village's property or property over
which the Village has control pursuant to this agreement or pursuant to
any other permit or approval issued in connection with this agreement.
The obligations of indemnification under this subsection shall apply
regardless of whether liability for damages arising out of bodily injury
to persons or damages to property were caused or contributed to by the
concurrent negligence of the Village, its officers, agents, employees,
or contractors but shall not apply in the event of gross negligence or
willful misconduct.
E. With the exception of PEG access or other programming produced or
provided by the Village and its employees or agents, the company shall
indemnify the Village against and shall save it harmless from any and all
claims for injury and damage to persons or property, both real and
personal, caused by the construction, erection, operation and
maintenance of the cable television system authorized or used pursuant
to the authority of the this ordinance.
F. In addition, the company shall also pay all reasonable legal expenses
incurred by the Village in exercising its right to appear and respond to
any petition or proceeding brought by the company arising out of this
ordinance before the Board of Public Utilities, including, but not limited
to, petitions for modification of the franchise terms pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:5A-47 on the following basis:
(1) The first $5,000 of such legal expenses shall be the responsibility of
the Village.
(2) Legal expenses over the first $5,000 up to $10,000 shall be the
responsibility of the company.
(3) Any amount over $10,000 up to $50,000 shall be borne equally on a
dollar-for-dollar basis by the Village and the company.
§ A285-23 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A285-25
A285:1249
§ A285-25. Future amendments.
§ A285-26. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and
in all filings with the Office of Cable Television or any amendment or
amendments thereto and any applications and amendments thereto
submitted in writing to the Village are binding upon the company as terms
and conditions of this consent. The application and any other relevant
writings submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part
hereof by reference as long as it does not conflict with state or federal law.
§ A285-27. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding
shall not effect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
A. In the event that another multichannel video program provider's
service within the Village of Ridgewood creates a significant
competitive disadvantage to Cablevision, the company shall have the
right to request from the Village of Ridgewood lawful amendments to its
franchise that relieve it of burdens which create the unfair competitive
situation. Should the company seek such amendments to its franchise,
the parties agree to negotiate in good faith appropriate changes to the
franchise in order to relieve the company of such competitive
disadvantages. If the parties can reach an agreement on such terms,
the Village of Ridgewood agrees to support the company's petition to
the Board for modification of the consent in accordance with N.J.S.A.
48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the Village of Ridgewood acknowledges
that the company shall have the right to petition the Board directly for
such amendments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7; provided, however, the Village of Ridgewood shall be under
no obligation to support Cablevision's request for such relief from the
Board.
C. Cablevision represents and acknowledges that as of the date of its
acceptance of this municipal consent, competition within the Village of
Ridgewood has not yet risen to the level of creating a significant
competitive disadvantage sufficient to enable the company to seek
relief under this section.
§ A285-25 RIDGEWOOD CODE § A285-28
A285:1250
§ A285-28. When effective.
This municipal consent shall become effective as of the date of publication
in accordance with the law and the company's written acceptance of the
terms and conditions hereof.
§ A285-29. Repealer.
Upon this ordinance becoming effective and having been accepted and
approved by the Board of Public Utilities, the adoption and approval of this
ordinance shall act as a specific repealer of Ordinance No. 2614 of the
Village of Ridgewood heretofore adopted on September 9, 1997.194
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2310 4-9-1991 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2345 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
2346 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
2347 Bond NCM
2348 2-11-1992 Vehicle and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2349 2-11-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2350 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
2351 Interlocal services
amendment
NCM
2352 Void
2353 Bond NCM
2354 Defeated
2355 4-14-1992 Fees amendment Ch. 145
194. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2614 was included as former Ch. A285, Cable Television
Franchise.
§ A285-28 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1251
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2356 Cap ordinance to
exceed index rate
NCM
2357 4-23-1992 Fire panel alarms and
fees amendments
Ch. 99, Art. II; Ch. 145
2358 5-11-1992 Garage sales Ch. 163
2359 5-11-1992 Filming Ch. 147
2360 5-11-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2361 Salary NCM
2362 Salary NCM
2363 Appropriation NCM
2364 Agreement NCM
2365 Salary amendment NCM
2366 Bond NCM
2367 Assessment NCM
2368 Capital improvement NCM
2369 Salary amendment NCM
2370 6-8-1992 Water amendment Ch. 269
2371 Defeated
2372 Salary amendment NCM
2373 Salary amendment NCM
2374 Salary amendment NCM
2375 10-13-1992 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2376 10-13-1992 Fees Ch. 145
2377 Bond NCM
2378 10-13-1992 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2379 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
2380 Capital improvement NCM
2381 10-13-1992 Animals and fees
amendments
Ch. 105; Ch. 145
2382 11-10-1992 Administration
amendment
Ch. 2
2383 11-10-1992 Taxation: delinquency
amendment
Ch. 254, Art. I
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1252
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2384 11-10-1992 Police salary NCM
2385 11-10-1992 Salaries NCM
2386 2-10-1993 Traffic permit parking Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2387 2-10-1993 Parking for
handicapped
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2388 Capital improvement NCM
2389 Property acquisition NCM
2390 Bond NCM
2391 Bond NCM
2392 1-12-1993 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 223
2393 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2394 Interlocal agreement NCM
2395 Interlocal agreement NCM
2396 Interlocal agreement NCM
2397 Budget NCM
2398 Salaries NCM
2399 Capital improvement NCM
2400 3-9-1993 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2401 3-9-1993 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2402 4-13-1993 Insurance NCM
2403 Bond NCM
2404 4-13-1993 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2405 Capital improvement NCM
2406 Canceled
2407 Capital improvement NCM
2408 5-11-1993 Central Business
District parking
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2409 Community
Development Grant
Program
NCM
2410 5-11-1993 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2411 Street vacation NCM
2412 6-7-1993 Outdoor cafes Ch. 156, Art. VIII
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1253
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2413 Capital improvement NCM
2414 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
2415 6-7-1993 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2416 6-7-1993 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2417 6-7-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2418 6-7-1993 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2419 7-13-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2420 Salaries NCM
2421 8-10-1993 Indemnification for
police services
Ch. 67, Art. I
2422 Defeated
2423 8-10-1993 Brush, grass and weeds Ch. 115
2424 8-10-1993 Licensing of bartenders Ch. 101, Art. II
2425 8-10-1993 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2426 8-10-1993 Bond NCM
2427 9-14-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2428 Salaries NCM
2429 9-14-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2430 10-12-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2431 Central dispatch
establishment
NCM
2432 11-9-1993 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 215
2433 Investment NCM
2434 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1254
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2435 11-9-1993 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
2436 Salaries NCM
2437 Appropriation NCM
2438 12-14-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2439 1-11-1994 Animals amendment Ch. 105
2440 1-11-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2441 1-11-1994 Environmental Advisory
Committee
Superseded by Ord.
No. 3739
2442 1-11-1994 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
2443 1-11-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2444 Salaries NCM
2445 Lease agreement NCM
2446 Appropriation NCM
2447 3-8-1994 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2448 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
2449 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
2450 Salaries NCM
2451 3-8-1994 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2452 3-8-1994 Fees; land use and
development
amendments
Chs. 145, 190
2453 Salaries NCM
2454 Salaries NCM
2455 3-12-1994 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2456 4-12-1994 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2457 Tabled
2458 Salaries NCM
2459 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1255
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2460 5-9-1994 Historic Preservation
Commission; land use
and development
amendment
Chs. 29, 190
2461 5-9-1994 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2462 5-9-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2463 5-9-1994 Towing Ch. 258
2464 6-14-1994 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2465 6-14-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2466 Defeated
2467 Capital improvement NCM
2468 Defeated
2469 Defeated
2470 Defeated
2471 Defeated
2472 Defeated
2473 Salaries NCM
2474 Defeated
2475 Defeated
2476 8-14-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2478 Easement NCM
2479 Salaries NCM
2480 9-13-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2481 9-13-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2482 9-13-1994 Land use and
development
amendment agreement
Ch. 190
2484 Gift acceptance NCM
2485 Salaries NCM
2486 10-11-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1256
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2487 Appropriation NCM
2488 10-11-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2489 Bond NCM
2490 Bond NCM
2491 Bond NCM
2492 Bond NCM
2493 Bond NCM
2494 Bond NCM
2495 Bond NCM
2496 Appropriation NCM
2497 Salaries NCM
2498 Capital improvement NCM
2499 1-10-1995 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2500 1-10-1995 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2501 1-10-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2502 1-10-1995 Environmental Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 18
2503 Appropriation NCM
2504 Bond NCM
2505 Salaries NCM
2506 2-14-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2507 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
2508 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
2509 Salaries NCM
2510 2-14-1995 Garbage and recycling
amendment
Ch. 165
2511 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2512 4-11-1995 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2513 Street vacation NCM
2514 Agreement NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1257
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2515 4-11-1995 Food establishments
amendment
Ch. 156
2516 Bond NCM
2517 Bond NCM
2518 Bond NCM
2519 Bond NCM
2520 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
2521 5-9-1995 Central Business
District parking
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2522 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2523 5-9-1995 Businesses and
occupations
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 117 and 145
2524 Salary amendment NCM
2525 Salary amendment NCM
2526 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2527 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2528 Salary amendment NCM
2529 Salary amendment NCM
2530 Salary amendment NCM
2531 Defeated
2532 Capital improvement NCM
2533 7-11-1995 Streets and sidewalks Ch. 249
2534 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2535 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2536 Capital improvement NCM
2537 8-8-1995 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2538 8-8-1995 Tobacco sales to
minors; vending
machines
Ch. 244, Art. I
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1258
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2539 Salary amendment NCM
2540 Bond NCM
2541 10-10-1995 Flood damage
prevention amendment
Ch. 154
2542 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2549; see Ch. 265
2545 Salary amendment NCM
2546 Canceling capital fund
balance
NCM
2547 12-12-1995 Massage operators and
masseurs repealer
Ch. 117, Art. VI
2548 Appropriation NCM
2549 12-12-1995 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 265
2550 Signs Defeated
2551 Salary amendment NCM
2552 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
2553 Interlocal services
agreement
NCM
2554 Lease agreement Not yet adopted
2555 Bond NCM
2556 Salary amendment NCM
2557 3-12-1996 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2558 Salary amendment NCM
2559 Salary amendment NCM
2560 Salary amendment NCM
2561 4-9-1996 Land use and
development
Ch. 190
2562 4-9-1996 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2563 4-9-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2564 5-13-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2565 5-13-1996 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1259
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2566 5-13-1996 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2567 5-13-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2568 Salary amendment NCM
2569 6-11-1996 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2570 Salary amendment NCM
2571 Salary amendment NCM
2572 Bond NCM
2573 Bond NCM
2574 Bond NCM
2575 Salary amendment NCM
2576 Salary amendment NCM
2577 Bond NCM
2578 9-10-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2579 Defeated
2580 Salary amendment NCM
2581 Salary amendment NCM
2582 Salary amendment NCM
2583 10-8-1996 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2584 10-8-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2585 11-12-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2586 12-10-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2587 1-14-1997 Water amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 145, 269
2588 Salary amendment NCM
2589 Salary amendment NCM
2590 Salary amendment NCM
2591 Salary amendment NCM
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1260
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2592 2-11-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2593 Salary amendment NCM
2594 3-11-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2595 3-11-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2596 3-11-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2597 4-8-1997 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2598 5-13-1997 Salary amendment NCM
2599 Bond NCM
2600 Capital improvement NCM
2601 Bond NCM
2602 Bond NCM
2603 Bond NCM
2604 Bond NCM
2605 Salary amendment NCM
2606 6-10-1997 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2607 7-8-1997 Streets and sidewalks;
fees amendment
Chs. 145, 249
2608 7-8-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2609 Salary amendment NCM
2610 7-8-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2611 8-12-1997 Use or possession of
tobacco by minors
Ch. 244, Art. II
2612 Bond NCM
2613 Salary amendment NCM
2614 9-9-1997 Cable television
franchise
Repealed by Ord. No.
2769
2615 Salary amendment NCM
2616 Purchase of property NCM
2617 Salary amendment NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1261
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2618 1-13-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2619 1-13-1998 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2620 2-10-1998 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2621 2-10-1998 Municipal Public
Defender
Ch. 70
2622 3-10-1998 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2623 Salary amendment NCM
2624 4-14-1998 Silly String Ch. 240
2625 Bond NCM
2626 Bond NCM
2627 Bond NCM
2628 Bond NCM
2629 Bond NCM
2630 5-11-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2631 5-11-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2632 5-11-1998 Water amendment Ch. 269
2633 5-11-1998 Municipal Public
Defender amendment
Ch. 70
2634 6-9-1998 Food and food-handling
establishments
amendment
Ch. 156
2635 Salary amendment NCM
2636 6-9-1998 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2637 6-25-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2638 6-25-1998 Sidewalk sales Ch. 239
2639 8-11-1998 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1262
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2640 9-8-1998 Administration of
government
amendment; sewers
and sewage disposal
amendment
Chs. 3, 238
2641 10-13-1998 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 125
2642 10-13-1998 Drug-free zones Ch. 131
2643 10-13-1998 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2644 10-13-1998 Towing amendment Ch. 158
2645 10-13-1998 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2646 11-10-1998 Parades and public
assemblies
Repealed by Ord. No.
3116
2647 11-10-1998 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
2648 Street vacation NCM
2649 11-10-1998 Flood damage
prevention amendment;
land use and
development
amendment
Chs. 154, 190
2650 Salaries NCM
2651 Bond NCM
2652 Reappropriation NCM
2653 Salaries NCM
2654 12-8-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2655 1-12-1999 Garbage, rubbish,
refuse and recycling
amendment
Ch. 165
2656 Acquisition of property NCM
2657 3-9-1999 Fees amendment; land
use and development
amendment
Chs. 145, 190
2658 3-9-1999 Environmental Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 18
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1263
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2659 4-13-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2660 4-13-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2661 4-13-1999 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2662 Bond NCM
2663 Sidewalk improvement NCM
2664 Sidewalk improvement NCM
2665 Capital improvement NCM
2666 Capital improvement NCM
2667 Bond NCM
2668 Bond NCM
2669 7-13-1999 Energy aggregation
program
NCM
2670 6-7-1999 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2671 Curb and sidewalk
improvements
NCM
2672 6-7-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2673 6-7-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2674 7-13-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2675 8-10-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2676 Sidewalk assessment NCM
2677 Bond NCM
2678 8-23-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2679 Revaluation of property NCM
2680 Property acquisition NCM
2681 Bond NCM
2682 Salaries NCM
2683 11-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1264
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2684 Salaries NCM
2685 Salaries NCM
2686 2-16-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2687 Salaries NCM
2688 Lease of storage space NCM
2689 Temporary traffic
restrictions
Temporary measure
2690 Salaries NCM
2691 Salaries NCM
2692 Bond NCM
2693 Bond NCM
2694 Salaries NCM
2695 5-17-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2696 5-17-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2697 Bond NCM
2698 Bond NCM
2699 Bond NCM
2700 Capital improvement NCM
2701 Bond NCM
2702 Bond NCM
2703 Bond NCM
2704 6-21-2000 Political fund-raising Ch. 221
2705 Bond NCM
2706 Sidewalk assessment NCM
2707 Salaries NCM
2708 9-27-2000 Fees amendment NCM
2709 9-27-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2710 Cancel accounts NCM
2711 Bond NCM
2712 Capital improvement NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1265
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2713 10-25-2000 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2714 10-25-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2715 10-25-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2716 Bond NCM
2717 Salaries NCM
2718 12-13-2000 Fees amendment; food
and food-handling
establishments
amendment
Chs. 145, 156
2719 12-13-2000 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 175
2720 Salaries NCM
2721 Capital ordinance NCM
2722 Verizon agreement NCM
2723 Extend lease NCM
2724 11-8-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2725 12-13-2000 Housing standards
amendment; property
maintenance
amendment
Chs. 175, 223
2726 Bond NCM
2727 Capital improvement NCM
2728 1-10-2001 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2729 2-14-2001 Farmers' market; fees
amendment
Chs. 141, 145
2730 2-13-2001 Fees amendment; food
and food-handling
establishments
amendment
Chs. 145, 156
2731 3-14-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2732 Bond NCM
2733 Bond NCM
2734 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1266
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2735 Bond NCM
2736 Bond NCM
2737 Bond NCM
2738 Bond NCM
2739 Bond NCM
2740 Bond NCM
2741 6-13-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2742 6-13-2001 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
2743 Not adopted
2744 7-18-2001 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2745 Bond NCM
2746 8-8-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2747 8-8-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2748 8-8-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2749 Adoption pending
2750 Bond Adoption pending
2751 8-8-2001 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 256
2752 Adoption pending
2753 8-21-2001 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2754 9-12-2001 Bond NCM
2755 Salaries NCM
2756 Salaries NCM
2757 10-10-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2758 10-10-2001 Park and ride facility
amendment; vehicles
and traffic amendment
Chs 210, 265, 265
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1267
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2759 Bond NCM
2760 10-10-2001 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2761 11-28-2001 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2762 10-24-2001 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2763 Power tools and
landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment
Defeated
2764 Appropriation NCM
2765 Salaries NCM
2766 12-12-2001 Noise amendment
(train whistles or
horns)
Ch. 201
2767 12-12-2001 Interlocal services
agreement amendment
NCM
2768 Salaries NCM
2769 12-12-2001 Cable television
franchise
Ch. A285
2770 1-9-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2771 2-13-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2772 1-9-2002 Power tools and
landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment
Ch. 222
2773 1-9-2002 Open Space,
Recreation, Farmland
and Historic
Preservation
Committee
Ch. 55
2774 1-9-2002 Bond NCM
2775 3-13-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2776 4-10-2002 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2777 Not adopted
2778 4-10-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1268
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2779 4-10-2002 Fees amendment;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Chs. 145, 265
2780 4-10-2002 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2781 5-8-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2782 6-12-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2783 Salaries NCM
2784 Capital ordinance NCM
2785 Bond NCM
2786 Easement NCM
2787 Lease of property NCM
2788 Bond NCM
2789 Bond NCM
2790 6-28-2002 Easement NCM
2791 Bond NCM
2792 8-2-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2793 8-14-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2794 9-18-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2795 Bond NCM
2796 Capital ordinance NCM
2797 Salaries NCM
2798 9-18-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2799 Salaries NCM
2800 10-9-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2801 Capital NCM
2802 10-9-2002 Fees amendment; land
use and development
amendment
Chs. 145, 190
2803 10-23-2002 Purchase of real estate NCM
2804 10-23-2002 Lease of property NCM
2805 11-13-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1269
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2806 Bond NCM
2807 11-6-2002 Lease of property NCM
2808 12-11-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2809 12-11-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2810 12-11-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2811 Bond NCM
2812 12-4-2002 Purchase of real estate NCM
2813 Capital NCM
2814 1-15-2003 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2815 Salaries NCM
2816 1-8-2003 Fees amendment; water
amendment
Chs. 145, 269
2817 2-19-2003 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
2818 3-12-2003 Fees amendment; land
use and development
amendment; soil
removal amendment
Chs. 145, 190 and 246
2819 Bond NCM
2820 Capital NCM
2821 Parking Defeated
2822 4-9-2003 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2823 4-9-2003 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2824 Salary NCM
2825 5-14-2003 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2826 6-11-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2827 Bond NCM
2828 Capital NCM
2829 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1270
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2830 7-16-2003 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2831 Parking Defeated
2832 7-16-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2833 7-16-2003 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2834 8-5-2003 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 218
2835 7-16-2003 Defense and
indemnification
amendment
Ch. 15
2836 Salary NCM
2837 Bond NCM
2838 7-16-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2839 7-16-2003 Mobile telephone use Ch. 197
2840 Parking time limit Defeated
2841 8-13-2003 Easement granted NCM
2842 8-13-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2843 Canceling various
amounts
NCM
2844 Bond NCM
2845 8-13-2003 Water amendment Ch. 269
2846 9-10-2003 Parking restrictions Ch. 265, Art. IX
2847 9-10-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2848 One-way traffic Defeated
2849 Pending adoption
2850 Capital NCM
2851 9-10-2003 Power tools, etc.;
repealer
Ch. 222
2852 10-22-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2853 12-10-2003 Modification agreement NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1271
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2854 12-10-2003 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2855 12-10-2003 Fees amendment;
sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Chs. 145, 238
2856 Bond NCM
2857 Bond NCM
2858 Salaries NCM
2859 Bond NCM
2860 1-14-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2861 1-14-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2862 2-11-2004 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2863 2-11-2004 Easements NCM
2864 Salary NCM
2865 Bond NCM
2866 Bond NCM
2867 Capital improvement NCM
2868 3-10-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2869 3-10-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2870 Purchase of land NCM
2871 3-10-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2872 3-10-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2873 3-10-2004 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 256
2874 Bond NCM
2875 4-14-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2876 5-12-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2877 5-12-2004 Body art Ch. 114
2878 5-12-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2879 5-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2880 5-12-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 145
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1272
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2881 6-9-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2882 6-9-2004 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2883 6-9-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2884 6-9-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2885 Capital improvement NCM
2886 6-9-2004 Appropriation NCM
2887 6-9-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2888 6-9-2004 Fees amendment;
taxicabs and limousines
amendment
Chs. 145, 256
2889 Bond NCM
2890 6-9-2004 Easement NCM
2891 5-12-2004 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2892 8-11-2004 Capital improvement NCM
2893 8-11-2004 Referendum question to
abandon run-off
election provisions
NCM
2894 8-11-2004 Easement NCM
2895 9-8-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2896 9-8-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2897 9-8-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2898 9-8-2004 Salaries NCM
2899 9-8-2004 Capital improvement NCM
2900 10-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2901 10-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2902 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1273
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2903 10-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2904 10-13-2004 Lease of property NCM
2905 10-13-2004 Lease of property NCM
2906 10-13-2004 Bond NCM
2907 10-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2908 11-10-2004 Bond NCM
2909 11-10-2004 Lease of property NCM
2910 11-20-2004 Lease of property NCM
2911 1-12-2005 Capital improvement NCM
2912 1-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2913 2-9-2005 Bond NCM
2914 1-26-2005 Lease of property NCM
2915 1-26-2005 Lease of property NCM
2916 1-26-2005 Bond NCM
2917 1-26-2005 Bond NCM
2918 2-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2919 2-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2920 2-9-2005 Salaries NCM
2921 2-9-2005 Salaries NCM
2922 2-9-2005 Capital improvement NCM
2924 2-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2925 2-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2926 2-9-2005 Salaries NCM
2927 3-9-2005 Fire zones Ch. 151
2928 3-9-2005 Capital improvement
fund
NCM
2929 3-9-2005 Capital improvement
fund
NCM
2930 3-9-2005 Bond NCM
2931 3-9-2005 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1274
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2932 4-13-2005 Salaries NCM
2933 4-13-2005 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2934 4-13-2005 Poppers Ch. 221A
2935 4-13-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2936 4-13-2005 Capital improvement NCM
2937 Capital improvement NCM
2938 5-11-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2939 5-11-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2940 5-11-2004 Capital improvement NCM
2941 5-11-2005 Lease of property NCM
2942 5-11-2005 Cap bank NCM
2943 5-11-2005 Bond NCM
2944 5-11-2005 Salaries NCM
2945 7-13-2005 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
2946 7-13-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2947 7-13-2005 Use of Graydon Pool NCM (temporary
measure)
2948 8-10-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2949 8-10-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2950 8-10-2005 Golfing amendment Ch. 212, Art. VII
2951 8-10-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2952 8-10-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2953 8-10-2005 Skateboards
amendment
Ch. 241
2954 9-14-2005 Salaries NCM
2955 9-14-2005 Capital improvement NCM
2956 10-19-2005 Sidewalk, apron and
curb improvements
NCM
2957 10-19-2005 Capital improvement NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1275
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2958 11-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2959 11-9-2005 Salaries NCM
2960 12-14-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2961 12-14-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2962 12-14-2005 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
2963 12-14-2005 Garbage, rubbish,
refuse and recycling
amendment
Ch. 165
2964 12-14-2005 Animals amendment Ch. 105
2965 12-14-2005 Animals amendment Ch. 105
2966 12-14-2005 Lease of premises NCM
2967 12-14-2005 Lease of premises NCM
2968 1-11-2006 Yard waste Ch. 275
2969 1-11-2006 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
2970 1-11-2006 Fire extinguisher
training
Ch. 149, Art. IV
2971 Defeated
2972 Defeated
2973 2-8-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2974 2-8-2006 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
2975 Pending
2976 2-8-2006 Vacation of lots NCM
2977 2-22-2006 Bond NCM
2978 3-8-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2979 3-8-2006 Granting PSE&G access
to Village property
NCM
2980 3-8-2006 Bond NCM
2981 3-8-2006 Bond NCM
2982 3-8-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2983 3-8-2006 Land use and
development
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
3035
2984 3-8-2006 Lease of property NCM
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1276
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2985 3-8-2006 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 256
2986 4-19-2006 Capital NCM
2987 4-19-2006 Capital NCM
2988 4-19-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2989 4-19-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2990 4-19-2006 Capital Improvement
Fund
NCM
2991 5-10-2006 Salaries NCM
2992 5-10-2006 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 212
2993 6-14-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2994 5-10-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2995 5-10-2006 Landscapers and
landscaping services
Ch. 186
2996 5-10-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 145
2997 5-10-2006 Bond NCM
2998 5-10-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
2999 5-10-2006 Cap bank NCM
3000
3001 6-14-2006 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3002 Land use and
development
amendment
Defeated
3003 6-21-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3004 7-1-2006 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
3005 7-1-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 145
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1277
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3006 7-1-2006 Redesignation of
Chapter numbers for
Ch. 275, Yard Waste,
and Ch. 186,
Landscaping and
Landscaping Services
Chs. 186 and 275
3007 7-19-2006 Appropriation NCM
3008 8-9-2006 Appropriation NCM
3009 8-9-2006 Appropriation NCM
3010 8-9-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3011 8-9-2006 Lease NCM
3012 8-9-2006 Appropriation NCM
3013 8-9-2006 Bond NCM
3014 8-9-2006 Bond NCM
3015 8-9-2006 Land use development
amendment
Ch. 190
3016 9-13-2006 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3017 10-11-2006 Filming amendment Ch. 147
3018 9-13-2006 Appropriation NCM
3019 10-11-2006 Sale of property NCM
3020 Defeated
3021 10-11-2006 Lease NCM
3022 10-11-2006 Designation of incident
management system
NCM
3023 11-8-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3024 Defeated
3025 11-8-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3026 11-8-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3027 11-8-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3028 12-13-2006 Lease of property NCM
3029 12-13-2006 Lease of property NCM
3030 12-13-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3031 12-13-2006 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1278
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3032 Capital Improvement
Fund
NCM
3033 12-13-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3034 12-13-2006 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3035 1-17-2007 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3036 Defeated
3037 2-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3038 2-14-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3039 2-14-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3040 2-14-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3041 2-14-2007 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3042 Bond NCM
3043 Bond NCM
3044 Capital improvement NCM
3045 Bond NCM
3046 Capital improvement NCM
3047 3-14-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3048 4-11-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3049 4-11-2007 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
3050 4-11-2007 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 212
3051 4-11-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3052 Capital improvement
fund
NCM
3053 5-9-2007 Establish cap bank NCM
3054 5-9-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3055 Defeated
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1279
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3056 5-9-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3057 5-9-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3058 5-9-2007 Water Utility Capital
Improvement Fund
NCM
3059 5-9-2007 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3060 6-13-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3061 Fees amendment Defeated
3062 6-13-2007 Salaries NCM
3063 Towing amendment Defeated
3064 6-13-2007 Games of chance
amendment
Ch. 161
3065 6-13-2007 Alcoholic beverages:
possession or
consumption by
underage persons on
private property
Ch. 101, Art. III
3066 7-18-2007 Fees amendment; land
use and development
amendment
Chs. 145 and 190
3067 7-18-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3068 7-18-2007 Salaries NCM
3069 7-18-2007 Salaries NCM
3070 7-18-2007 Salaries NCM
3071 7-18-2007 Food and food-handling
establishments
amendment; land use
and development
amendment
Chs. 156 and 190
3072 8-8-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3073 8-8-2007 Fees amendment; parks
and recreation areas
amendment
Chs. 145 and 212
3074 8-8-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 145
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1280
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3075 8-8-2007 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 218
3076 9-19-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3077 9-19-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3078 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Defeated
3079 10-10-2007 Bond NCM
3080 Bond Defeated
3081 10-10-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3082 10-10-2007 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3083 10-10-2007 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3084 10-10-2007 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3085 10-10-2007 Adoption of
redevelopment plan for
North Walnut Street
redevelopment area;
Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
3086 10-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3087 11-28-2007 Bond NCM
3088 12-12-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3089 12-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3090 12-12-2007 Municipal Housing
Liaison; land use and
development
amendment
Chs. 32; 190
3091 Land use and
development
amendment
Defeated
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1281
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3092 1-16-2008 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
(damage claims for
backup onto certain
premises)
Ch. 238
3093 12-12-2007 Lease NCM
3094 12-12-2007 Lease NCM
3095 1-16-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3096 1-16-2008 Capital fund balance NCM
3097 1-23-2008 Emergency medical
services third-party
billing plan
Ch. 137
3098 2-13-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3099 2-13-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3100 2-13-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3101 Land use and
development
amendment
Defeated
3102 3-12-2008 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
3103 3-12-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3104 3-12-2008 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3105 3-12-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3106 3-12-2008 Towing amendment Ch. 258
3107 3-12-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3108 Defeated
3109 4-9-2008 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3110 5-14-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3111 4-9-2008 Bond NCM
3112 4-9-2008 Capital improvement
fund
NCM
3113 4-9-2008 Capital improvement
fund
NCM
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1282
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3114 4-9-2008 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3115 5-14-2008 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3116 5-14-2008 Parades Ch. 207
3117 5-14-2008 Public assemblies Ch. 207A
3118 5-14-2008 Establish cap bank NCM
3119 5-14-2008 Fees amendment; parks
and recreation areas
amendment
Chs. 145 and 212
3120 5-14-2008 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3121 5-14-2008 Fees amendment; parks
and recreation areas
amendment
Chs. 145 and 212
3122 6-11-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3123 6-11-2008 Water Utility Capital
Fund
NCM
3124 6-11-2008 Salaries NCM
3125 6-11-2008 Salaries NCM
3126 6-11-2008 Salaries NCM
3127 Fees amendment Defeated
3128 8-13-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3129 8-13-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3130 8-13-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3131 8-13-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3132 8-13-2008 Contributions, gifts and
donations: gifts to
Village Council
Ch. 127, Art. I
3133 8-13-2008 Smoke-free zones and
areas
Ch. 244, Art. III
3134 8-13-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3135 9-10-2008 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1283
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3136 9-10-2008 Capital Improvement
Fund
NCM
3137 9-10-2008 Capital Improvement
Fund
NCM
3138 9-10-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3139 9-10-2008 Capital Improvement
Fund
NCM
3140 9-10-2008 Capital Improvement
Fund
NCM
3141 9-10-2008 Garbage, rubbish,
refuse and recycling
amendment
Ch. 165
3142 9-10-2008 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3143 9-10-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3144 10-15-2008 Salaries NCM
3145 10-15-2008 Capital Improvement
Fund
NCM
3146 12-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3147 10-15-2008 Salaries NCM
3148 11-12-2008 Capital Improvement
Fund
NCM
3149 11-12-2008 Retirement: Defined
Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 75, Art. I
3150 11-12-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3151 11-12-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3152 11-12-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3153 Salaries NCM
3154 11-12-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3155 11-12-2008 Capital fund balance NCM
3156 12-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3157 12-10-2008 Capital fund balance NCM
3158 12-10-2008 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1284
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3159 12-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3160 12-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3161 2-11-2009 Salaries NCM
3162 2-11-2009 Bond NCM
3163 2-11-2009 Bond NCM
3164 2-11-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3165 3-11-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3166 3-11-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3167 3-11-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3168 3-11-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3169 3-11-2009 Bond NCM
3170 3-11-2009 Bond NCM
3171 3-11-2009 Capital Improvement
Fund
NCM
3172 3-11-2009 Bond NCM
3173 3-11-2009 Capital Improvement
Fund
NCM
3174 3-11-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3175 4-15-2009 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
3176 4-15-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3177 4-15-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3178 4-15-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3179 4-15-2009 Capital Improvement
Fund
NCM
3180 5-13-2009 Parking Utility Capital
Improvement Fund
NCM
3181 5-13-2009 Bond NCM
3182 5-13-2009 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1285
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3183 5-13-2009 Dedication of Village
property
Ch. 129
3184 5-13-2009 Cap bank NCM
3185 5-13-2009 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 212
3186 6-10-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3187 5-13-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3188 5-13-2009 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3189 6-10-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3190 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Defeated
3191 6-10-2009 Drug-free zones
amendment
Ch. 131
3192 6-10-2009 Salaries NCM
3193 6-10-2009 Salaries NCM
3194 6-10-2009 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3195 6-10-2009 Bond NCM
3196 7-8-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3197 7-8-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3198 7-8-2009 Salaries NCM
3199 7-8-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3200 7-8-2009 Fertilizer application Ch. 187
3201 7-8-2009 Garbage, rubbish,
refuse and recycling
amendment
Ch. 165
3202 7-8-2009 Capital Improvement
Fund
NCM
3203 7-8-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3204 8-12-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1286
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3205 8-12-2009 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
3206 8-12-2009 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 223
3207 8-12-2009 Salaries amendment NCM
3208 8-5-2009 Bond NCM
3209 Land use and
development
amendment
Defeated
3210 9-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3211 9-9-2009 Bond NCM
3212 9-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3213 9-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3214 9-9-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3215 9-16-2009 Bergen Community
Development Block
Grant Program
NCM
3216 9-16-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3217 9-16-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3218 9-16-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3219 9-30-2009 Capital Improvement
Fund: sidewalk, apron
and curb improvements
NCM
3220 10-14-2009 Fees amendment; land
use and development
amendment
Chs. 145; 190
3221 10-14-2009 Salaries NCM
3222 10-14-2009 Salaries NCM
3223 11-9-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3224 11-9-2009 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1287
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3225 11-9-2009 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3226 11-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3227 Administration of
government
amendment
Defeated
3228 10-28-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3229 12-9-2009 Lease of one-family
dwelling
NCM
3230 12-9-2009 Lease of one-family
dwelling
NCM
3231 12-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3232 12-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3233 12-9-2009 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
3234 12-9-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3235 12-9-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3236 12-14-2009 Fees amendment; water
amendment
Chs. 145; 269
3237 12-14-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
3238 Administration of
government
amendment
Defeated
3239 2-24-2010 Fire prevention:
exterior identification
of floor or roof truss
construction
Ch. 149, Art. V
3240 2-24-2010 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3241 2-24-2010 Sale of real property NCM
3242 4-7-2010 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3243 3-10-2010 Administration of
government
Ch. 3
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1288
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3244 3-24-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3245 4-14-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3246 5-12-2010 Cap bank NCM
3247 6-9-2010 Bond NCM
3248 4-14-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3249 3-24-2010 Environmental Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 18
3250 3-24-2010 Fees amendment; parks
and recreation areas
amendment
Chs. 145; 212
3251 6-9-2010 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3252 6-9-2010 Fees amendment; water
amendment
Chs. 145; 269
3253 6-9-2010 Salaries NCM
3254 6-9-2010 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3255 6-9-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3256 8-11-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3257 8-11-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3258 8-11-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3259 8-11-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3260 8-11-2010 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3261 8-11-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3262 8-11-2010 Appropriation of funds NCM
3263 9-15-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3264 10-13-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3265 Salaries Defeated
3266 Salaries Defeated
3267 11-10-2010 Water amendment Ch. 269
3268 11-10-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 145
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1289
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3269 11-10-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3270 12-1-2010 Bond NCM
3271 12-1-2010 Bond NCM
3272 12-8-2010 Fees amendment; water
amendment
Chs. 145; 269
3273 12-8-2010 Gifts to Village Council
amendment
Ch. 127, Art. I
3274 1-12-2011 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 256
3275 1-5-2011 Salaries NCM
3276 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Defeated
3277 2-9-2011 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3278 2-9-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3279 Defeated
3280 3-9-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3281 3-9-2011 Parks and recreation
areas
Ch. 212
3282 3-9-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3283 3-9-2011 Capital fund balance NCM
3284 3-9-2011 Salaries NCM
3285 3-9-2011 Salaries NCM
3286 3-9-2011 Salaries NCM
3287 4-13-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3288 4-13-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3289 4-13-2011 Cap bank NCM
3290 4-13-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3291 Zoning Map
amendment
Defeated
3292 5-11-2011 Capital fund balance NCM
3293 5-11-2011 Towing amendment Ch. 258
3294 5-11-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 145
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1290
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3295 5-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3296 5-11-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3297 6-8-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3298 6-8-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3299 6-8-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3300 7-13-2011 Salaries NCM
3301 7-13-2011 Salaries NCM
3302 7-13-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 223
3303 8-10-2011 Bond NCM
3304 9-14-2011 Fire zones amendment Ch. 151
3305 9-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3306 9-14-2011 Bond NCM
3307 9-14-2011 Bond NCM
3308 Defeated
3309 10-12-2011 Bond NCM
3310 10-26-2011 Lease NCM
3311 11-9-2011 Lease NCM
3312 11-9-2011 Salaries NCM
3313 11-9-2011 Salaries NCM
3314 12-14-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3315 12-14-2011 Bond NCM
3316 12-14-2011 Bond NCM
3317 12-14-2011 Capital fund balance NCM
3318 Defeated
3319 7-3-2012 Water amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 269; 145
3320 12-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3321 12-14-2011 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
3322 12-14-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 145
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1291
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3323 12-14-2011 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3324 1-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3325 2-8-2012 Regulating authority of
Verizon to use public
streets and ways
NCM
3326 2-8-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3327 2-8-2012 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3328 2-8-2012 Refunding of bond NCM
3329 3-14-2012 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3330 3-14-2012 Alcoholic beverages:
possession or
consumption by
underage persons on
private property
amendment
Ch. 101, Art. III
3331 3-14-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3332 3-14-2012 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3333 3-14-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3334 Defeated
3335 4-11-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3336 4-11-2012 Capital fund balance NCM
3337 3-28-2012 Bond NCM
3338 5-8-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3339 5-9-2012 Animals amendment;
fees amendment
Chs. 105; 145
3340 Defeated
3341 4-25-2012 Bond NCM
3342 5-15-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 145
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1292
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3343 6-13-2012 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3344 6-26-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3345 6-13-2012 Lease NCM
3346 6-13-2012 Appropriation NCM
3347 6-13-2012 Appropriation NCM
3348 6-13-2012 Appropriation NCM
3349 6-13-2012 Cap bank NCM
3350 6-26-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3351 6-26-2012 Water Capital Utility
Fund
NCM
3352 8-8-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3353 10-3-2012 Bond NCM
3354 10-10-2012 Bergen County
Community
Development Block
grant
NCM
3355 Yard waste amendment Defeated
3356 10-10-2012 Bond NCM
3357 11-28-2012 Landscapers and
landscaping services
amendment
Ch. 186
3358 Land use and
development
amendment
Defeated
3359 Yard waste amendment Defeated
3360 10-24-2012 Bond NCM
3361 12-5-2012 Bond NCM
3362 12-5-2012 Bond NCM
3363 12-5-2012 Parking utility capital
improvement fund
NCM
3364 Salaries Defeated
3365 Salaries Defeated
3366 12-12-2012 Emergency
appropriation
NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1293
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3367 12-12-2012 Bond NCM
3368 Land use and
development
amendment
Defeated
3369 Defeated
3370 2-13-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3371 2-13-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3372 2-13-2013 Animals amendment;
fees amendment
Chs. 105; 145
3373 2-13-2012 Refunding bond NCM
3374 2-13-2013 Taxicabs and
limousines amendment
Ch. 256
3375 3-13-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3376 4-10-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3377 5-8-2013 Salaries NCM
3378 5-8-2013 Salaries NCM
3379 5-8-2013 Water amendment Ch. 269
3380 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Defeated
3381 Defeated
3382 5-8-2013 Smoke-free zones and
areas amendment
Ch. 244, Art. III
3383 6-12-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3384 6-12-2013 Capital improvements NCM
3385 6-12-2013 Municipal budget; cap
bank
NCM
3386 7-17-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3387 7-13-2013 Acquisition of real
property
NCM
3388 Fees amendment Defeated
3389 9-18-2013 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
3390 9-18-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 145
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1294
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3391 10-9-2013 Capital fund balance
account
NCM
3392 10-9-2013 Bond NCM
3393 10-9-2013 Bond NCM
3394 10-9-2013 Bond NCM
3395 11-13-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3396 11-13-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3397 12-11-2013 Salaries NCM
3398 12-11-2013 Salaries NCM
3399 12-11-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3400 12-11-2013 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3401 1-15-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3402 1-15-2014 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3403 2-19-2014 Smoke-free zones and
areas amendment
Ch. 244, Art. III
3404 2-19-2014 Garbage, rubbish,
refuse and recycling
amendment
Ch. 165
3405 3-12-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3406 3-12-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3407 3-12-2014 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3408 3-5-2014 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3409 4-9-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3410 4-9-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3411 5-14-2014 North Walnut Street
redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1295
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3412 5-14-2014 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
3413 5-28-2014 Bond NCM
3414 5-28-2014 Bond NCM
3415 5-28-2014 Bond NCM
3416 6-11-2014 Lease of property NCM
3417 6-11-2014 Abandoned property Ch. 222A
3418 Not adopted
3419 5-28-2014 Bond NCM
3420 5-28-2014 Bond NCM
3421 7-16-2014 Bond NCM
3422 7-16-2014 Environmental Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 18
3423 8-13-2014 Green Team Ch. 26
3424 8-13-2014 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3425 8-13-2014 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3426 8-13-2014 Fees amendment; land
use and development
amendment
Chs. 145; 190
3427 8-13-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3428 8-13-2014 Appropriation NCM
3429 8-13-2014 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3430 8-13-2014 Valet parking services Ch. 263
3431 8-13-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3432 9-17-2014 Holiday displays Ch. 174
3433 9-17-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3434 10-8-2014 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3435 Not adopted
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1296
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3436 Not adopted
3437 10-22-2014 Salaries NCM
3438 10-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3439 10-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3440 11-12-2014 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 223
3441 11-12-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3442 12-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3443 Bond NCM
3444 Salaries NCM
3445 Salaries NCM
3446 12-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3447 12-10-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3448 12-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3449 Not adopted
3450 12-10-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3451 1-14-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3452 1-14-2015 Filming amendment Ch. 147
3453 1-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3454 1-14-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3455 12-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3456 Salaries NCM
3457 2-11-2015 Towing amendment Ch. 258
3458 2-11-2015 Valet parking services
amendment
Ch. 263
3459 3-11-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3460 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1297
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3461 3-11-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3462 3-11-2015 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3463 3-11-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3464 3-11-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3465 3-11-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3466 3-25-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3467 3-25-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3468 4-8-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3469 4-8-2015 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3470 4-8-2015 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3471 5-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3472 Defeated
3473 5-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3474 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
3475 Bond NCM
3476 Bond NCM
3477 Appropriation NCM
3478 6-10-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3479 7-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3480 7-15-2015 Bond NCM
3481 7-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3482 7-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1298
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3483 7-15-2015 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3484 7-15-2015 Salaries NCM
3485 8-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3486 8-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3487 8-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3488 8-12-2015 Lease agreement NCM
3489 3-23-2016 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3490 3-23-2016 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3491 3-23-2016 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3492 3-23-2016 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3493 3-23-2016 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3494 9-16-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3495 9-16-2015 Appropriation NCM
3496 9-16-2015 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3497 9-16-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3498 9-16-2015 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3499 9-16-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3500 9-30-2015 Lease agreement NCM
3501 10-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1299
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3502 10-14-2015 Holiday displays
amendment
Ch. 174
3503 10-14-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3504 10-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3505 10-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3506 NCM
3507 Bond NCM
3508 11-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3509 12-9-2015 Salaries NCM
3510 12-9-2015 Animals amendment Ch. 105
3511 12-9-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3512 12-9-2015 Valet parking services
amendment; vehicles
and traffic amendment
Ch. 263; Ch. 265
3513 12-9-2015 Salaries NCM
3514 12-9-2015 Salaries NCM
3515 NCM
3516 12-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3517 1-13-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3518 Bond NCM
3519 2-10-2016 Lease agreement Repealed by Ord. No.
3527
3520 3-9-2016 Bond NCM
3521 Bond NCM
3522 Defeated
3523 Defeated
3524 4-13-2016 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3525 4-13-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 145, history only
3526 4-13-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 145
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1300
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3527 Lease agreement
repealer
NCM
3528 5-11-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3529 Establish position of
qualified purchasing
agent
NCM
3530 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
3531 Bond NCM
3532 5-11-2016 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3533 Establishment of
Ridgewood Community
Action Network
NCM
3534 6-8-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3535 Bond NCM
3536 Bond NCM
3537 Salaries amendment NCM
3538 6-8-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3539 6-8-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3540 9-7-2016 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3541 9-7-2016 Fees amendment; land
use and development
amendment
Ch. 145; Ch. 190
3542 9-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3543 9-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3544 9-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3545 9-14-2016 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 249
3546 9-14-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3547 Defeated
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1301
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3548 10-12-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3549 10-12-2016 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3550 10-12-2016 Yard waste amendment Ch. 275
3551 10-12-2016 Administration of
government
amendment
Ch. 3
3552 10-12-2016 Capital fund NCM
3553 10-12-2016 Animals amendment Ch. 105
3554 10-12-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3555 11-9-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3556 Not adopted
3557 11-9-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3558 11-9-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3559 Salaries NCM
3560 Salaries NCM
3561 Salaries NCM
3562 12-14-2016 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3563 12-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3564 Appropriation NCM
3565 12-14-2016 Lease agreement NCM
3566 12-14-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3567 12-14-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3568 1-11-2017 Valet parking services
amendment
Ch. 263
3569 Pending codification
3570 1-11-2017 Businesses and
occupations
amendment
Ch. 117
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1302
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3571 1-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3572 1-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3573 1-11-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3574 Bond NCM
3575 1-25-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3576 1-25-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3577 Bond NCM
3578 2-8-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3579 2-8-2017 Land use and
development
amendment
Ch. 190
3580 2-8-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3581 3-8-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3582 3-8-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3583 3-8-2017 Sewers and sewage
disposal amendment
Ch. 238
3584 3-8-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3585 3-8-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3586 3-8-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3587 3-8-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3588 4-12-2017 Water amendment Ch. 269
3589 4-12-2017 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 212
3590 4-12-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3591 4-12-2017 Historic Preservation
Commission repealer;
land use and
development
amendment; swimming
pools repealer
Ch. 29, reference only;
Ch. 190; Ch. 251,
reference only
3592 5-10-2017 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1303
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3593 Bond NCM
3594 Bond NCM
3595 Bond NCM
3596 5-10-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3597 5-10-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3598 Construction of
handicapped ramp
NCM
3599 6-14-2017 Trees and shrubs Ch. 260
3600 6-14-2017 Parks and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 212
3601 7-12-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3602 7-12-2017 Power tools,
landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment
amendment
Ch. 222
3603 7-12-2017 Emergency
appropriation
NCM
3604 7-12-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3605 8-9-2017 Not adopted
3606 8-9-2017 Appropriation NCM
3607 8-9-2017 Salaries NCM
3608 8-9-2017 Salaries NCM
3609 8-9-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3610 8-9-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3611 8-9-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3612 8-9-2017 School enrollment Ch. 232
3613 10-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3614 10-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3615 10-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1304
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3616 10-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 265
3617 10-11-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 145
3618 11-8-2017 Salaries NCM
3619 11-8-2017 Salaries NCM
3620 11-8-2017 Salaries NCM
3621 11-8-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3622 11-8-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3623 12-13-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3624 12–13-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3625 Defeated
3626 1-17-2018 Salaries NCM
3627 1-17-2018 Salaries NCM
3628 1-17-2018 Salaries NCM
3629 1-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3630 1-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3631 2-14-2018 Bond NCM
3632 2-14-2018 Bond NCM
3633 3-14-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3634 3-14-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3635 3-14-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3636 6-27-2018 Fees Amendment;
Water Amendment
Ch. 145; Ch. 269
3637 6-27-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3638 4-11-2018 Parks and Recreation
Areas Amendment
Ch. 212
3639 6-13-2018 Parks and Recreation
Areas Amendment
Ch. 212
3640 4-11-2018 Parks and Recreation
Areas Amendment
Ch. 212
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1305
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3641 4-11-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3642 5-9-2018 Bond NCM
3643 5-9-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
3644 5-9-2018 Bond NCM
3645 5-9-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3646 No title found for
reference Defeated
Ch. Defeated
3647 6-13-2018 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190
3648 6-13-2018 Health and Sanitation
Amendment
Ch. 172
3649 6-13-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
3650 7-18-2018 Bond NCM
3651 7-18-2018 Appropriation NCM
3652 7-18-2018 Appropriation NCM
3653 8-8-2018 Valet Parking Services
Amendment
Ch. 263
3654 8-8-2018 Animals Amendment Ch. 105
3655 8-8-2018 Smoking Amendment Ch. 244, Art. I; Ch.
244, Art. II; Ch. 244,
Art. III
3656 8-8-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3657 8-8-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3658 8-8-2018 Garbage, Rubbish,
Refuse and Recycling
Amendment
Ch. 165
3659 8-8-2018 Food and Food-
Handling
Establishments
Amendment
Ch. 156
3660 8-8-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3661 8-8-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3662 9-5-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1306
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3663 9-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3664 9-12-2018 Bond NCM
3665 9-12-2018 Bond NCM
3666 9-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3667 9-12-2018 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190
3668 9-12-2018 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190
3669 9-12-2018 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190
3670 9-26-2018 Bond NCM
3671 9-26-2018 Bond NCM
3672 10-10-2018 Administration of
Government
Amendment
Ch. 3
3673 10-24-2018 Smoking: Tobacco,
Cannabis and
Electronic Vapor
Substance Inhalation
Shops
Ch. 244, Art. IV
3674 10-24-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3675 10-24-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3676 10-24-2018 Bond NCM
3677 11-28-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3678 11-28-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3679 11-28-2018 Salaries and Wages NCM
3680 11-28-2018 Salaries and Wages NCM
3681 11-28-2018 Animals Amendment;
Fees Amendment
Ch. 105; Ch. 145
3682 11-28-2018 Trees and Shrubs
Amendment
Ch. 260
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1307
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3683 11-7-2018 Purchase of Property NCM
3684 11-7-2018 Purchase of Property NCM
3685 11-7-2018 Purchase of Property NCM
3686 11-7-2018 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190
3687 12-12-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3688 1-16-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3689 12-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3690 12-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3691 12-12-2018 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190
3692 12-12-2018 Cosmetology Ch. 128
3693 12-12-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3694 1-16-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3695 1-16-2019 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190
3696 1-16-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3697 1-16-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3698 2-13-2019 Bond NCM
3699 2-13-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3700 2-13-2019 Food and Food-
Handling
Establishments
Amendment
Ch. 156
3701 2-13-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3702 2-13-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3703 2-13-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3704 3-6-2019 Food and Food-
Handling
Establishments
Amendment
Ch. 156
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1308
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3705 3-13-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3706 3-13-2019 Dumpsters Amendment Ch. 133
3707 3-13-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3708 4-10-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
3709 4-10-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 269
3710 4-10-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3711 4-10-2019 Bond NCM
3712 4-10-2019 Bond NCM
3713 4-10-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
3714 4-10-2019 Smoking: Tobacco,
Cannabis and
Electronic Vapor
Substance Inhalation
Shops
Ch. 244, Art. IV
3715 4-10-2019 Landscapers and
Landscaping Services
Amendment
Ch. 186
3716 4-10-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145
3717 4-10-2019 Food and Food-
Handling
Establishments
Amendment
Ch. 156
3718 4-10-2019 Bond NCM
3719 4-10-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
3720 5-8-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145 30
3721 5-8-2019 Parks and Recreation
Areas Amendment
Ch. 212 30
3722 6-12-2019 Single-Use Plastic Bag
Reduction
Ch. 240A 30
3723 7-17-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145 30
3724 7-17-2019 Flood Damage
Prevention
Ch. 154 30
3725 7-17-2019 Bond NCM 30
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1309
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
3726 7-17-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 30
3727 7-17-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145 30
3728 8-7-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 30
3729 9-4-2019 Bond NCM 30
3730 9-11-2019 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190 30
3731 8-14-2019 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190 30
3732 9-4-2019 Bond NCM 30
3733 9-4-2019 Bond NCM 30
3734 Defeated 30
3735 9-11-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 30
3736 9-11-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145 30
3737 9-11-2019 Salaries NCM 30
3738 9-11-2019 Parks and Recreation
Areas Amendment
Ch. 212 30
3739 9-11-2019 Green Ridgewood
Committee
Ch. 18 30
3740 9-11-2019 Green Team
Amendment
Ch. 26 30
3741 9-11-2019 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190 30
3742 9-11-2019 Flood Damage
Prevention Amendment
Ch. 154 30
3744 9-4-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 30
3745 9-11-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 30
3746 10-7-2019 Bond NCM 30
3747 10-7-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 30
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1310
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
3748 Pending
Adoption
3749 10-7-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 30
3750 10-7-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 30
3751 11-13-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 145 31
3752 11-13-2019 Salaries NCM 31
3753 11-13-2019 Salaries NCM 31
3754 11-6-2019 Salaries NCM 31
3755 1-8-2020 Salaries NCM 31
3756 Failed 31
3757 1-8-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 31
3758 1-8-2020 Animals Amendment Ch. 105 31
3759 1-8-2020 Animals Amendment Ch. 105 31
3760 1-8-2020 Fees Amendment Ch. 145 31
3761 Defeated 31
3762 1-8-2020 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190 31
3763 1-8-2020 Fees Amendment Ch. 145 31
3764 1-8-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 31
3765 1-8-2020 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190 31
3766 1-8-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 31
3767 1-8-2020 Bond NCM 31
3768 1-15-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 31
3769 1-15-2020 Fees Amendment Ch. 145 31
3770 1-8-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 31
3771 2-5-2020 Salaries NCM 31
3772 2-5-2020 Salaries NCM 31
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A285:1311
Ord.
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
3773 2-5-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 31
3774 2-5-2020 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 265 31
3775 2-19-2020 Bond NCM 31
3776 2-19-2020 Bond NCM 31
3777 2-19-2020 Parks and Recreation
Areas Amendment
Ch. 212 31
3778 3-11-2020 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190 31
3779 2-19-2020 Garbage, Rubbish,
Refuse and Recycling
Amendment
Ch. 165 31
3780 2-19-2020 Garbage, Rubbish,
Refuse and Recycling
Amendment
Ch. 165 31
3781 3-11-2020 Appropriation NCM 31
3782 3-11-2020 Appropriation NCM 31
3783 3-11-2020 Land Use and
Development
Amendment
Ch. 190 31
§ DL-1 RIDGEWOOD CODE § DL-1
A285:1312