The Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-21-1967 by Ord. No. 1971]
§ 1-1. Title and adoption.
The ordinances of the Borough of Rutherford, in the County of Bergen,
New Jersey, of a general and permanent nature, as codified, are ordained
as general ordinances and are adopted as the "Code of the Borough of
Rutherford, New Jersey," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. When effective.
All the provisions of the Code shall be in force and effect on and after the
effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-3. Repealing clause.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Council
and in force on the 21st day of March 1967 and not contained in the Code
are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance,
except as hereinafter provided in § 1-4.
§ 1-4. Exceptions to repeal.
The repeal provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect:
A. Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the
effective date of this ordinance.
B. Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money by or for the borough or authorizing the issuing of bonds of the
borough or evidence of the borough's indebtedness or any contract or
obligation assumed by the borough.
C. The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the borough not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the Code.
D. Any right of franchise conferred by the borough.
E. The annual budget appropriation ordinances or resolutions.
F. Any ordinance or resolution of the borough fixing the compensation or
salaries of the members of the Mayor and Council, or of the borough
officials and employees, or the pay or compensation of positions and
clerical employments in the borough not provided for in this Code.
G. Any ordinance of the borough creating employments, positions or
offices and fixing duties therefor not provided for in this Code.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Additions and amendments to Code.
Any and all additions or amendments to said Code, when passed in such
form as to indicate the intention of the Borough Council to make the same
a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in said Code so that
reference to the Code of the Borough of Rutherford shall be understood and
intended to include such additions and amendments.
§ 1-6. Filing with Clerk; supplementation.
A certified copy of said Code shall be kept on file in the office of the Borough
Clerk. It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk, or someone designated by
the Clerk, to insert in the designated places all amendments or ordinances
which indicate the intention of the Borough Council to make the same a part
of said Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form,
and to extract from said Code all provisions which may be from time to time
repealed by the Borough Council. This copy of said Code shall be available
for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the
official Code of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 1-7. Unauthorized insertion or deletion of pages prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend
by additions or deletions any part or portion of said Code, or to insert or
delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with said Code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of Rutherford
to be misrepresented thereby.
§ 1-8. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent
of such conflict, hereby repealed.
§ 1-9. Severability.
Each section of said Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause does not affect the
validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
H. Any prosecution, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered on or prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
I. Any ordinance of the borough providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, acceptance or vacation of
any street, road or highway within the borough.
J. Any right, right-of-way or easement acquired or established in any road
return.
K. Any ordinance of the borough adopted upon final passage after the
seventh day of March 1967.
§ 1-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 1-10
1:4
§ 1-10. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately after final passage and
publication according to law.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Chapter 126, Vehicles and Traffic
[Adopted 12-5-1978 by Ord. No. 2243-78]
§ 1-11. Inclusion of vehicles and traffic legislation.
Chapter 126 of the Code, entitled "Vehicles and Traffic," as adopted by
Ordinance No. 2140-74 and as subsequently amended, supplemented and
revised by Ordinance Nos. 2147-74, 2156-74, 2165-75, 2166-75, 2179-75,
2182-75, 2196-76, 2199-76, 2200-76, 2218-77 and 2227-78, all as printed
in the Code of the Borough of Rutherford as of October 25, 1978, as
Chapter 126, is hereby adopted and deemed to be the Vehicles and Traffic
Ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford. Any vehicle and traffic legislation
not included therein is hereby deemed repealed.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 16.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 31.
Fire Department — See Ch. 33.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 60.
Personnel policies and practices — See Ch.
70.
Police Department — See Ch. 76.
Salary schedules — See Ch. 87.
§ 1-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 1-11
1:8
ARTICLE I
Borough Attorney
[Adopted 5-18-1897 by Ord. No. 257]
§ 4-1. Duties of Attorney; compensation.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Attorney to give his opinion, in writing,
upon all questions submitted to him by the Council; to attend all regular
meetings of the Council and all special meetings of the same when
requested; to draft all such resolutions, ordinances, contracts and other
papers as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the public business
and the due performance of the duties of Council; to represent the Council,
when requested, in all matters pending before it and to conduct and
conclude negotiations in the Council's behalf; and to advise the various
officers and departments of the borough as to the proper discharge of
the duties devolving upon them when requested. For all of such services,
he shall receive such salary as the Council may from time to time fix by
ordinance or resolution and, in addition thereto, his actual disbursements
made and expenses incurred in attending to any matters required of him.
§ 4-2. Additional duties, compensation.
The Borough Attorney shall appear for the Mayor and Council in all litigated
matters in which they may be a party or interested, when required by the
Mayor and Council, and shall conduct all suits, actions and proceedings
at law or in equity, prosecuted or brought by the Mayor and Council for
any purpose whatsoever, when so required by the Mayor and Council, and
shall make all necessary searches and investigations which the Council may
from time to time require. For such services, he shall receive the usual
compensation of attorneys and solicitors for like services or such sum as
may be mutually agreed upon and, in addition thereto, shall receive his
actual disbursements made and expenses incurred in the conduct of such
litigation or investigation and such taxed costs as he may recover from the
opposing litigant.
§ 4-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2
1:9

ARTICLE II
Borough Engineer
[Adopted 12-21-1948 by Ord. No. 1541]
§ 4-3. Duties of Borough Engineer.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Engineer to attend all regular and special
meetings of the Mayor and Council, to advise the Mayor and Council on
specifications and bids for materials, equipment and public improvements,
and to perform and conduct all other engineering duties which may be
required by the Mayor and Council.
§ 4-4. Compensation.
For the above services he shall receive such salary as the Mayor and Council
may from time to time adopt by ordinance,1 his actual disbursements made
and expenses incurred in attending to any matters referred to him. And
for engineering services rendered in connection with public improvements,
such as grading, curbing, sidewalks, paving, sewers, storm drains, etc., he
shall receive the prevailing professional compensation for like services or
such sum as may be agreed upon with the Mayor and Council.
§ 4-5. Repeal of prior ordinance.
An ordinance entitled "An Ordinance concerning the duties of the Borough
Engineer" No. 1473, adopted April 2, 1946, be and it is hereby repealed.
§ 4-6. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Salary Schedules.
§ 4-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6
1:11

ARTICLE III
Building Inspector
[Adopted 6-20-1950]
§ 4-7. Duties of Building Inspector.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the Building Code
and Zoning Ordinance by making building investigations, examining plans,
preparing specifications and initiating legal action against violators of the
same; to prepare and deliver to the Board of Assessors, on forms prescribed
by said Board, all information pertaining to the alteration and repair of
buildings and the construction of new buildings; to prepare and deliver
to the Board of Assessors, during the month of October of each year,
information concerning buildings under construction with the percentage of
completion of the same as of October 1 of each year; to attend all regular
and special meetings of the Mayor and Council; and to perform such other
duties which may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance.
§ 4-8. Additional duty. [Added 5-6-1958 by Ord. No. 1740]
It shall also be the duty of the Building Inspector to examine and inspect all
buildings owned or occupied by the Borough of Rutherford, and to report in
writing to the governing body concerning their condition on the first day of
October of each and every year; provided, however, that this section shall
not apply to any building maintained and operated by the Trustees of the
Free Public Library of Rutherford.
§ 4-9. Compensation.
For the above services the Building Inspector shall receive such
remuneration as the Mayor and Council may from time to time adopt by
ordinance.2
§ 4-10. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Salary Schedules.
§ 4-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10
1:13

ARTICLE IV
Deputy Building Inspector
[Adopted 3-16-1954]
§ 4-11. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of Deputy Building Inspector.
§ 4-12. Duties of Deputy Building Inspector.
It shall be the duty of the Deputy Building Inspector to perform the duties
of Building Inspector during the absence of the Building Inspector from
the Borough of Rutherford and during such other periods of time when the
Building Inspector is unable to perform his duties.
§ 4-13. Compensation.
For the above services the Deputy Building Inspector shall receive such
remuneration as the Mayor and Council may from time to time adopt by
ordinance.3
§ 4-14. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Salary Schedules.
§ 4-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-14
1:15

ARTICLE V
Legal Assistant
[Adopted 2-16-1965]
§ 4-15. Required qualification.
The person holding the office of Legal Assistant shall be an attorney at law
of New Jersey.
§ 4-16. Duties of Legal Assistant.
The Legal Assistant shall attend all meetings of the Planning Board of the
Borough of Rutherford and he shall perform such legal services for said
Board as it may require of him, subject to the supervision of the Borough
Attorney.4
§ 4-17. Additional duties.
The Legal Assistant shall perform such additional legal services which may
be delegated to him from time to time by the Mayor and Council upon the
recommendation and under the supervision of the Borough Attorney.
§ 4-18. Compensation.
The salary of the Legal Assistant shall be in such amount as the Mayor and
Council shall determine by the ordinance concerning civil service.5
§ 4-19. Term of office.
The term of office of the Legal Assistant shall be for one year, commencing
on January 1 and terminating on December 31 of the same year and until a
successor has been appointed.
§ 4-20. Limitation of duties.
The duties of the Legal Assistant shall not exceed 80 full working days in
any one year.
§ 4-21. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
4. Editor's Note: See Article I of this Chapter.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Salary Schedules.
§ 4-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-21
1:17

ARTICLE VI
Purchasing Agent, Comptroller and Personnel Officer
[Adopted 3-3-1953]
§ 4-22. Offices created.
There is hereby created the offices of Purchasing Agent, Comptroller and
Personnel Officer.
§ 4-23. Duties of Purchasing Agent.
The Purchasing Agent shall have charge of arranging for the purchase of all
materials and supplies for public use.6
§ 4-24. Duties of Comptroller.
The Comptroller shall supervise and be responsible for the accounting
work involved in posting, recording and verifying revenues, appropriations,
transfers, disbursements and commitments, and he shall supervise and be
responsible for the installation and maintenance of accounts, and he shall
also supervise and be responsible for the preparation of periodic financial
statements.
§ 4-25. Duties of Personnel Officer.
The Personnel Officer shall act in an advisory capacity in the consideration
and adjustment of personnel and employee relation problems and he shall
act in a representative or liaison capacity with the Department of Civil
Service of the State of New Jersey in varied personnel matters. The
Personnel Officer shall also have authority to assign and transfer clerical
duties as the demand for additional clerical assistance arises in the several
departments .7
§ 4-26. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately.
6. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 81, Purchasing, and Ch. 82, Purchasing, Cooperative.
7. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 70, Personnel Policies and Practices.
§ 4-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26
1:19

ARTICLE VII
Municipal Prosecutor8
[Adopted 12-19-1961]
§ 4-27. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of Municipal Prosecutor of the Borough
of Rutherford.
§ 4-28. Required qualification.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall be an attorney at law of New Jersey.
§ 4-29. Duties of Municipal Prosecutor.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall prosecute cases to be tried before the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Rutherford alleging a violation of the
criminal law of New Jersey, operating a motor vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol and such other cases as may be designated by the
Mayor and Council upon the recommendation of the Borough Attorney,9 by
statute or by Rule of the Supreme Court of New Jersey.
§ 4-30. Term of office.
The term of office of the Municipal Prosecutor shall be for one year,
commencing on January 1 and terminating on December 31 of the same
year and until a successor shall have been appointed and qualified.
§ 4-31. Nomination and appointment.
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council,
appoint the Municipal Prosecutor, including the filling of a vacancy in said
office, which shall be for the unexpired term only.
§ 4-32. Compensation.
The salary of the Municipal Prosecutor shall be in such amount as the Mayor
and Council shall determine by ordinance.10
§ 4-33. Limitation of duties.
The duties of the Municipal Prosecutor shall not exceed 80 full workdays in
any one year.
8. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 60, Municipal Court.
9. Editor's Note: See Article I of this chapter.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Salary Schedules.
§ 4-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-34
1:21
§ 4-34. Repeal of prior ordinance.
An ordinance entitled "An Ordinance Creating the Office of Legal Assistant
of the Borough of Rutherford in the County of Bergen and Prescribing the
Term, Duties and Salary Thereof," No. 1803, adopted on March 15, 1960, be
and it is hereby repealed.
§ 4-35. Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
§ 4-34 RUTHERFORD CODE § 4-35
1:22
ARTICLE VIII
Borough Administrator
[Adopted 9-16-1969; amended in its entirety 2-28-2006 by Ord. No.
3101-06]
§ 4-36. Position of Borough Administrator created.
The position of Borough Administrator of the Borough of Rutherford is
hereby created, and the employment of a person to fill such position on a
temporary or permanent basis is hereby authorized.
§ 4-37. Appointment; term of office; removal; vacation;
compensation.
§ 4-38. Qualifications.
A. Appointment of Borough Administrator. The Borough Administrator
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. The Mayor shall make such appointment within 30 days after
the office becomes vacant. If the Mayor fails to make such appointment
within said 30 days or if the Council fails to confirm any appointment
made by the Mayor, then, after the expiration of said 30 days, the
Council shall appoint said Borough Administrator.
B. Term of office. The term of office of the Borough Administrator shall be
at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
C. Removal of Borough Administrator. The Borough Administrator may be
removed by a two-thirds vote of the governing body. The resolution of
removal shall become effective three months after its adoption by the
governing body. The governing body may provide that the resolution
shall have immediate effect; provided, however, that the governing
body shall cause to be paid to the Borough Administrator forthwith any
unpaid balance of salary and the salary for the next three calendar
months following adoption of the resolution. [Amended 12-26-2017
by Ord. No. 3441-17]
D. (Reserved)11
E. Compensation of Borough Administrator. The Borough Administrator
shall receive as his salary such sums as may be fixed and adopted by the
Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford.12 [Amended
12-26-2017 by Ord. No. 3441-17]
A. The Borough Administrator shall be chosen on the basis of executive
and administrative abilities and qualifications, with special regard to
education, training and experience in government affairs.
11.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Vacation for Municipal Administrator, was repealed
8-5-1975 by Ord. No. 2175-75.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Salary Schedules.
§ 4-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-39
1:23
§ 4-39. Powers and duties of the Borough Administrator. [Amended
8-5-1975 by Ord. No. 2175-75; 12-26-2017 by Ord. No. 3441-17]
The Borough Administrator shall have the following powers and perform the
following duties:
A. Shall attend all meetings as directed by the Mayor and Council.
B. Shall provide a liaison between the Mayor and Council and the various
municipal boards, agencies and departments of the Borough of
Rutherford and its professional advisors.
C. Shall keep the Mayor and Council currently informed on all matters
assigned to the administrator or otherwise within the administrator's
jurisdiction.
D. Shall be responsible for the coordination of intradepartmental
operations and manage the day-to-day operations of the Borough Hall
by coordinating and supervising the activities of all employees.
E. Shall make studies and surveys of such municipal problems of the
Borough of Rutherford as shall be assigned from time to time by the
Mayor and Council and prepare and submit written reports of the
findings and determinations to the Mayor and Council for their
consideration and action.
F. Shall have direct responsibility for policy formulation on overall
problems and shall study continually present and future budgets,
purchasing procedures and personnel organization and policies,
making appropriate changes when necessary. The administrator also
shall make recommendations to the Mayor and Council relating thereto
as the administrator shall deem necessary from time to time.
G. Shall be responsible for continually improving communications
between the various Borough personnel, departments, agencies, boards
and the Mayor and Council.
H. Shall see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Borough
or its inhabitants in any statute or contract are faithfully kept and
performed, and, upon knowledge of any violation, call the same to the
attention of the Borough Council.
I. Shall have the authority to recommend the removal, discipline and
appointment of all department heads and all other employees, subject
to personnel policies of the Borough and subject to all rules and
regulations of the New Jersey Department of Civil Service as presently
exist or as may be promulgated in the future. In addition, the
administrator shall have the authority to suspend any and all Borough
employees immediately. In cases of suspension, it shall be the
administrator's responsibility to notify 2/3 of the governing body within
24 hours.
§ 4-39 RUTHERFORD CODE § 4-39
1:24
§ 4-40. Bond.
The Borough Administrator shall furnish a surety bond to be approved
by the Mayor and Council, said bond to be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties. The premium of said bond shall be paid by the
borough.
J. Shall continually review and supervise the Borough's insurance
program.
K. Shall be responsible for the overall supervision and maintenance of real
property owned by the Borough of Rutherford.
L. Shall act as liaison between the Borough of Rutherford and the various
county, state and federal agencies, with respect to all applications for
funds and/or services needed or required by the Borough of Rutherford.
M. Shall review daily any complaints concerning the functions and
obligations of the Borough of Rutherford made by any of its residents,
and shall have a permanent record of all complaints and the disposition
made.
N. Shall make any recommendations which the administrator may believe
will increase the efficiency of the operation of the Borough of
Rutherford.
O. Shall prepare and present to the Mayor and Council an annual report of
Borough affairs on or before December 15 of each year, which shall
include a report from each department head.
P. Shall be responsible for the preparation of the operating and capital
improvement budgets for presentation to the Mayor and Council and
for administration of the budget approved by the governing body. In
preparing the proposed budget, the administrator shall alert
department heads to the submission of their portion thereof with
supporting data the administrator deems necessary and shall assist the
individual Council members and department heads in contributing their
share of the responsibility for the municipal budget. The administrator
shall thoroughly review these requests and submit recommendations
with respect thereto to the governing body in a timely fashion.
Q. Shall review all requisitions from departments for materials, equipment
and supplies, and proofs of purchase by the Council. Shall require the
various departments to furnish an adequate inventory of all equipment,
materials and supplies in stock and to recommend the sale of any
surplus, obsolete or unused equipment when authorized by the Mayor
and Council.
R. Shall also perform such other duties as may be assigned to the
administrator from time to time by the Mayor and Council.
§ 4-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-41
1:25
§ 4-41. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
§ 4-42. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon publication and final
passage pursuant to law.
§ 4-41 RUTHERFORD CODE § 4-42
1:26
ARTICLE IX
Borough Clerk and Deputy Clerk13
[Adopted 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 3219-11]
§ 4-43. Position of Borough Clerk.
The position of Borough Clerk which exists pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133
shall be filled pursuant to the requirements of said statute. The Clerk shall
attend all meetings of the Council, keep a correct record of its proceedings,
and perform such other duties as the Council may require, or as may be
directed by law.
§ 4-44. Position of Deputy Borough Clerk created.
The position of Deputy Borough Clerk is hereby created pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-135. The Deputy Borough Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council. The Deputy Borough Clerk shall,
during the absence or disability of the Borough Clerk, have all the powers of
the Borough Clerk, and shall perform the functions and duties of such office.
In addition, the Deputy Borough Clerk shall be responsible to perform any
and all duties assigned to him or her by the Borough Clerk.
§ 4-45. through § 4-46. (Reserved)
13.Editor's Note: Former Art. IX, Borough Treasurer, adopted 7-5-1978 by Ord. No. 2234-78,
was repealed 9-8-1999 by Ord. No. 2908-99. See now Ch. 31A, Finance Department.
§ 4-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-45
1:27

ARTICLE X
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 2-7-1989 by Ord. No. 2524-89]
§ 4-47. Position created.
The position of Chief Financial Officer of the Borough of Rutherford is
hereby created, and the employment of a person to fill such position is
hereby authorized.
§ 4-48. Appointment; term of office; tenure; compensation.
§ 4-49. Duties.
The Chief Financial Officer shall perform such duties as are required by law
and the ordinances of the borough and such duties as may be designated by
the Borough Council.
§ 4-50. Bond.
The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough of Rutherford shall furnish a
surety bond to be approved by the Mayor and Council, said bond to be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Chief Financial Officer's
duties. The premium of said bond shall be paid by the borough.
§ 4-51. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holdings shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.15
A. Appointment, The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
B. Term of office. The term of office of the Chief Financial Officer shall be
at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council. No Chief Financial Officer
shall be removed without being afforded an opportunity to be heard.
Unless sooner removed, however, said Chief Financial Officer shall hold
office for one year and until his successor shall have qualified.
C. Tenure. The Chief Financial Officer may obtain tenure as provided by
statute.
D. Compensation. The Chief Financial Officer shall receive as salary such
sums as may be fixed and adopted by the Salary Ordinance of the
Borough of Rutherford.14
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Salary Schedules.
15.Editor's Note: Former Art. XI, Executive Secretary, adopted 2-22-2016 by Ord. No.
3389-16, which immediately followed, was repealed 6-10-2019 by Ord. No. 3504-19.
§ 4-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-51
1:29
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative offices — See Ch. 4.
Personnel policies and practices — See Ch.
70.
Purchasing — See Ch. 81.
§ 5-1. Organization; officers; meetings (N.J.S.A. 40A:60-3).
A. The Mayor and Council shall hold an annual meeting on the first day of
January at 12:00 noon, or during the first seven days of January in any
year.
B. At its annual meeting the Council shall, by the vote of a majority of its
number, elect a President of the Council who shall preside at all its
meetings when the Mayor does not preside. The President of the
Council shall hold office for one year and until the next annual meeting
and shall have the right to debate and vote on all questions before
Council. If the Council fails to elect a President at the annual meeting,
the Mayor shall appoint the President from the Council and, in that
case, no confirmation by the Council shall be necessary.
C. The President of the Council shall perform all the duties of the Mayor
during any period in which the Mayor is absent from the Borough for
three days or more, or is unable to perform the duties of his or her
office. Where such absence is intended, the President of the Council
shall become the Acting Mayor until the Mayor's return. If the President
of the Council is unable to perform the duties of the Acting Mayor, then
the member of Council with the longest term of service may act
temporarily for the President of the Council.
D. Three Council members and the Mayor or, in the absence of the Mayor,
four Council members, shall constitute a quorum for transacting
business.
E. The Council may, at its annual meeting, establish for its members such
committees of the Council as will assist it for the ensuing year.
F. The Council shall hold such other meetings, at such time and place as it
may by resolution direct, but all regular meetings shall be held within
the Borough.
G. The Mayor shall, when necessary, call special meetings of the Council.
In case of his or her neglect or refusal, any four members of the Council
may call such meeting at such time and place in the Borough as they
may designate, and in all cases of special meetings notice shall be given
to all the members of the Council, or left at their places of residence.
§ 4-51 RUTHERFORD CODE § 5-2
1:30
§ 5-2. Powers of Mayor (N.J.S.A. 40A:60-5).
§ 5-3. Powers of Council (N.J.S.A. 40A:60-6).
A. The Mayor shall be the head of the municipal government.
B. The Mayor shall have all those powers designated by general law.
C. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council and may vote to
break a tie.
D. Every ordinance adopted by the Council shall, within five days after its
passage, Sundays excepted, be presented to the Mayor by the Borough
Clerk. The Mayor shall, within 10 days after receiving the ordinance,
Sundays excepted, either approve the ordinance by affixing the Mayor's
signature thereto, or return it to the Council by delivering it to the
Clerk, together with a statement setting forth the Mayor's objections
thereto or any item or part thereof. No ordinance or any item or part
thereof shall take effect without the Mayor's approval unless the Mayor
fails to return the ordinance to the Council, as prescribed above, or
unless the Council, upon consideration of the ordinance following its
return shall, by a vote of two-thirds of all the members of Council,
resolve to override the veto.
E. No ordinance shall be passed, or appointment of any subordinate officer
of the Borough be confirmed, except by a vote of a majority of the
members of the Council present at the meeting provided that at least
three affirmative votes shall be required for such purpose, the Mayor
voting only in the case of a tie.
F. If any ordinance contains more than one distinct section, clause, or
item, the Mayor may approve one or more thereof and veto the rest.
G. The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of Council,
appoint all subordinate officers of the Borough, unless the specific
terms of the general law clearly require a different appointment
procedure. He or she shall make his or her nomination to any such
office within 30 days of that office becoming vacant.
H. The Mayor shall see to it that the laws of the State, and the ordinances
of the Borough, are faithfully executed. He or she shall recommend to
the Council such measures as he or she may deem necessary or
expedient for the welfare of the Borough. He or she shall maintain
peace and good order, and have the power to suppress all riots and
tumultuous assemblies in the Borough.
A. The Council shall be the legislative body of the municipality.
B. The Council may, subject to general law and the provisions of this act:
(1) Pass, adopt, amend and repeal any ordinance or, where permitted,
any resolution for any purpose required for the government of the
§ 5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-3
1:31
§ 5-4. Borough Clerk.
The Borough Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Council, keep a correct
record of all its proceedings, and perform such other duties as the Council
may require, or as may be directed by law.
§ 5-5. Quorum.
A quorum must be present for a meeting of the governing body. Three or
more Council members and the Mayor, or four or more Council members
without the Mayor, shall constitute a quorum.
§ 5-6. Agenda.
municipality, or for the accomplishment of any public purpose for
which the municipality is authorized to act under general law;
(2) Control and regulate the finances of the municipality and raise
money by borrowing or taxation;
(3) Create such offices and positions as it may deem necessary. The
officers appointed thereto shall perform the duties required by law
and the ordinances of the Council;
(4) Investigate any activity of the municipality;
(5) Remove any officer of the municipality, other than those officers
excepted by law, for cause; and
(6) Override a veto of the Mayor by a two-thirds majority of all the
members of the Council.
C. The Council shall have all the executive responsibilities of the
municipality not placed by general law or this act in the office of the
Mayor.
D. The Council, whenever it fails to confirm the nomination by the Mayor
of any official to a subordinate office of the Borough within 30 days of
being presented such nomination, shall make the appointment to that
office provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required for
such purpose, the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in the case of a
tie.
E. The Borough Council may create such advisory councils to the
municipality as it may choose, including councils for the functions
absorbed by it of any heretofore existing boards, commissions or
districts (N.J.S.A. 40A:60-7).
A. Any and all matters which members of the governing body wish to bring
to the attention of the Mayor and Council at any meeting shall be filed
with the Borough Clerk not later than 48 hours before the meeting. Any
item of business not on the agenda which a member of the governing
body wishes to be considered by the Mayor and Council shall only be
§ 5-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 5-6
1:32
§ 5-7. Meetings.
considered upon consent of a majority of the Council members present.
The Borough Clerk shall prepare a written agenda of all such matters to
be brought before any meeting of the Mayor and Council. The agenda
shall include the following:
(1) A consent agenda consisting of any matters which may be approved
collectively upon one motion, duly made and seconded; provided,
however, that the Mayor or any member of the Council may remove
a matter from the consent agenda for full discussion of such matter
by the governing body;
(2) A list of bills presented for payment;
(3) A copy of any ordinance proposed to be introduced on first reading;
(4) A copy of any written resolution intended to be acted upon by the
Mayor and Council; and
(5) Any other item requested to be included by the Mayor or a Council
member.
B. Members of the public shall be given the opportunity to speak on any
subject relevant to the business of the governing body at every meeting
of the Mayor and Council. Said opportunity to speak shall be limited to
five minutes unless a majority of the Council agrees to a longer period.
C. No item of business shall be introduced at a Council meeting which
does not appear on the agenda unless approved by a majority of those
members of the Council present; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be deemed to restrict the right of a citizen to bring a matter
before the Council.
D. A copy of the list of bills, any ordinance proposed to be introduced on
first reading, any written resolution intended to be acted upon by the
Mayor and Council, and any other items included on the agenda shall be
made available for inspection by the general public at the regular
meeting of the Mayor and Council.
A. Annual organizational meeting. The Mayor and Council shall hold an
annual meeting on January 1, or during the next following weekday not
a legal holiday, and such other meetings, or adjourned meetings, at
such time and place as they may by resolution direct. At the
organizational meeting, the Mayor and Council shall adopt a resolution
authorizing the "annual notice" required by N.J.S.A. 10:4-8d containing
the time, date and, to the extent known, the location of each meeting to
be held during the forthcoming year. All meetings held in accordance
with the "annual notice" shall be considered regular meetings of the
Mayor and Council.
B. Regular meetings. There shall be two regular meetings each month:
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:33
(1) A meeting known as the first regular meeting of the month,
conducted on a date set by resolution at the annual organizational
meeting and advertised pursuant to N.J.S.A. 10:4-8d(l), for the
purpose of considering any matters as may properly come before
the Council. Unless otherwise modified by the governing body, the
order of business at this meeting shall be as follows:
(a) Roll call.
(b) Salute to the flag.
(c) Provisions of Open Public Meetings Act.16
(d) Borough Engineer's report.
(e) Borough Administrator's report.
(f) Review of changes to proposed agenda.
(g) Scheduled presentations.
(h) Hearing of citizens.
(i) Review of minutes, payment of bills.
(j) Committee agenda items and general discussion.
(k) New, unfinished and/or miscellaneous business.
(l) Motion to approve agenda items.
(m) Ordinances on first reading. [Added 7-26-2011 by Ord. No.
3232-1117]
(n) Ordinances on second reading, including public hearing.
[Added 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 3232-11]
(o) Adjournment.
(2) A meeting known as the second regular meeting of the month,
conducted on a date set by resolution at the annual organizational
meeting, and advertised pursuant to N.J.S.A. 10:4-8d(l), for the
purpose of considering any matters as may properly come before
the Council. Unless otherwise modified by the governing body, the
order of business at this meeting shall be as follows:
(a) Citizen awards and commendations (Council chambers): 7:00
p.m.
(b) Roll call 7:15 p.m., or immediately following awards (work
room).
16.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B(1)(m) as Subsection
B(1)(o).
§ 5-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 5-7
1:34
(c) Salute to the flag and silent prayer.
(d) Provisions of Open Public Meetings Act.18
(e) Review of changes to proposed agenda.
(f) Hearing of citizens.
(g) Review of minutes and payment of bills.
(h) Committee agenda items and general discussion.
(i) Relocate to council chambers.
(j) Monthly committee reports.
(k) Hearing of citizens (agenda items only).
(l) Motion to approve consent agenda and vote on other agenda
items.
(m) New, unfinished and/or miscellaneous business.
(n) Ordinances on first reading.
(o) Ordinances on second reading, including public hearings.
(p) Adjournment.
(3) The order of business at any meeting of the Mayor and Council may
be modified with the consent of a majority of those present.
C. Executive sessions. The Council may, at any time during any meeting,
on motion of a majority of those present, go into executive session and
exclude the public, when permitted by applicable law to do so. Matters
discussed in executive session shall not be disclosed to the public until
disclosure is required by law or a majority of the Council agrees that
the matter should be made public, and there is no law which requires
that the matter not be made public.
D. Rules of order at meetings. The following rules of order shall be
observed at all Council meetings:
(1) No resolution or motion shall be put to a vote unless seconded.
(2) No member shall occupy more than five minutes at a time without
the majority of the Council present.
(3) No person shall speak more than twice on the same subject without
a majority of the Council present.
(4) While a member is speaking, no member shall entertain any private
discourse.
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 5-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:35
§ 5-8. Committees.
(5) When a question has been put and decided, it shall be in order for
any member who voted with the majority to move for
reconsideration thereof, provided the same shall be moved the
same day, or at the next regular meeting.
(6) The deliberations of the Council shall be governed by Robert's
Rules of Order as revised.
(7) No member of the public shall speak for more than five minutes on
any subject without the approval of the Mayor or a majority of the
Council present.
(8) A curfew of 11:00 p.m. will be observed for all committee of the
whole or regular meetings. It may be waived by a vote of 2/3 of
those present.
A. Pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A. 40A:60-7, the Council
hereby organizes itself into the following standing committees:
Finance, Police, Fire, Public Works, Buildings, Grounds and Utilities,
and Recreation and Human Resources. Each committee shall have a
primary and secondary member. The Council, from time to time, may
modify, eliminate or appoint additional standing committees by consent
of the Council. [Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3489-19]
B. Committee members appointed pursuant to Subsection A above shall
act as liaisons to those municipal organizations which fall under the
responsibilities assigned to their committees, unless the power to act as
liaisons to a municipal organization is otherwise granted to the Mayor
by law or statute.
C. All committees, both standing and special, shall make oral reports of
their activities at regular meetings during the year, and an annual
report in writing at the end of the year. Nothing in this rule shall
prevent the presentation of divergent reports from the two members of
a committee.
D. Responsibilities.
(1) Standing committees appointed by the Council shall have the
following responsibilities:
(a) Police Department. The Committee on Police shall report on
matters connected with the Police Department and the
preservation of the peace and good order. This Committee shall
also report to the Council on matters connected to the
following Borough entities: OEM, crossing guards, Violations
Bureau and Municipal Court, and shall act as Council liaison to
the Pedestrian Safety Task Force. [Amended 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3489-19]
§ 5-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 5-8
1:36
§ 5-9. Ordinances.
(b) Finance. The Committee on Finance shall examine and report
on budget matters, and from time to time shall report on the
financial condition of the Borough. This Committee shall report
to the Council as necessary on matters connected to the
following Borough departments: Finance, Purchasing, Tax
Collection, Tax Assessment, and shall act as Council liaison to
the Citizens Finance Committee. [Amended 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3489-19]
(c) Department of Public Works. The Committee on Public Works
shall report on matters concerning the Department of Public
Works and its activities, including solid waste, recycling,
streets, parks, stormwater management, and shall act as
Council liaison to the Recycling and Environment Committee.
[Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3489-19]
(d) Buildings, Grounds and Public Utilities. The Committee on
Buildings and Utilities shall report on the activities of the
Building Department and the condition of publicly owned or
operated buildings and utilities. [Amended 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3489-19]
(e) Fire Department. The Committee on Fire shall report on
matters concerning the Bureau of Fire Safety and the Fire
Department and its activities, and shall act as Council liaison to
the Ambulance Corps.
(f) Recreation Department/Human Resources. The Committee for
Recreation/Human Resources shall report on the activities of
the Recreation Department, including recreation youth sports,
league sports, field and sports facilities maintenance, and
community events. It shall also report on Borough hiring, labor,
employee benefits and other related employment conditions.
[Amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3489-19]
(2) Where there is a question regarding which standing committee
should have responsibility for a particular issue, municipal activity,
or municipal organization, a majority of the full Council shall
determine which committee shall have responsibility.
E. The following special committee/liaison assignments shall be organized
by the Council at the annual reorganization meeting and assigned to the
chosen council member(s): the Access for All Committee, the Local
Assistance Board, the Shade Tree Commission, the Nereid Boat Club,
the Passaic River Coalition, Green Acres, and Felician University. Any
other assignments to ad hoc committees not listed within this section or
established by the governing body during the year will be organized by
the Council. [Added 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3489-19]
§ 5-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-9
1:37
§ 5-10. Purchases. [Amended 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 3196-10]
A. A copy of any proposed ordinance shall be presented to each member of
the governing body before it is presented for introduction.
B. All proposed ordinances shall generally be introduced by a member of
the committee to which the subject matter has been assigned. The
member shall introduce the ordinance, and briefly describe it on first
reading or on second reading. The Clerk shall read and introduce the
ordinance by title only. The member shall then move that the ordinance
be passed on first or second reading, which motion shall require a
second.
C. After introduction and reading, and motion and second for passage, the
Mayor shall request that the Clerk take roll call as to each member's
aye or nay vote on passage of each ordinance. The Clerk shall take the
roll call vote on passage or nonpassage of each ordinance.
D. All ordinances, whether on first or second reading, shall be read by the
Clerk by title only. Any member may request that an ordinance be read
in its entirety at the time of its introduction on first reading, or on
second reading. Such request shall be honored upon the unanimous
consent of all Council present.
E. An ordinance passed on first reading shall be published in the
Borough's official newspaper in accordance with law. Following passage
of an ordinance on second reading, the Clerk shall endorse on the
ordinance the date of passage thereof, and shall present the ordinance
to the Mayor for his or her signature within five days from passage
thereof.
F. Upon passage, every ordinance or the title, together with a notice of the
date of passage, shall be published at least once in the Borough's
official newspaper. The ordinance shall take effect in accordance with
law.
G. After the passage of an ordinance, it shall be properly numbered and
recorded at length by the Borough Clerk in the ordinance book, and
proof of publication of the same shall be attached to the original
ordinance.
H. The Borough Clerk shall enter only the title of any ordinance and
reference to amendments into the minutes of the meetings.
A. All purchases must comply with the bidding requirements, and other
requirements, imposed by the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1, et seq.
B. Prior to committing to any purchase, a requisition signed by the
department head of the requesting department shall be presented to
the Chief Financial Officer to ensure the availability of funds and that
the proper budgetary account is charged, and to the Borough
§ 5-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 5-10
1:38
Administrator, or in the absence of a Borough Administrator by anyone
the Council designates by resolution. Requisitions under the current
bid threshold ($40,000 at the time of the most recent amendment
to this subsection) shall be signed by the department head of the
requesting department, the Chief Financial Officer, and the Borough
Administrator, or in the absence of a Borough Administrator by anyone
the Council designates by resolution. Requisitions above the current bid
threshold ($40,000 at the time of the most recent amendment to this
subsection) shall also be presented to the appropriate Councilperson
and are subject to Council approval. However, a Councilperson's
signature is not required for any requisitions that are statutory and
contractually negotiated, including but not limited to requisitions for
health benefit payments, insurance payments, distribution of tax levies,
sewer utilities, pension payments and debt payments. [Amended
6-26-2018 by Ord. No. 3464-18]
C. The Borough Administrator or, in the absence of a Borough
Administrator, the Council may delegate the review and approval of
requisitions for purchases costing less than $1,000 to the Purchasing
Agent or other appropriate individual. That delegation by the
Administrator must be in writing or resolution of the Council and filed
with the Borough Clerk, specifying the classes of requisitions over
which authority is delegated.
D. For all requisitions, the Borough Administrator or his or her delegate or
the Council's delegate shall review the requisition to determine that it
is necessary and appropriate for purchase at that time, and/or is a
planned and budgeted expenditure.
E. Whenever possible, written quotations shall be obtained for all
purchases. If the cost of purchasing the material is below the bid
threshold established by New Jersey Public Contracts Law N.J.S.A.
40A:11, but over $3,150 (or present quote threshold), a reasonable
effort must be made to obtain at least three written quotes before
entering into any contract.
F. Upon receipt of a certification of availability of funds, the requisition
shall be filed in the Purchasing Office, and shall be available for review
by any member of the Council.
G. The appropriate standing committee may specify in writing, filed with
the Borough Administrator, that certain classes of requisitions shall
require its specific approval prior to a purchase order being given. If so
specified, a member of the committee shall review all requisitions
falling into that class.
H. An objection to any requisition must be made in writing. If an objection
is unable to be reconciled, or if the standing committee fails to approve
the requisition, the requisition shall be presented to the governing body
for consideration at the next council meeting by the Borough
§ 5-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10
1:39
§ 5-11. Payment of claims and bills.
Administrator, or any Councilmember who believes that the purchase is
in the best interests of the Borough
I. If no objections are noted, or if any noted objection is resolved, the
Chief Financial Officer or Purchasing Agent may proceed to issue a
purchase order as soon as expedient, and purchase the material. The
purchase order and descriptive information will appear on the bill list
(in accordance with Article Eleven) for payment approval by the
Council.
J. Any purchase over $21,000 or such higher amount as set by statute or
administrative code, must be advertised in accordance with the Local
Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11.
K. If the cost of purchasing supplies and equipment is above the bidding
threshold, written specifications shall be prepared for approval by the
Council. Upon approval of the specifications, the Administrator or his or
her delegate, or in the absence of an Administrator an individual named
by a majority of the council, shall procure the materials pursuant to
public bidding.
L. To ensure compliance with the Local Public Contract Law N.J.S.A.
40A:11, a Resolution will be presented to the Mayor and Council, along
with a certification of funds, for any purchase(s) over $21,000 or such
higher amount as set by statute or administrative code. Resolutions for
lesser amounts may be presented to the governing body at request, or
at the discretion of the CFO, the Borough Administrator, or his/her
delegate.
M. The Borough Administrator or his or her delegate or the Council's
delegate is authorized, upon consultation with the Committee Chair, to
approve requisitions for the emergency purchase of materials, or
provision of services, before review by the Council when the purchase is
deemed necessary to maintain essential Borough operations.
A. All bills and claims against the Borough shall be fully itemized and
submitted on the legal voucher provided by the Borough. The claimant
shall certify the correctness of his or her demand, and shall present the
same to the Chief Financial Officer and/or Borough Administrator, or
his or her delegate, before it is presented for payment at a Council
meeting.
B. In order to determine the validity of bills and claims, prevent
duplication of the same, and to establish their propriety, invoices shall
be presented with the voucher. Where applicable, the department head
shall execute the voucher certifying that the service had been rendered,
or that the materials, supplies, or equipment has been delivered. The
Borough Administrator, or his or her delegate, shall approve all
vouchers, and evidence same with his or her signature.
§ 5-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 5-11
1:40
§ 5-12. Ayes and nays.
Upon every vote of the Council on resolutions and motions, the ayes and
nays shall be taken and recorded. No member shall be permitted to vote
unless present when the member's name is called in regular order. A voice
vote may be taken on any motion or resolution. A roll call vote shall be
required upon the demand of one or more members of the governing body.
§ 5-13. Seal.
§ 5-14. Amendments to bylaws.
These bylaws may be amended by a vote of a majority of the Council, but
only at a meeting of the Council where notice of said proposed amendment
has been presented to the entire governing body at least 14 days prior. The
bylaws may be amended temporarily for a specific meeting, but only by an
affirmative vote of two thirds of Council members present at that meeting.
Chapter 6
C. All claims shall be audited by the Chief Financial Officer for accuracy
compliance with law and with budgetary controls.
D. Upon approval of the Chief Financial Officer, the bill or claim and all
supporting documentation shall be filed with the Purchasing
Department, and shall be available for review by the Council. The Chief
Financial Officer shall prepare a list of all vouchers which he or she has
approved for payment (the "bill list") and shall provide such list to the
Borough Clerk for inclusion by the Borough Clerk in the agenda
materials of each Council member.
E. The members of the Council shall review the bill list prior to the work
session or regular meeting. Whenever possible, any objection to or
question regarding any payment should be resolved. Any objection or
question raised at the meeting shall be resolved before the Council
approves any payment. If not resolved, the voucher shall be removed
from the bill list at that meeting for further evaluation.
F. If no objections are noted, or if any noted objection is resolved, the
Council may proceed to authorize payment of the bill list in whole, or in
part, on the consent agenda.
G. The Chief Financial Officer may then disburse payment of the claim
after he or she has determined that all required procedures have been
followed, and procedures received.
A. The seal of the Borough shall be circular in form and shall contain the
following: "The Borough of Rutherford, Incorporated September 21,
1881," and may contain a device.
B. The seal shall be in the custody of the Borough Clerk and shall be
affixed only by the Borough Clerk.
§ 5-11 ALARM EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION § 5-14
6:41
ALARM EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
False public alarms — See Ch. 68, § 68-4. Alarms in public amusement structures — See
Ch. 79.
§ 6-1. Findings and declarations.
The Mayor and Council does hereby define and declare that:
§ 6-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices, whether
by direct line, telephone or other means, actuating devices at the Police
Department of the borough and requiring a response thereto by the Police
or Fire Department or other borough departments.
§ 6-3. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person, other than the
municipality, who operates, maintains or owns any alarm device designed
to summon the Police or Fire Department or other borough departments
to any location in response to any type of alarm signal. The terms of this
A. The occupants and numerous residential, commercial and industrial
establishments in the Borough of Rutherford have found it desirable to
make provision for the installation upon their premises, at their own
cost and expense, of alarm systems for emergencies such as burglaries,
fire and like alarms.
B. There is a growing number of alarm companies that sell or lease such
alarm systems entering into contracts with such occupants for the
installation, operation and maintenance of such alarm systems and
providing for the connection of the individual alarm system so installed
by them to a central location or to an alarm panel installed in the Police
Department of the borough.
C. The number of private enterprises engaged in the alarm business, each
with its own system and equipment, has resulted in conditions that, if
not remedied, will lead to an unnecessary drain on the manpower, time,
space, facilities and finances of the borough and its Police and Fire
Departments, the deterioration of the quality of service to persons
subscribing to the alarm systems and inequities in the alarm business in
the borough.
D. The public interest therefore requires the enactment of rules,
regulations, standards and procedures to regulate and control the
alarm business of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 5-14 RUTHERFORD CODE § 6-3
6:42
chapter shall in no way prohibit alarm companies from providing services
by private source to other offices within or without the borough so long as
such activity is not connected to any alarm panel, alarm register or special
telephone connected with the Police or Fire Department or other municipal
department which presently exists or will be installed at any of the said
borough departments. Any persons having premises protected by a local
alarm shall be responsible for the registration thereof in accordance with
§ 6-9 of this chapter.
§ 6-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm equipment which actuates the alarm
panel or special telephone located in the borough's communications console
for providing warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other peril.
ALARM PANEL — That component or components to be installed in the
console in the Police Department and containing alarm indications and
designations.
ALARM SYSTEM — The installation in one or more buildings of one or more
alarm devices for the express purpose of giving visual or audible warning,
or both, of an emergency such as burglary, intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or
like perils.
COMMUNICATIONS CONSOLE — The console or control panel of devices
giving visual or audio indications, or both, and general communications and
located within the confines of the Police Department of the borough.
DIAL ALARM — That type of alarm device that employs an automatic dialing
system precoded to connect with a special telephone in the borough's
communications console rather than to the alarm panel.
FALSE ALARMS — The actuation of an alarm system by causes other than
those to which the alarm system was designed or intended to respond,
which summon the Police or Fire Department or other municipal
department to investigate.
LICENSEE — The person obtaining the license to install, operate and
maintain the alarm panel as hereinafter set forth.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which, when actuated, produces an
external visible or audible signal and which is not connected to the alarm
panel in the borough's communications console, such as but not limited to
independent burglar and/or fire alarms.
PERMITTEE — Any person owning or leasing an alarm system and holding
a permit to connect said device to a special telephone (dial alarm) or the
alarm panel within the scope of this chapter.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, corporation or
association or any other legal entity.
§ 6-3 ALARM EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION § 6-5
6:43
§ 6-5. Alarm panel license.
§ 6-6. Issuance of alarm panel license.
Upon adoption of this chapter, the Purchasing Agent, after consulting with
the Chief of Police and Fire Department, shall issue written specifications
covering the alarm panel hereinbefore referred to and submit the same to
the Borough Council for approval, and, after advertising and bidding, in
accordance with the Local Public Contracts Law,19 the alarm panel license
shall be issued by the Borough Clerk to the licensee in accordance with said
specifications and upon resolution adopted by the Mayor and Council.
§ 6-7. Alarm panel permits; application, issuance and fee; false
alarms.
A. There is hereby established an alarm panel license, which shall be
granted to a licensee upon approval of the Borough Council as set forth
in § 6-6 of this chapter.
B. Any such licensee shall have exclusive use and control of the alarm
panel, which shall be installed in the communications console in the
Police Department of the borough in accordance with the specifications
referred to in this chapter; excepting, however, the borough's Police
and Fire Departments' use of said alarm panel. Such licensee shall be
responsible, at no cost to the borough, for the furnishing, installing,
operating and maintaining of said panel, containing equipment and
being of a design approved by the Borough Council. Said licensee shall
locate said panel and relocate said panel, if necessary, under the
supervision of the borough's Chief of Police, at no cost to the Borough of
Rutherford.
A. Every person desiring to connect an alarm system to the alarm panel in
the Police Department shall make application to the Police Chief for a
permit to do so. The application shall be in such form as the Police Chief
shall prescribe and shall set forth all information required by the Police
Chief to enable him to decide whether or not the applicant's alarm
system can effectively be connected to the alarm panel. As part of said
application, the permittee shall provide an agreement to release the
Borough of Rutherford and its officers, agents and employees from any
and all liability or damages which may flow or result from any and all
actions of the said Borough of Rutherford and its agents, servants or
employees and, further, to indemnify and save harmless the Borough of
Rutherford and its officers, agents and employees for or on account of
any acts or omissions directly or indirectly related to the installation,
operation or maintenance of the alarm panel and the connection of the
applicant's alarm system thereto.
B. All alarm devices in operation and connected to the present alarm
panels in the Police Department as of the date of the adoption of this
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 6-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 6-7
6:44
chapter shall obtain a permit and be connected hereunder to the
proposed alarm panel by the licensee, and no additional connection
charge for such transfer shall be permitted.
C. Upon compliance by the applicant with all of the provisions of this
chapter, the Police Chief shall issue to the applicant a permit for the
connection applied for.
D. The permittee shall pay to the Borough Clerk an annual fee for the
privilege of being connected to the alarm panel in the sum of $50, which
fee shall be payable by January 30 of each year annually so long as the
permit is in force. Any permit issued between January 1 and December
31 shall require the same fee of $50, no portion of which shall be
prorated or refundable. Should any such fee be delinquent for 30 days,
the Police Chief or his designated representative shall notify the
permittee, in writing, that such system has been disconnected from the
alarm panel.
E. The permittee shall pay the licensee a connection fee not in excess of
$50 for connection to the alarm panel and agree to pay the licensee a
monthly service charge not in excess of the amount authorized in the
licensee's license with the Borough of Rutherford.
F. If any permittee shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the
permittee's obligation to pay the monthly charge to the licensee and/or
the borough and shall remain in such default for 30 days, the Police
Chief is authorized, on five days, notice to such permittee, to order the
licensee to disconnect the permittee's alarm system from the panel. In
such event, the alarm system shall not be reconnected except upon
payment of all arrearages, as well as a new connection fee.
G. Every permittee shall, by acceptance of the permit, be deemed as
having consented to the inspection of the alarm device, upon request
and at reasonable hours, by the Police Chief and/or Fire Prevention
Chief or their designated representatives.
H. Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected, by order of the
Police Chief or his designated representative, from the communications
console for noncompliance with this chapter, and any person installing
or maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be prosecuted for
violation of this chapter; and each and every day the equipment is in
operation shall be considered a separate violation.
I. Any licensee for the alarm panel and any permittee utilizing the
services of said alarm panel shall provide for a representative to be on
call at all times, and service shall be provided within eight hours of
notification by the Police Department of any malfunction of any
equipment.
J. In the case of false alarms, excepting false fire alarms, which summon
the police to investigate, the Police Chief shall cause an investigation to
be made and keep a record of said false alarms on file. With such false
§ 6-7 ALARM EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION § 6-7
6:45
§ 6-8. Dial alarms.
alarms, the following penalties shall be imposed: for the first and
second false alarms in any calendar year, a warning shall be issued; for
the third false alarm in the same calendar year, a penalty of $25 shall
be paid to the Borough of Rutherford. [Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord.
No. 2685-93; 5-7-1996 by Ord. No. 2759-96.]
K. In the case of false alarms, excepting false fire alarms, which summon
the police to investigate, the Police Chief shall cause an investigation to
be made and keep a record of said false alarms on file. For such false
alarms, the following penalties shall be imposed: for the fourth and
each subsequent false alarm, a penalty of $40 shall be paid to the
Borough of Rutherford. [Added 5-7-1996 by Ord. No. 2759-9620]
L. All components of alarm systems shall be maintained by the owner in
good repair. When evidence exists that there has been a failure to
comply with the operational requirements of this chapter, the Police
Chief is then authorized to demand that such devices be disconnected
from the alarm panel until such time as compliance with such
requirements is reestablished.
M. Where the investigation of the Police and/or Fire Department discloses
continued abuse of the privileges of being connected to the alarm panel,
a disregard of the permittee in taking remedial steps to avoid false
alarms or the failure to pay the required fees under this chapter, the
Borough of Rutherford reserves the right to require disconnection from
the alarm panel for a limited or permanent time, provided that no such
permit shall be revoked or suspended without giving the permittee an
opportunity to show cause before the Borough Council why such action
should not be taken. [Added 10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2685-93]
A. No dial alarm shall be permitted unless it shall first have been
registered with the Police Chief as hereinafter required and approved
by the Police Chief following approval thereof by the New Jersey Bell
Telephone Company and the performance of a test alarm conducted by
or on behalf of the applicant.
B. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial a special number which shall be
provided by the Police Chief. No dial alarm shall be coded to dial any
other number of the Rutherford Police Department or other
departments of the borough.
C. Any dial alarm may be coded as well to notify a relative, neighbor or
other third party who shall be named in the registration required by this
chapter.
20.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the relettering of former Subsections K
and L as Subsections L and M, respectively.
§ 6-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 6-8
6:46
§ 6-9. Registration of alarm systems.
No person shall install, operate or maintain any alarm system, except the
borough, unless the alarm system has been registered with the Police Chief
as follows:
D. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected by the owner to
permit a call to the Police Department in the event that a false alarm
occurs.
E. The permittee of each dial alarm system shall pay to the Borough of
Rutherford an annual fee of $12 to cover the cost of registration and
testing and to amortize the cost of the special telephone line or lines
required in the Police Department and the ancillary tape devices
necessitated by these systems. If any permittee shall fail, neglect or
refuse to pay the annual fee by January 30 of each year and shall remain
in default for 30 days thereafter, the Police Chief or his designated
representative is authorized, on five days' notice to such permittee, to
have the permittee's dial alarm system disconnected.
F. If any dial alarm shall hereafter be found to be dialing any number
other than the special telephone number reserved for dial alarms, the
permittee of said dial alarm system shall be sent a notice in writing by
the Police Chief requiring compliance with the terms of this chapter. If
said permittee, occupant of the premises of said system or listed
telephone subscriber to said system shall fail within 30 days after
receipt of said notice to comply, he or they shall be liable to a penalty
payable to the Borough of Rutherford in the amount of $50.
G. The contents of any recorded message from a dial alarm must be
intelligible and in a format approved by the Police Chief. No such
message shall be transmitted more than three times as a result of a
single stimulus of the mechanism. Said message shall not exceed 15
seconds, and the time gap between delivery shall be approximately 10
seconds.
H. All components of dial alarms shall be maintained by the permittee in
good repair. When evidence exists that there has been a failure to
comply with the operational requirements of this chapter, the Police
Chief is then authorized to demand that such device be disconnected
until such time as compliance with such requirements is reestablished.
A. Alarm panel systems. Any alarm system connected to the alarm panel
shall be deemed registered at such time as the permit therefor is
issued.
B. Dial alarms. A dial alarm system shall be deemed registered when the
annual dial alarm fee is remitted to the borough and the system has
been approved by the Police Chief.
C. Local alarms. A local alarm shall be deemed registered when the
occupant of the building in which it is installed shall have filed with the
§ 6-8 ALARM EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION § 6-9
6:47
§ 6-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord. No.
2685-93]
Every person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter of the Code for which no other specific penalty
is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine in an amount
not exceeding $100 for each violation or imprisonment in the county jail for
a period not exceeding 10 days, in the discretion of the court.
§ 6-11. Fee exemption for houses of worship. [Added 3-15-1983 by
Ord. No. 2338-83]
All houses of worship shall be exempt from paying any fees payable to the
borough called for under the provisions of this chapter of the Code.
Chapter 7
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fingerprint identification — See Ch. 32.
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 65.
Public intoxication — See Ch. 68, § 68-10.
Consumption in Borough recreation
areas — See Ch. 73, § 73-2N.
Police Chief a registration form which shall include, among other data,
the location of the device, the name of the installer of said device,
the type of device, provisions relating to false alarms and testing
procedures, a list of persons to be contacted in the event of an alarm
and other pertinent information as may be required by the Police Chief.
(1) Local alarms shall be registered, but no fees shall be charged
therefor.
(2) Registrants of local alarms shall be governed by the false alarm
procedure and penalties set forth in § 6-7J of this chapter.
(3) All local alarms installed after adoption of this chapter shall be
equipped with a time relay device which limits the sounding of
alarms to 30 minutes or less.
(4) Registrants of local alarms, upon registration, shall be deemed as
having consented to inspection of the alarm device upon request
and at reasonable hours by the Police Chief, the Fire Prevention
Chief or their designated representatives.
§ 6-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 7-1
6:48
§ 7-1. Conditions for issuance of plenary retail distribution licenses.
[Amended 2-19-1952 by Ord. No. 1596; 10-16-1990 by Ord. No.
2586-90]
Plenary retail distribution licenses may be issued in the Borough of
Rutherford by the Mayor and Council for the sale of any alcoholic beverages
for consumption off the licensed premises, but only in original containers.
§ 7-2. Hours of legal sale. [Amended 2-19-1952 by Ord. No. 1596;
6-26-1967 by Ord. No. 1978; 4-6-1971 by Ord. No. 2061-71;
12-5-1989 by Ord. No. 2562-89; 10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 2586-90;
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 2746-95; 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 3021-03]
No alcoholic beverage shall be sold by the licensee or by anyone on his,
her or its behalf except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
prevailing time on weekdays and Saturdays, and on Sundays except
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. When December 24 and
December 31 both fall on a Sunday, alcoholic beverages may be sold on said
dates by the licensee or by anyone on his, her or its behalf between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
§ 7-3. Plenary retail distribution license fee. [Amended 2-19-1952
by Ord. No. 1596; 10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 2586-90; 5-14-1991 by
Ord. No. 2602-91; 4-1-1997 by Ord. No. 2793-97; 5-25-2004 by Ord.
No. 3044-04; 6-19-2007 by Ord. No. 3142-07; 4-28-2009 by Ord. No.
3181-09; 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 3199-10]
The fee for this license shall be $1,555 per year.
§ 7-4. Consumption on licensed premises restricted; fee. [Amended
10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 2586-90]
A. Club licenses. Licenses may be issued in the Borough of Rutherford,
subject to rules and regulations hereinafter set forth, which rules and
regulations may be altered from time to time as the occasion may arise,
for the sale for consumption on the licensed premises of any alcoholic
beverages by the glass or other open receptacle; provided, however,
that no license shall be issued except to a club or fraternal organization
which shall have been in existence in the Borough of Rutherford for at
least two years continuously, immediately preceding the date of
submission of the application, and provided further that sales under
this license shall be restricted to members of the club or fraternal
organization, and sales shall not be made to the public generally.
B. The fee for this license shall be $102 per year. [Amended 5-25-2004
by Ord. No. 3044-04; 6-19-2007 by Ord. No. 3142-07; 4-28-2009
by Ord. No. 3181-09; 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 3199-10]
§ 7-1 ALARM EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION § 7-5
6:49
§ 7-5. Sale of malt alcoholic beverages restricted.
Limited retail distribution licenses may be issued in the Borough of
Rutherford, subject to rules and regulations hereinafter set forth, which
rules and regulations may be altered from time to time as the case may
arise, for the sale for consumption off the licensed premises, but only in
original containers, of any unchilled brewed malt alcoholic beverages in
quantities of not less than 72 fluid ounces.
§ 7-6. Hours of legal sale of malt alcoholic beverages; fee.
[Amended 6-26-1967 by Ord. No. 1978; 4-6-1971 by Ord. No.
2061-71; 12-5-1989 by Ord. No. 2562-89; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
2746-95]
§ 7-7. Enabling provisions. [Amended 5-15-2001 by Ord. No.
2968-01]
This chapter was passed in pursuance of the authority granted by an Act
of the Legislature entitled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages,"21 and
the supplements and amendments thereto, and, in addition to the rules
and regulations set forth herein, it is the intention to hereby adopt all
regulations and rules set forth in the aforementioned Act and the applicable
provisions of the New Jersey Administrative Code.
§ 7-8. Consumption; possession of open containers. [Added
5-6-1975 by Ord. No. 2172-75; amended 6-2-1976 by Ord. No.
2190-76; 10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2685-93; 5-7-1996 by Ord. No.
2761-96]
A. No malt beverages shall be sold by the holder of a limited retail
distribution license or by anyone on his, her or its behalf except
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and on Sunday except between the hours of 12:00 noon and
6:00 p.m. When December 24 and December 31 both fall on a Sunday,
alcoholic beverages may be sold on said dates by the licensee or by
anyone on his, her or its behalf between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.
B. The fee for this license shall be $60 per year. [Amended 4-28-2009 by
Ord. No. 3181-09; 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 3199-10]
A. No person shall drink or have in his possession any open container of
alcoholic beverage in any public or quasi-public place or while in or on a
public street or thoroughfare or while in a parked vehicle on any street
or public thoroughfare in the Borough of Rutherford except by
resolution of the Mayor and Council and in accordance with all statutes
and regulation pertaining to consumption of alcohol and as set forth by
the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control ("ABC").
[Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 3335-14]
21.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 7-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 7-8
6:50
§ 7-9. Prohibited transfers to minors. [Added 12-19-1978 by Ord.
No. 2245-78]
§ 7-10. Administrative authority; enforcement. [Added 10-16-1990
by Ord. No. 2586-90]
B. Every person who drinks or has in his possession an open container or
any alcoholic beverages in any public or quasi-public place or on a
public street or thoroughfare in the Borough of Rutherford shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of $50 for the first offense or violation
and, in default of payment thereof, be imprisoned in the county jail for a
period not exceeding 30 days, in the discretion of the court.
C. Every person who drinks or has in his possession an open container or
any alcoholic beverages in any public place or quasi-public place or on a
public street or thoroughfare in the Borough of Rutherford shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of $100 for the second and each
subsequent offense or violation and, in default of payment thereof, be
imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days, in the
discretion of the court.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, transfer, give or by
any other means supply any beer, wine, alcohol or alcoholic beverage to
any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages in any
public or quasi-public place or while in or on a public street or
thoroughfare or while in a parked vehicle on any street or public
thoroughfare in the Borough of Rutherford, except such transfers
between a parent and his minor child.
B. Every person who violates the provisions of Subsection A above shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine in an amount not exceeding
$500 for each offense or violation or be imprisoned in the county jail for
a period not exceeding 30 days in the discretion of the court.
[Amended 10-5-1993 by Ord. No. 2685-93]
A. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford, being the
governing body of said municipality, shall constitute the authority for
the administration of issuance of licenses under this chapter and shall
forthwith report the issuance of all such licenses to the State Director of
the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. The Detective Bureau of the Rutherford Police Department is hereby
designated as the alcoholic beverage control investigation and
enforcement unit and is hereby authorized and empowered to
investigate, inspect, search or examine any licensed premises as may
be necessary under the Alcoholic Beverage Control Law22 or rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
22.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 7-8 ALARM EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION § 7-11
6:51
§ 7-11. Prerequisites to license issuance or transfer. [Added
10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 2586-90; amended 5-15-2001 by Ord. No.
2968-01]
No license shall be issued or transferred except after written application
is presented by the proposed licensee, and inspection and investigation is
conducted by the alcoholic beverage control investigation and enforcement
unit, and after conformity with the publication of notice requirements and
other requirements under the Act, the N.J.A.C., and this chapter. No license
shall be issued or transferred to any person, firm, corporation, group or
partnership not fully qualified under the provisions of the Act and the rules
and regulations.
§ 7-12. License required. [Added 10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 2586-90]
It shall be unlawful to sell, distribute or deliver alcoholic beverages in the
Borough of Rutherford in the County of Bergen without a license or special
permit previously applied for and granted pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter and said Act.
§ 7-13. Plenary retail consumption license. [Added 10-16-1990 by
Ord. No. 2586-90]
§ 7-14. (Reserved)23
§ 7-15. Duration of license. [Added 10-16-1990 by Ord. No.
2586-90]
All licenses shall be for the term of one year from the first day of July
in each year, and all fees shall be paid in advance upon presentation of
A. The holder of such license shall be entitled, subject to rules and
regulations, to sell for consumption on the licensed premises any
alcoholic beverages by the glass or other open receptacle and also to
sell all alcoholic beverages in original containers for consumption off
the licensed premises; provided, however, that no license shall be
issued except to the following: [Amended 4-1-1997 by Ord. No.
2793-97]
(1) A restaurant of 125 seats or more, excluding outdoor seats, located
in the B-2, ORD Zone or Hackensack Meadowlands Development
Commission District.
(2) A hotel of 100 sleeping rooms or more located in the B-2, ORD Zone
or Hackensack Meadowlands Development Commission District.
B. The fee for this license shall be $2,500 per year. [Amended 6-19-2007
by Ord. No. 3142-07; 4-28-2009 by Ord. No. 3181-09; 4-27-2010
by Ord. No. 3199-10]
23.Editor's Note: Former § 7-14, Application for license, added 10-16-1990 by Ord. No.
2586-90, was repealed 5-15-2001 by Ord. No. 2968-01.
§ 7-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 7-15
6:52
the application; provided, however, that any licensee who shall voluntarily
surrender his license and who shall not have committed any violation of this
chapter or of any rule or regulation and who shall have paid all taxes, setoffs
or counterclaims that may have become due to the State of New Jersey or to
the Borough of Rutherford shall be entitled, after deduction of 50% of said
fee as a surrender fee, to the prorated fee for the unexpired term.
§ 7-16. (Reserved)24
§ 7-17. Numbers of licenses. [Added 10-16-1990 by Ord. No.
2586-90]
No plenary retail consumption license shall be issued in the Borough of
Rutherford unless and until the combined total number of such licenses
existing in the Borough of Rutherford is fewer than one for each 3,000 of its
population as shown by the last federal census.
§ 7-18. (Reserved)25
§ 7-19. Suspension and revocation of licenses. [Added 10-16-1990
by Ord. No. 2586-90]
§ 7-20. Hours of sale and consumption. [Added 10-16-1990 by Ord.
No. 2586-90]
A. Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the provisions
of said Act or said statutes heretofore mentioned or any of the
regulations and rules prescribed by the State Director of the Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of said Act, by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee, as provided in said Act, and by providing
a reasonable opportunity for a hearing, and such suspension or
revocation shall carry the penalties and prohibitions provided for in
said Act.
A. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or served to or
consumed in any licensed premises on any day between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except New Year's Day, as hereinafter
provided.
B. On New Year's Day, no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served,
delivered or consumed in the licensed premises between the hours of
5:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
24.Editor's Note: Former § 7-16, Transfer of license, added 10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 2586-90,
was repealed 5-15-2001 by Ord. No. 2968-01.
25.Editor's Note: Former § 7-18, Identification cards, added 10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 2586-90,
was repealed 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 2944-00.
§ 7-15 ALARM EQUIPMENT INSTALLATION § 7-21
6:53
§ 7-21. Restrictions on minors. [Added 10-16-1990 by Ord. No.
2586-90]
§ 7-22. Service in back rooms. [Added 10-16-1990 by Ord. No.
2586-90]
No person shall be served in any back room or side room which is not open
to the use of the public generally, except that, in hotels, guests may be
served in their rooms or in private or public dining rooms, and provided also
that this prohibition shall not apply to club licenses.
§ 7-23. Location restrictions. [Added 10-16-1990 by Ord. No.
2586-90]
No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages within 200
feet of any church or public school or private schoolhouse not conducted
for pecuniary profit, except to manufacturers, wholesalers, hotels, clubs
and fraternal organizations which own or are actually in possession of the
licensed premises at the time of the effectiveness of the aforesaid Act, said
200 feet to be measured in the normal way that a pedestrian would properly
walk from the nearest entrance of said church or school to the nearest
entrance of the premises sought to be licensed; provided, however, that this
prohibition may be waived at the issuance of renewal of such license by the
duly authorized governing body, and provided also that this prohibition shall
not apply to the renewal of said license where no such school or church was
located within said prohibited distance of said licensed premises at the time
of the issuance of said license, or as otherwise excepted by the provisions
of said Act.
Chapter 8
AMUSEMENT GAMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Poolrooms, billiard parlors and bowling alleys
- See Ch. 77.
Public amusement structures - See Ch. 79.
A. Persons under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages shall
not be allowed in any room in which any bar is located unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian.
B. No sale of alcoholic beverage for consumption on the licensed premises
shall be made to any person under the legal age for purchasing
alcoholic beverages.
§ 7-21 RUTHERFORD CODE § 8-1
8:54
§ 8-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to license, regulate and control the operation
of amusement centers and amusement games, as defined in § 131-2 of the
Code, within restricted areas of the Borough of Rutherford in conjunction
with the Zoning Code.26
§ 8-2. License required; exemption from provisions; applications.
§ 8-3. Application procedure.
§ 8-4. License fees; substitution of games or machines. [Amended
12-18-1984 by Ord. No. 2393-84]
A. No person, firm or corporation shall maintain, operate or possess in any
store, building or other place in the Borough of Rutherford wherein the
public is invited any amusement game or amusement center referred to
in § 8-1 without first obtaining a license therefor in accordance with this
chapter.
B. This chapter shall not apply to private organizations and clubs,
provided that said operation is restricted to their members and invited
guests.
C. The Borough Clerk shall prepare and issue applications and annual
licenses for amusement centers or amusement game operations (one
per location) when authorized by this chapter and the Zoning Code,
Chapter 131.
A. The applicant shall submit a signed application (new or renewal) to the
Borough Clerk, together with payment of the license fee, which shall be
submitted forthwith to the Chief of Police and Construction Code
Official, who shall each investigate the applicant and the premises and
submit written reports.
B. These officials shall report if the application and its proposed or
continued use conform to the zoning, building and health regulations;
the past record of its operation if any; and their recommendation to
approve or disapprove, giving reasons therefor.
C. The Clerk shall submit the application and attached reports to the
Mayor and Council, who shall either approve or disapprove the
requested license.
D. If disapproved, the applicant, upon request, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Mayor and Council as to whether said application
should be granted.
E. If approved, the Clerk shall issue the requested license.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Zoning.
§ 8-1 AMUSEMENT GAMES § 8-4
8:55
§ 8-5. Gambling prohibited.
Any person, firm or corporation holding a license herein provided for who
shall knowingly or willfully use or permit to be used any of the machines or
games herein described for the purpose of gambling shall be deemed guilty
of a violation of this chapter.
§ 8-6. Hours of operation.
§ 8-7. Restrictions on minors.
No person under the age of 16 shall operate or be permitted to operate any
machine licensed by this chapter between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00
p.m. during regular school days of the Rutherford Public School System,
unless such person is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other
supervisory adult who is over the age of 21 years.
§ 8-8. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held unconstitutional, the decision of the court respecting
such provision or provisions shall not affect the validity of any other
provisions which can be given effect without such invalid provision or
provisions.
A. The annual fee, payable in advance each year on or before May 1, for
each type of license shall be:
Type of License Annual Fee
Amusement Center
First machine $200
Each additional machine $25
Amusement game operation
First machine $200
Each additional machine (3
games maximum)
$25
B. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the holder of a license
from substituting a game or machine at the location set forth in said
license, but at no time shall more games or machines be at said location
than the number allowed by said license.
A. Amusement centers may operate only between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 12:00 midnight each day.
B. The hours of operation of all other amusement games shall be the same
as the regular hours of the primary use at said location, except that in
no event shall the games be operated before 7:00 a.m. or after 12:00
midnight.
§ 8-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 8-9
8:56
§ 8-9. Existing licenses.
Any applicants holding valid issued licenses at the time of adoption of this
chapter may continue same until May 1, 1983, and thereafter be subject to
the provisions hereof.
§ 8-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the revocation or temporary
suspension of the license heretofore issued and/or shall be punishable by a
fine not exceeding $100 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days,
or both.
Chapter 10
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cat licensing — See Ch. 20A.
Dogs and kennels - See Ch. 26.
Keeping of animals — See Ch. 89, Art. V.
§ 8-9 ANIMALS § 8-10
10:57

ARTICLE I
Quarantine
[Adopted 11-27-1989 by Ord. No. BH 3-89]
§ 10-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall pertain to any person, firm or corporation that owns,
harbors, keeps and maintains a dog, cat or other animal within the Borough
of Rutherford.
§ 10-2. Animals subject to quarantine.
Any dog, cat or other animal that bites or attacks a human shall be
quarantined for a ten-day period of time at the owner's expense.
Confinement shall take place on the animal owner's property or, if off the
owner's property, on a leash in the custody of some person or persons
capable of controlling such animal or at another site approved by the
Rutherford Health Department.
§ 10-3. Release.
§ 10-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
26:3-70, be liable to a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $500 for
each violation. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 10-5. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase hereof shall, for any reason,
be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this chapter, but they shall remain in effect, it being the
legislative intent that this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity
of any part
A. Any dog, cat or other animal shall not be released from quarantine until
the owner of said animal, at the owner's own expense, submits written
proof from a licensed veterinarian to the Rutherford Health Department
that said animal was examined by a licensed veterinarian and found to
be in good health.
B. This examination shall take place after the ten-day quarantine period
and no later than the 15th day of quarantine, at which time a copy of the
veterinarian's report shall be forwarded to the Rutherford Health
Department.
§ 10-1 ANIMALS § 10-6
10:59
§ 10-6. When effective.
This chapter will take effect immediately upon publication according to law.
§ 10-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 10-6
10:60
Chapter 12
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Skateboards, bicycles, roller skates and
scooters — See Ch. 98.
Vehicles and traffic - See Ch. 126.
§ 12-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context, the terms herein shall be defined as follows:
BICYCLE — Includes vehicles with two wheels, 20 inches or more in
diameter, one in front of the other, having a saddle-like seat for the rider,
steered by a handlebar and driven by pedals.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Rutherford.
CLERK — The Borough Clerk of the Borough of Rutherford.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford.
PERSON — An individual, association of individuals or corporation.
§ 12-2. Safety rules and regulations.
The following safety rules and regulations for the use of bicycles on the
public roadways and public places are hereby established:
A. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible for a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear which shall emit a red
light visible for a distance of at least 500 feet to the rear.
B. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least
100 feet; provided, however, that a bicycle shall not be equipped with,
nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle.
C. A person propelling or riding on a bicycle shall not ride other than upon
or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor shall he
ride with his feet removed from the pedals or with both hands removed
from the handlebars. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at
one time than the number for which it is designed.
D. No person riding upon a bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any
vehicle.
E. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
§ 10-6 BICYCLES § 12-2
12:61
§ 12-3. Additional violations and penalties; age range.
Any person of 18 years of age and over violating any of the provisions of this
chapter may be subjected to a fine of not exceeding $5 by the Judge before
whom such person is convicted.
§ 12-4. Application procedure; renewals and fees.
Chapter 14
(RESERVED)
Chapter 15
F. Every person riding or operating a bicycle shall obey all stop signs and
traffic signals in the same manner and to the same extent as would be
required if said person were operating a motor vehicle.
G. Every person riding or operating a bicycle shall be required to dismount
and walk his or her bicycle across heavily traveled streets.
H. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side as practicable, exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
I. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall ride in single file;
provided, however, that this regulation shall not apply on paths or parts
of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
J. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk.
K. Persons riding or operating bicycles shall comply with the Traffic Laws
of the State of New Jersey,27 the Traffic Ordinance of the Borough28 and
such other rules and regulations as may be adopted from time to time
by the governing body.
A. The person applying for a license and registration tag shall pay a fee of
$0.50 for each bicycle to be licensed. Duplicate tags will be issued upon
satisfactory proof to the Committee of the loss of the original tags, and
upon payment of a fee of $0.50. Said license or tag is not transferable.
B. For each annual renewal, the fee for the license and registration tag
shall be the same as for the original thereof. Said licenses, registration
tags and renewals thereof shall expire of the last day of April of each
year.
C. The application shall state the name, age and address of the applicant
and a brief description of the bicycle to be licensed. If the applicant be a
minor, the name and address of the applicant's parents or guardian.
27.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 126, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 12-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 12-4
15:62
(RESERVED)
Chapter 16
BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 12-4 (RESERVED) § 12-4
15:63

ARTICLE I
Composition and Appointment of Members
[Adopted 5-7-1901 by Ord. No. 356]
§ 16-1. Composition of Board. [Amended 8-5-1947 by Ord. No. 1498;
2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3487-19]
The Board of Health of the Borough of Rutherford shall consist of seven
members and two alternates who shall be residents and legal voters within
the borough and, when duly appointed as herein provided, shall possess all
the powers conferred and perform all the duties enjoined upon local Boards
of Health by an act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled
"Revised Statutes of New Jersey 1937," N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq.
§ 16-2. Appointments and terms of office.
A. The members of said Board shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Council, and shall hold office for the term of
three years and until their successors shall have qualified, provided
that at the first appointment there shall be appointed two members to
serve for one year, two members to serve for two years and two
members to serve for three years from March 18, 1901, and thereafter
two members shall be appointed annually to serve for a term of three
years, at the first meeting of the Council in each year. Any vacancy in
said Board shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment, but for the unexpired term only.
B. Alternate members. [Added 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3487-19]
(1) Alternate members of the Board shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council, and shall be designated
at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years,
except that the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall
be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2,
so that the term of not more than one alternate member shall
expire in any one year. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by
expiration of term shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment, but for the unexpired term only.
(2) An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in
which the alternate member has either directly or indirectly any
personal or financial interest.
(3) An alternate member may, after public hearing if the alternate
member requests one, be removed by the governing body for
cause.
(4) An alternate member may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
§ 16-1 (RESERVED) § 16-2
15:65
§ 16-3. Repeal of prior ordinance; effective date.
Ordinance No. 31, entitled "An Ordinance Constituting and Concerning the
Board of Health in the Borough of Rutherford," be and the same is hereby
repealed, and this article shall take effect immediately.29
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
29.Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Schedule of Fees, adopted 8-31-1961 by Ord. No. 1-61, as
amended, which immediately followed, was repealed 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3488-19
§ 16-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 16-3
15:66
Chapter 17
(RESERVED)
Chapter 18
BUILDING CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm equipment installation — See Ch. 6.
Licensing of builders — See Ch. 19.
Uniform Construction Code — See Ch. 22.
Construction in flood hazard areas — See Ch.
37.
Numbering of buildings and lots — See Ch.
63A.
Public amusement structures — See Ch. 79.
Unfit dwellings — See Ch. 123.
§ 18-1. Provision for adoption by reference.
A code regulating the design, construction, alteration, enlargement, repair
and conversion of buildings and structures and the kind and quality of
materials to be used therein is hereby established pursuant to c. 21, P.L.
1946, as amended, (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 to 40:49-5.3). A copy of said code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof
herein, with additions, deletions and changes hereinafter set forth.
§ 18-2. Adoption of code; title. [Amended 4-15-1969 by Ord. No.
2020]
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
designated as "Abridged Building Code," 1955 Edition, as published by the
Building Officials Conference of America, Inc., and in addition, Standard
Building Code of New Jersey, 1964, Section E, entitled "Plumbing."
§ 18-3. Filing.
Three copies of the said Abridged Building Code, similarly marked, have
been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of the Borough of Rutherford
upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there until final
action is taken on said chapter, for the use and examination of the public.
§ 18-4. Deletions. [Amended 6-19-1962 by Ord. No. 1858]
Sections 104.5, 106.6, 106.7, 106.8, 110.55, 116.0, 117.0 and 121.4 of said
Abridged Building Code are hereby deleted.
§ 16-3 (RESERVED) § 18-5
17:67
§ 18-5. Revisions.
The following sections of said Abridged Building Code are hereby revised
and hereinafter set forth.
§ 18-6. Fees. 30 [Amended 12-18-1962 by Ord. No. 1874; 4-16-1968
by Ord. No. 1999-68]
Section 104.6. Fees. The following schedule of permit fees is hereby
established:
A. The first sentence of Section 104-2 of the Abridged Building Code
adopted by the ordinance of which this ordinance is amendatory, be and
it is hereby amended to read as follows: "No building or structure or
part thereof shall hereafter be erected, converted, repaired, altered or
enlarged until a building permit has been obtained by the owner, his
agent duly authorized in writing, his builder, his contractor or the
subcontractor of the contractor or builder." [Amended 6-19-1962 by
Ord. No. 1858]
B. Section 104.3. Approved Plans. The third sentence is revised to read as
follows: "A building permit shall become void unless operations are
commenced within two months from date of approval, unless such time
is extended by the building official." The following sentence is added to
said section at the end of the fourth sentence thereof: "The building
under construction for which the permit was issued shall be
substantially completed within two years from the date of the issuance
of said permit or said permit shall become void and a new permit
required for completion of said building with fees payable for the
amount of the estimated cost of construction to complete the work."
A. New buildings, residential and residential accessory uses. For each new
building or structure, a fee of $2 per 100 square feet of floor area. In
estimating the area of a building, the cellar or basement and each story
above the same, including the attic, if any, is to be included. Open
porches and stoops are not to be included as part of the area of the
building. [Amended 2-6-1973 by Ord. No. 2111-73]
B. New buildings, commercial and industrial. For each new building or
structure, a fee of $5 per 100 square feet of floor area. In estimating the
area of a building, the cellar or basement and each story above the
same is to be included. [Amended 2-6-1973 by Ord. No. 2111-7331]
C. Signs and billboards.
(1) For the erection of each new sign or billboard, a fee of $5.
30.Editor's Note: For current provisions, see Ch. 22, Construction Codes, Uniform, § 22-5.
31.Editor's Note: This ordinance replaced former Subsection B which provided a fee for
moving of buildings.
§ 18-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 18-6
18:68
§ 18-7. Additional revisions.
(2) For the erection of each new illuminated sign or illuminated
billboard, a fee of $10.
D. Alterations, additions and repairs.
(1) For alterations, additions or repairs to any building structure at a
cost up to $500, a minimum fee of $5.
(2) For alterations, additions or repairs to any building structure at a
cost of $501 to $1,000 a minimum fee of $10.
(3) For alterations, additions or repairs to any building structure, a fee
of $5 for each additional $1,000 of the estimated cost.
E. Demolition of structure or building. [Amended 2-6-1973 by Ord. No.
2111-73]
(1) For the demolition of a structure or building, a minimum fee of $25.
(2) For the demolition of private garages and sheds in residential
areas, a minimum fee of $5.
F. No fee shall be less than $5.
A. Section 107.1. Fire District Subdivision. The second sentence is revised
to read as follows: "Such areas shall be designated as 'within the fire
limits' and shall be bounded and described as follows: Commencing at
the Erie Railroad and Chestnut Street and running thence (1) along the
center line of Chestnut Street to the center line of Park Avenue; thence
(2) along the center line of Park Avenue to the center line of The
Terrace; thence (3) along the center line of The Terrace to the center
line of East Passaic Avenue; thence (4) along the center line of East
Passaic Avenue to the center line of Feronia Way; thence (5) along the
center line of Feronia Way to the Erie Railroad; and thence (6) along the
Erie Railroad to the center line of Chestnut Street, the point or place of
beginning." [Amended 10-6-1964 by Ord. No. 1924]
B. Section 110.51. Wall Footings. The entire section is revised to read as
follows: "Concrete footings for load-bearing walls shall be of adequate
dimensions to distribute the load and unless required by local
conditions shall be not less than eight inches thick and shall be no less
than eight inches wider than the thickness of the foundation wall
resting thereon; provided, however, that all footings, shall have
sufficient spread so that the load on soil will not exceed the provisions
of this ordinance."
C. Section 110.6. Foundation Walls. The first sentence is revised by the
deletion of the exception thereto.
D. Section 110.62. Hollow or Solid Masonry and Plain Concrete. The entire
section is revised to read as follows:
§ 18-6 BUILDING CODE § 18-7
18:69
(1) Foundation walls for frame buildings shall be below grade level, not
less than 12 inches thick if built of brick, cement blocks, or hollow
tile, and not less than 16 inches thick if built of stone. Above grade
level said foundation walls, if not over three feet high, shall not be
less than eight inches thick if built of brick, concrete blocks or
hollow title, and not less than 12 inches thick if built of stone. If the
clear span of floor beams resting on any foundation wall exceeds 16
feet, or the wall above grade exceeds three feet high, said
foundation wall shall not be less than 12 inches thick.
(2) Solid concrete foundation walls run between forms may be 10
inches thick for the entire height, instead of as above.
(3) Foundation walls of approved hollow masonry units shall be
provided with not less than four inches of solid masonry at girder
bearings or shall be strengthened with buttresses.
E. Section 118.59. Water Connections. The section is revised by the
addition of the following at the end thereof: "nor shall it be discharged
into any sanitary drainage system."
F. Electric wiring and apparatus. [Added 3-4-1969 by Ord. No. 2015]
(1) No electric wiring for light, heat or power shall be installed
hereafter in any building or structure, or for any outdoor electrical
signs, nor shall any alteration or extension of an existing electric
wiring system be made except in conformity with the requirements
of the National Electrical Code, being the standard of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters for electric wiring and apparatus as
recommended by the National Fire Protection Association,
hereafter in this chapter referred to as "the code," which is hereby
enacted and adopted by this reference thereto, save and except for
Article 230, Section 2304(a)(4), of the aforesaid code which is
enacted and adopted as hereinafter modified. The said Article 230,
Section 2304(a)(4), of said code is hereby modified to read as
follows:
The neutral conductor shall have a current-carrying capacity in
conformity with Section 2203-g, but shall not be smaller than the
underground conductors when these are No. 8 or smaller. It is
required that a minimum of 100 amp. 3-wire service be provided
for all individual residents.
(2) The materials, fittings and devices enumerated in the List of
Inspected Appliances of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., shall
be used in electrical installations under this chapter.
(3) The Middle Department Association of Fire Underwriters, upon
request, shall, during installation of any electric wiring system,
make or cause an inspection to be made to assure compliance with
the National Electrical Code.
§ 18-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 18-7
18:70
§ 18-8. Disposition of fees, penalties.
All fees, penalties and moneys collected under any provision of this chapter
or the code established herein shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Borough
of Rutherford.
§ 18-9. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter and the code established herein are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 18-10. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this chapter or the
code established herein shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not in any manner prejudice
the enforcement of the remaining provisions.
§ 18-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or the code established herein shall be subject to
a fine of not exceeding $200 or imprisonment in the county jail for a period
of not exceeding 90 days, or both.
(4) No electrical wiring shall be concealed unless inspected and
approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters. A duplicate
record of such approval shall be filed with the Building Inspector.
(5) The Middle Department Association of Fire Underwriters shall,
within a reasonable time after notice of the completion of electrical
work, make or cause to be made an inspection of such work and
such tests as may be necessary to determine that it conforms to the
provisions of the aforesaid National Electrical Code, and shall make
or cause to be made a reinspection of any electric wiring
installation whenever it deems it necessary in the interest of public
safety.
(6) The Building Inspector shall have power to stop electrical work
when he is notified by the Middle Department Association of Fire
Underwriters that such work is not being installed in conformity
with the National Electrical Code.
(7) If an existing electric wiring system upon inspection is found to be
defective and unsafe, upon notification by the Building Inspector
such system shall be discontinued until it has been corrected and
made to conform to the requirements of the National Electrical
Code and approved by the Middle Department Association of Fire
Underwriters.
§ 18-7 BUILDING CODE § 18-12
18:71
§ 18-12. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 19
BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 22.
Maintenance of construction sites — See Ch.
21, Clean Environment, § 21-10.
Noise from building operations — See Ch. 63.
Registration of landscape contractors — See
Ch. 82A, Art. III.
§ 19-1. Legislative intent.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or act in the
capacity of a builder or contractor within the Borough of Rutherford without
having first obtained a license therefor as provided herein.
§ 19-2. Definitions.
A. Scope and meaning of certain words and terms.
(1) Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, words used in the
present tense include the future; the singular number includes the
plural and the plural the singular.
(2) The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the word "may" is
permissive.
B. Definition of terms. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
BUILDER or CONTRACTOR — Any person who is in any capacity other
than as the employee of another with wages as the sole compensation
who undertakes or offers to undertake, or purports to have the capacity
to undertake, or accepts an order or contract whether on a fixed sum,
cost plus, or percentage or fixed fee, or any combination thereof, or
submits a bid to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, demolish,
re-roof, re-side or in any way improve any building or structure, project
or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of
scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith.
BUILDING — Any roofed structure built for the support, shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or
corporation.
§ 18-12 RUTHERFORD CODE § 19-3
19:72
§ 19-3. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
§ 19-4. License required; validity of license.
No firm, association or corporation shall engage in building contracting
in the borough unless at least one officer, agent or member of said firm,
association or corporation has been licensed, according to the provisions
of this chapter and has a license issued to it in the name of the firm,
association or corporation as herein provided. Such license shall be valid
and in effect only while the individual so licensed is still a member, officer
or agent of such firm, association or corporation.
§ 19-5. Administration.
§ 19-6. Classification of contractors.
Contractors shall be divided into the following classifications:
A. Any person or authorized representative dealing with any governmental
unit.
B. Any private person making repairs on his own private home.
C. Plumbers, electricians and other specialized trades, for which other
special licenses are required by applicable city ordinances or state
statutes.
A. This chapter shall be administered by the Building Committee of the
governing body of the Borough of Rutherford and the Building
Inspector.
B. In addition to any other powers granted under this chapter, the Building
Committee may adopt such rules and regulations as are deemed
necessary and expedient for the purposes of administering this chapter,
including consideration of license applications and recommendations to
the Mayor and Council for suspension and revocation of licenses.
A. General contractor. A contractor or firm qualified to erect a structure in
its entirety or add to, alter or repair an existing structure. A general
contractor shall be held accountable for the work of all separate
contractors employed by his organization.
B. Contractor. A contractor or firm qualified to erect a structure in its
entirety or add to, alter or repair an existing structure. A contractor
shall be in a position to complete said work with his own employees,
retaining no separate contractors.
C. Subcontractor. A contractor or firm employed directly by a homeowner
to excavate for, erect, repair or alter a specific part of a structure. This
category shall include excavators, masons, tile men, carpenters,
cabinetmakers, heating contractors and any other trade.
§ 19-3 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS LICENSING § 19-6
19:73
§ 19-7. Application for license.
D. Sign or billboard contractor. A contractor or firm qualified to erect,
maintain or alter signs or billboards.
E. Roofing, siding and swimming pool contractor. A contractor or firm
qualified to apply roofing and siding material to a new or existing
structure; a contractor or firm qualified to install a swimming pool; a
contractor or firm qualified and equipped to move any structure.
F. Demolition contractor. A contractor or firm qualified to demolish a
structure or portion thereof.
A. Applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made to the
Building Inspector, in writing, on such printed forms as the Building
Committee shall prescribe and prepare. Such forms may be obtained
from the office of the Building Inspector and shall be signed by the
applicant under oath and shall contain the following information:
(1) If an individual, the full name, age, sex and residence address at
the time of application.
(2) If the applicant is a corporation or an officer or employee of a
corporation:
(a) The full corporate name.
(b) The date and state of incorporation.
(c) The address of the place or places of business.
(d) The name, residence and business address of the authorized
agent upon whom service of process may be had in the State of
New Jersey.
(3) If the applicant is a partnership or a member of such firm or
association:
(a) The information required by Subsection A(l) of this section for
each partner.
(b) The name under which the business is being conducted.
(4) Whether the applicant carries public liability insurance and, if so,
the amount of said coverage.
(5) Any such other information as the Building Committee may deem
reasonably necessary for the protection of public health, safety,
morals and general welfare of the citizens of the Borough of
Rutherford.
B. No license or renewal thereof granted under the provisions of this
chapter shall be assignable or transferable.
§ 19-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 19-8
19:74
§ 19-8. License fees. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No. 2668-92]
§ 19-9. Renewal of license.
Every license issued hereunder shall expire one year following the date it
is granted. A license may be renewed upon payment of the renewal fee as
hereinabove set forth.
§ 19-10. Revocation of license.
The Building Committee of the Borough of Rutherford shall have the power,
in addition to all other powers provided for in this chapter, to revoke the
license of any contractor licensed hereunder, who shall be guilty of any one
or more of the following acts or omissions:
§ 19-11. Procedure for revocation of license.
A. The annual fee for a building contractor's license under this chapter
shall be $25.
B. The annual license fee for each annual renewal license for a building
contractor shall be $25.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining license.
B. Violation of the Building Code.32
C. Filing of voluntary petition in bankruptcy.
A. The Building Committee or any contractee or contractor may prefer
charges against any licensee under the terms of this chapter by the
filing of a complaint. Such complaint must be made in writing and
sworn to by the person preferring such charges and submitted to and
filed with the secretary to the Building Committee. Upon filing of the
complaint in the manner and form prescribed, it shall be the duty of the
Building Committee, at the earliest possible date and not later than 30
days thereafter, to investigate the charges and to determine whether
there exists probable cause that a violation has occurred.
B. The complaint shall contain a statement of facts setting forth the
specific charges relating to the violation of this chapter, or of the
borough Building Code, or any applicable borough ordinance or state
laws pertaining to building construction.
C. If the Building Committee finds probable cause that a violation has been
committed, the Building Committee shall forthwith issue a notice
directing the licensee, within 20 calendar days after service of notice, to
appear and answer to the charges showing cause, if any, why his license
should not be suspended or revoked.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 19-8 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS LICENSING § 19-11
19:75
§ 19-12. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Building Committee shall have
the right of appeal to the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford.
Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Council, within 14 days after
notice of the action complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the
grounds for the appeal. The Council shall set a time and place for hearings
on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant
by registered letter at his last known address at least five days prior to the
date set for hearing. The decision and order of the Council on such appeal
shall be final and conclusive.
§ 19-13. Building permits.
D. A copy of the charges, together with the notice showing the time and
place of hearing shall be served on the licensee at least five days before
the date fixed for the hearing. The licensee shall be notified by certified
letter and notice of the hearing shall be published in the local
newspaper. At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear
personally or by counsel and cross-examine witnesses against him and
to produce witnesses and evidence in his behalf.
E. Failure of the licensee to appear may be deemed an admission by him of
a commission of the act or acts cited in the complaint and his license
thereupon may be suspended forthwith pending any hearing of the
cause that the Building Committee in its discretion, may order;
provided, however, that the Building Committee shall have the power in
the event of such failure to answer, to suspend or revoke the license
without further evidence other than the charges filed.
F. Whenever the Building Committee, after hearing, shall determine that a
licensee is in violation, the Building Committee may then issue an order
against such licensee to correct such violation, fixing a reasonable time
within which such correction shall be made or accomplished and upon
compliance with said order, the Building Committee may dismiss said
complaint.
G. After revocation of a license upon any ground set forth in this chapter,
such license shall not be renewed or reissued within a period of six
months after the final determination of revocation, and then only upon
proper showing that all loss caused by the act or omissions for which
the license was revoked has been fully satisfied and that all conditions
imposed by the decision of the revocation have been complied with.
A. No permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector for the erection,
construction, reconstruction, structural alteration or removal of any
building or structure to anyone except a duly licensed contractor or his
duly authorized agent under the provisions of this chapter.
B. Permits shall be granted to the actual owner of the promises and/or the
individual who undertakes alone to do the work of a contract or his duly
§ 19-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 19-13
19:76
§ 19-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate the terms or provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $200 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both at the discretion
of the Judge. Each day upon which such violation shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 19-15. Severability.
The invalidity of any article, section, clause or word of this chapter shall not
affect the validity of any other article, section, clause or word thereof.
§ 19-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication as provided by law.
Chapter 20
CAR LOTS: NEW AND USED
§ 20-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NEW OR USED CAR LOT — An open lot or plot of land where new cars or
used cars or both are displayed, stored, purchased, sold or exchanged.
§ 20-2. Space required; exception.
A new or used car lot shall contain at least 5,000 square feet; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to such a lot when it is connected
with and is part of a new car business conducted in an adjacent garage
building or showroom building.
§ 20-3. Prohibited locations; exception.
No motor vehicle shall be parked or left standing on a new or used car lot
within 15 feet of any building occupied solely for residence purposes or as
a school, church or other place of assembly; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to a new or used car lot heretofore established and
in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
authorized agent for which work construction is to be done; provided,
however, the owner or his duly authorized agent shall sign a statement
that said work or construction for which the permit is sought will be
done by himself or one who undertakes alone to do the work of a
contract.
§ 19-13 CAR LOTS: NEW AND USED § 20-4
20:77
§ 20-4. Illumination restricted.
Illumination of a new or used car lot shall be installed, arranged and
maintained in such a manner as to deflect the light from the public highways
and residence buildings. No unshaded string of lights or unshaded
streamers shall be permitted. The purpose of the foregoing condition is to
eliminate the glare of lights on the public highways and from residential
buildings.
§ 20-5. (Reserved)33
§ 20-6. Barrier or fencing required.
A new or used car lot shall be enclosed by a fireproof barrier or fence
of sturdy permanent construction which shall be placed on or within the
setback line applicable thereto; provided, however, that where § 20-3 of this
chapter applies, the said barrier or fence shall be set back in accordance
therewith. The purpose of said barrier or fence shall be the protection of
the general public from the damage of rolling or moving motor vehicles,
and said barrier or fence shall be constructed to minimize said danger. The
said barrier or fence shall have no openings except at regularly maintained
driveways.
§ 20-7. Administration by Building Inspector.
This chapter shall be administered by the Building Inspector; provided,
however, that this section shall not be construed to limit or restrict the
enforcement of this chapter to the Building Inspector.
§ 20-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by a court having jurisdiction
thereof, pay a fine not exceeding $200 for each violation or be imprisoned
for a period not exceeding 30 days, or both. Every day that a violation
continues shall, for the purposes hereof, be considered a separate violation.
§ 20-9. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this chapter shall
be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
declaration shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions.
§ 20-10. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
33.Editor's Note: Former § 20-5, Display areas restricted, was repealed 7-6-1966 by Ord. No.
1962-66.
§ 20-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 20-10
20:78
Chapter 20A
CAT LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 10.
Dogs and kennels — See Ch. 26.
License fee exemption for volunteer
organizations — See Ch. 127.
§ 20A-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person or agency designated by the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford or authorized by law to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or
neutered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of four
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Police Department of the Borough of
Rutherford or any persons designated by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Rutherford who shall be charged with administering the
issuance and revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this
chapter.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property or custody in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his or her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat
or knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
VACCINATION — Inoculation against rabies performed by a licensed
veterinarian, or such other person permitted by law to do the same under
the supervision of a veterinarian, in accordance with the latest Compendium
of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendation for Immunization
published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians.
VETERINARIAN — Any person licensed to practice veterinary medicine by
any state of the United States.
§ 20A-2. Rabies vaccinations; exemptions.
§ 20-10 CAT LICENSING § 20A-2
20A:79
§ 20A-3. Licensing requirements.
A. No person shall be the owner of a cat of licensing age within the
Borough of Rutherford unless such cat is licensed and has a vaccination
which was administered within the last 365 days or for which a valid
vaccination certificate has been issued with an expiration date
occurring in the future. The provisions of this section do not apply to
cats held in a veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept
for diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments.
B. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each cat
which has been administered a vaccination in a form recommended by
the State of New Jersey.
C. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such vaccination for
a specified period of time by the Borough of Rutherford Department of
Health upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that,
because of an infirmity or other physical condition or regimen of
therapy, a vaccination of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Any owner of a cat of licensing age shall apply for and procure from the
Borough of Rutherford Police Department or other officials designated
by the Borough Administrator a license for each cat owned, except as
provided below. The license number shall be displayed on any licensed
cat. Acceptable methods of displaying the license number shall include,
but are not limited to, an official license tag or sleeve securely affixed to
a breakaway or elastic collar. License tags or sleeves are not
transferable. If a cat is tattooed with the owner's social security number
plus a letter uniquely identifying such cat and such identifying tattoo is
listed on the license application and vaccine certificate, then no license
number need be displayed.
B. The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing age, or of any cat
which attains licensing age, shall make application for a license for
such cat within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment. This
requirement will not apply to a nonresident keeping a cat within the
Borough of Rutherford for no longer than 30 days.
C. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough of
Rutherford any cat, and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Borough of Rutherford for a period of more than 30
days, shall immediately apply for a license for such cat, unless
otherwise exempted under this chapter.
D. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the cat for which the license is sought and whether it is of a long- or
short-haired variety; the date on which such cat was last vaccinated
against rabies and the expiration date of such vaccination; the name,
street, post office address and telephone number of the owner; the
person who shall keep or harbor such cat, and any tattoo which shall be
used to identify such cat. The information on said application and the
§ 20A-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 20A-3
20A:80
§ 20A-4. License fees. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3062-04]
The applicants shall pay an annual fee of $7 per year for a license for each
neutered and nonneutered cat owned, kept or harbored. If a license tag is
misplaced or lost, the Police Department may issue a duplicate license for
that particular cat for a fee of $6. The fees shall not be apportioned pro rata.
§ 20A-5. Sick or diseased cats.
Management of domestic animals known or suspected to have been bitten
by a known or suspected rabid animal of unknown origin shall be
quarantined in accordance with Title 26 of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated. The owner of a cat evidencing a change in disposition or illness
suggesting it may be rabid may be required to have such cat examined by an
approved veterinarian. Any cost incurred in quarantining such cat or for the
veterinary service examination shall be paid for by the owner or harborer of
such cat or cats.34
§ 20A-6. Disposition of revenue.
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions
of this chapter shall be forwarded to the Borough Treasurer and shall be
placed in a special account separate from any of the other accounts of the
Borough and shall be used for the purposes provided by law.
registration number issued for the cat shall be preserved for a period
of three years by the Borough of Rutherford Police Department or other
officials designated to license cats.
E. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall be furnished by the
Borough of Rutherford, shall be numbered serially and shall bear the
year of issuance and the name of the Borough of Rutherford.
F. The Borough of Rutherford Police Department or other official
designated by the Mayor and Council to license cats shall not grant any
such license for any cat, unless the owner thereof provides evidence
that the cat to be licensed has been vaccinated or has been certified
exempt as provided by § 20A-2 of this chapter.
G. Applications for the renewal of a license under this chapter shall be
made in the month immediately prior to the expiration date of the
current license.
H. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any owner of a cat upon the
request of any health official, police officer or animal control officer.
I. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 10, Animals, Article I, Quarantine.
§ 20A-3 CAT LICENSING § 20A-7
20A:81
§ 20A-7. Annual canvass.
The Chief of Police of the Borough shall annually, during the months of
July and August, cause a canvass of all cats owned, kept or harbored
within the limits of the Borough and shall report to the Borough Clerk.
Borough of Rutherford Department of Health and, if required by law, to the
State Department of Health the result thereof, setting forth the names and
addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring such cats; the number
of licensed cats owned, kept or harbored by each of said persons, together
with the license numbers of said cats; and also setting forth the names
and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring unlicensed cats, the
number of unlicensed cats owned, kept or harbored by each said person,
together with a complete description of each unlicensed cat.
§ 20A-8. Publication of notice.
The Borough Clerk shall publish a notice reminding cat owners to make
application for said cat license during the month in which cat licenses
expire.
§ 20A-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of $25 for each
offense.
Chapter 21
CLEAN ENVIRONMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Commercial property maintenance — See Ch.
21A.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 40.
Littering — See Ch. 53.
Deposit and removal of materials — See Ch.
56.
Municipal property and grounds — See Ch.
61.
Nuisance Code — See Ch. 64.
Property Maintenance Code — See Ch. 78.
Recycling — See Ch. 82A.
Trees and shrubbery — See Ch. 120.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 125.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 126.
§ 21-1. Establishment.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-92 et seq., the Clean
Communities Act of the State of New Jersey.
§ 20A-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 21-2
21:82
§ 21-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms herein are defined
as follows:
CLEAN FILL — An uncontaminated non-water-soluble, nondecomposable,
inert solid, such as rock, soil, gravel, concrete, glass and/or clay or ceramic
products.
CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste building materials and refuse resulting
from construction, remodeling and repair operations on houses, commercial
buildings, pavements and other structures.
DEMOLITION WASTE — Waste generated from the razing of buildings,
factories and other man-made structures, including streets, roads and
fences.
LEAF COMPOSTING FACILITIES — A solid waste facility which is designed
and operated for the purpose of composting leaves, either exclusively or
in combination with other type ID 23 wastes, as identified in N.J.A.C.
7:26-2.13.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has
been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper or
other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including
but not limited to any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
OPEN DUMP — A land site at which solid waste is disposed of in a manner
which does not protect the environment, is susceptible to open burning or
is exposed to the elements, vectors and scavengers.
SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge and other discarded materials
resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations and from
domestic and community activities, and shall include all other waste
materials, including liquids, except for liquids which are treated in public
sewage treatment plants and except for solid animal and vegetable wastes
collected by swine producers licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to collect, prepare and feed such wastes to swine on their own
farms.
VECTOR — An organism, including insects, other arthropods or rodents,
that is capable of transmitting a pathogen from one organism to another.
§ 21-3. Purpose.
This chapter provides for regulatory authority designed to promote a clean,
litter-free environment for the citizens of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 21-2 CLEAN ENVIRONMENT § 21-4
21:83
§ 21-4. Littering prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise place
litter of any nature upon any public or private property other than in a litter
receptacle or waste container designed for the purpose of litter storage or
disposal.
§ 21-5. Illegal dumping.
§ 21-6. Use of litter receptacles.
Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public
places which exist in the municipality, including sidewalks used by
pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a
minimum there shall be no single linear quarter mile without a receptacle;
buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, government
buildings and railroad and bus stations; parks; drive-in restaurants; all
street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites;
gasoline service stations islands; shopping centers; parking lots; and at
special events to which the public is invited, including sporting events,
parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals. The proprietors of these places or
the sponsors of these events shall be responsible for providing and servicing
the receptacles such that adequate containerization is available.
§ 21-7. Collection and disposal of sweepings.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin
or other public place any accumulation of litter from any public or private
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street
or road, on or off any right-of-way, any solid waste, including but not
limited to rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicles or vehicle parts, rubber tires,
appliances, furniture, packaging materials, construction waste or
demolition waste.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump on any property,
public or private, any solid waste, including but not limited to rubbish,
refuse, junk, vehicles or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances,
furniture, packaging materials, construction waste or demolition
wastes or any manner of solid waste, without the express consent of the
property owner and then only in a litter receptacle or waste container
designed for the express purpose of solid waste storage or disposal.
C. Open dumps are declared to be a nuisance, hazardous to human health,
and are prohibited.
D. The land application of clean fill, provided that it is wholly
uncontaminated by the presence of any other solid waste and further
provided that it is applied by a property owner or with the express
written consent of a property owner shall not be regulated by this
section.
§ 21-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 21-7
21:84
sidewalk or driveway. Every person who owns or occupies property shall
keep the sidewalk in front of his or her premises free of litter. All sweepings
shall be collected and properly containerized for disposal.
§ 21-8. Open or overflowing waste disposal bins.
§ 21-9. Uncovered vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any street, road or highway unless such a vehicle is constructed or
loaded to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise
escaping therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any portion
of the load has fallen or otherwise escaped, which could cause an
obstruction to traffic, damage a vehicle or otherwise endanger travelers or
damage property, shall immediately cause the public or private property or
roadway to be cleaned and shall pay the costs therefor.
§ 21-10. Construction sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It shall
be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or non-flyable
debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and to maintain
and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as
to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 21-11. Commercial establishments and residences.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and to cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisance of
every kind and to keep sidewalks, areaways, front yards, back yards, courts
and alleys free from litter and other solid waste.
§ 21-12. Distribution of handbills and advertising material.
[Amended 11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2856-98]
A. It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins, containers or litter
receptacles on his or her property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit the presence of waste disposal bins, containers or litter
receptacles in a manner which promotes or tends to promote the
presence of any disease vector.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, to cause to be placed or to
hire another person to place any advertisement, handbill or unsolicited
material of any kind in or on any street, sidewalk, lawn, building,
§ 21-7 CLEAN ENVIRONMENT § 21-12
21:85
§ 21-13. Violations and penalties.
§ 21-14. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter are hereby repealed as to such inconsistencies only.
§ 21-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication as
required by law.
Chapter 21A
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 21 and Ch. 53.
Fire safety — See Ch. 34A.
Placement of garbage for collection — See Ch.
40.
Deposit and removal of materials — See Ch.
56.
Municipal property and grounds — See Ch.
61.
Numbering of buildings and lots — See Ch.
63A.
Nuisance Code — See Ch. 64.
Property Maintenance Code — See Ch. 78.
Shopping carts — See Ch. 96.
borough shade tree, public facility, utility pole, fence or vehicle within
the borough without the consent of the property owner. This provision
shall not apply to emergency postings or notices by governmental
agencies.
B. Any person responsible for the placement of any advertisement,
handbill or unsolicited material any kind in or on such location within
the borough shall, in addition to other penalties herein provided, be
under obligation to remove the aforementioned materials and dispose
of them in a litter receptacle or waste container designed for the
purpose of solid waste storage or disposal.
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $50 and not more than $500 per day, except as
provided for in Subsection B of this section.
B. Any person violating any provision of § 21-5, Illegal dumping, of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500 and not more
than $1,000 per day or by imprisonment for a period not more than six
months, or both.
§ 21-12 RUTHERFORD CODE § 21A-1
21:86
§ 21A-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by establishing minimum standards for the maintenance of such premises;
to fix responsibilities and duties upon owners, operators and occupants;
to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of commercial
premises; to fix penalties for the violations for this code; and to provide for
the right of access to permit repairs when necessary. This code is hereby
declared to be remedial and essential for the public interest, and is intended
that this code be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose as stated
herein.
§ 21A-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms herein are defined
as follows:
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PREMISES — Any lot or any part of
which commercial or industrial activity of any kind takes place. Such
activity includes all those commercial and industrial uses permitted or
conditionally permitted in the Business 1, Business 2, Business 3, Business
3/Senior Housing, Business/Light Industrial, ORD, Highway Commercial
and Planned Commercial Zones, whether such uses are actually in those
zones or in other zones. 35
DETERIORATION — The condition of a building or part thereof
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, pealing, rusting or
other evidence of physical decay, neglect, lack of maintenance or excessive
wear.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC TO VIEW — Any premises or part thereof which may
be lawfully viewed by the public or any member thereof from the sidewalk,
street, alleyway or parking lot or from any adjoining or neighborhood
premises.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building which are exposed
to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any building
erected thereon.
HARBORAGE — Any condition, man-made or natural, which affords a
breeding or hiding place for rodents, insects or other pests.
NUISANCE —
Any common-law nuisance or as provided by the laws of the State of
New Jersey or the ordinances of the Borough of Rutherford.
A.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of children, whether in a building or upon a lot. This includes but
is not limited to any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber,
trash, debris or vegetation, such as poison ivy, poison oak or poison
sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
B.
35.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 131, Zoning.
§ 21A-1 CLEAN ENVIRONMENT § 21A-2
21:87
OCCUPANT — Any person having actual possession of the premises or any
part thereof.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of the
commercial premises or any part thereof, whether with or without the
consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any commercial or industrial premises with
or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or shall have charge,
care or control of any commercial or industrial premises as owner or agent
of the owner or as fiduciary, including but not limited to executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate
or as a mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such possession was
obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part or
all of any commercial or industrial premises shall be deemed to be a coowner
with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of
the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction, including
but not limited to buildings, stadiums, platforms, radio towers, trestles,
open sheds, bins, shelters, fences and display racks and signs.
TRANSLUCENT — The property of admitting the passage of light but
defusing it so that objects beyond it cannot be clearly distinguished.
WINDOW — An opening in the wall or roof of a building with the admission
of light, which opening may be closed to the elements by casements or
sashes containing glass or other transparent material.
WINDOW DISPLAY AREA — That area of a building in proximity to the
inner surface of a window which is designed and used for the viewing of
the interior and the display items representative of any goods or services
pertaining to the business therein.
§ 21A-3. Scope and applicability.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist.
C.
Unsanitary conditions or anything unreasonably offensive to senses or
dangerous to health in violation of this code.
D.
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the
health of human beings.
E.
F. Fire hazards.
A. Every commercial and industrial premises and any building situated
thereon in the Borough of Rutherford used or intended to be used for
commercial or industrial occupancy shall comply with the provisions of
this code whether or not such buildings shall have been constructed,
altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this code. This code
establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy
§ 21A-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 21A-3
21:88
§ 21A-4. Liability of owner.
Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities
prescribed in this code, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from any
such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge or
violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also responsible
therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 21A-5. Liability of occupant.
Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
§§ 21A-13, 21A-14, 21A-15, 21A-16 and 21A-17 of this code, and the
occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor be
entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the
fact that the owner or operator is also responsible therefor and in violation
thereof.
§ 21A-6. Premises to be maintained free of hazards.
The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free of
all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and
other persons utilizing the premises and free of unsanitary conditions, and
any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or
operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the premises
free of hazards, which include but are not limited to the following:
and use of all such commercial or industrial buildings and does not
replace or modify standards otherwise established for the construction,
repair, alteration or use of such commercial or industrial buildings
or premises contained therein. Where there is mixed occupancy with
commercial or industrial and other uses on the same premises, all such
uses shall be nevertheless regulated by and subject to the provisions of
this code.
B. In any case where the provisions of this code impose a higher standard
that is set forth in any other ordinances of the Borough of Rutherford or
under the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the standard as set forth
herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this code impose a lower
standard than any other ordinances in the Borough of Rutherford or the
laws of the State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in
any other such ordinance or law shall prevail.
A. Refuse. Broken glass, filth, garbage, trash, litter and debris.
B. Natural growth. Brush, weeds, ragweed, stumps, roots and obnoxious
growths and dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth
which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm
damage, constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees
shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
§ 21A-3 CLEAN ENVIRONMENT § 21A-6
21:89
§ 21A-7. Landscaping.
Premises shall be kept landscaped, and lawns, hedges and bushes shall be
kept trimmed and kept from becoming overgrown. Plantings required by
site plan approval shall be replaced when the same have died.
§ 21A-8. Signs.
All signs, pavement markings and printed matter and pictures or
illustrations contained thereon, permitted by reasons of other regulations
or as a lawful nonconforming use, shall be maintained in good repair.
§ 21A-9. Exterior of buildings.
In order to preserve property value and eliminate safety hazards and
protect adjacent properties and the neighborhood from blighting influences,
the exterior of every structure or accessory structure, including fences,
shall be maintained in good repair, and all surfaces thereof shall be kept
painted and whitewashed where necessary for purposes of preservation and
appearance, free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick
or excessive peeling paint.
C. Overhangings. Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice
and snow which, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a
danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof.
D. Ground surface hazards or unsanitary conditions. Holes; broken or
missing pavement; loose stone excavations, breaks, projections,
obstructions, ice or uncleared snow; and excretion of pets and other
animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas and
other parts of the premises which are accessible to and used by persons
on the premises. All such holes and excavations shall be filled and
repaired, walks and steps shall be repaired and other conditions shall
be removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary
conditions with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery. It shall be the
responsibility of owners and operators to take reasonable steps to
discover any such hazards or unsanitary conditions which may exist on
their premises.
E. Recurring accumulations of stormwater. Adequate runoff drains shall
be provided and maintained to eliminate any recurrent or excessive
accumulation of stormwater.
F. Sources of infestation.
A. Unsafe exterior facilities. Unsafe exterior facilities include exterior
porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes, all of which shall
be kept structurally sound and in good repair and shall be provided with
banisters or railings properly designed and maintained.
B. Signs and billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to
public view permitted by the Zoning Ordinance and regulated by the
§ 21A-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 21A-9
21:90
Building Code36 or other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use
shall be maintained in good repair. Any sign or billboard which has
weathered excessively or faded or the paint on which has excessively
peeled or cracked shall, with its supporting members, be removed
forthwith or put into a state of good repair. All inoperative or broken
electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting
members, be removed forthwith.
C. Windows exposed to public view. All windows exposed to public view
shall be kept clean and free of marks and foreign substances and be
unbroken. Except when necessary in the course of changing displays,
no storage of materials, stocks or inventory shall be permitted in
window display areas ordinarily exposed to public view unless such
areas are first screened from view by draperies, venetian blinds or
other means. All screening of interiors shall be maintained in a clean
and attractive manner in good state of repair.
D. Awnings or marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying
structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or other
portion of the premises shall be so maintained as to not constitute a
nuisance or safety hazard. In the event that any such awning or
marquee is not properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing, it
shall, together with its supporting members, be removed forthwith. In
the event that any such awning or marquee is made of cloth, plastic or
of similar materials, said materials, where exposed to public view shall
be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence of
excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing or other
deterioration. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment of an awning, marquee or its accompanying structural
members on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
E. Temporary scaffolding or equipment. No temporary painting scaffold or
other temporary equipment used for construction, repair or
maintenance shall be permitted to remain in place beyond a period
necessary to reasonably complete the purpose for which such
equipment was intended to be used without permission of the Building
Inspector.
F. Store fronts. All store fronts shall be maintained in good repair, and all
surfaces thereof shall be kept painted when necessary for purposes of
preservation and appearance. In the event that repairs to a portion of a
store front are made, such repairs shall be performed with materials
identical or compatible with the materials used in the area not
undergoing repair, to the end that the appearance of the store front
shall be uniform and attractive and shall not constitute a blighting
factor depreciating adjoining properties.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 131, Zoning.
§ 21A-9 CLEAN ENVIRONMENT § 21A-9
21:91
§ 21A-10. Windows of unoccupied buildings. [Amended 4-13-2015
by Ord. No. 3361-15]
In order to preserve property value and eliminate safety hazards and
protect adjacent properties and the neighborhood from blighting influences,
the interior side of all ground-floor windows exposed to the public view of
unoccupied commercial or industrial structures shall be kept clear, clean,
and in a good state of repair during the period of time said structure or
structures remain unoccupied. During the period of time that said structure
or structures remain unoccupied a light shall be kept on in the interior
side of all ground-floor windows exposed to the public view. All areas of
unoccupied commercial or industrial structures visible by the public from
the public street or sidewalk must be maintained in broom-clean condition
and free of litter.
§ 21A-11. Outside storage.
§ 21A-12. Parking lots or areas.
Parking lots or parking areas, including the entrances and exits thereto,
shall be kept in a good state of repair and maintained so as to comply
with § 21A-6 hereof. Signing of ownership and use restrictions shall be
maintained in good repair, clearly visible to potential parkers. Striping,
where appropriate, shall indicate spaces, direction of flow and entrances
and exits and be maintained so as to assure visibility.
§ 21A-13. Sidewalks.
Every day that the premises is open for business, the occupant shall be
responsible for removing litter from the sidewalk or other pedestrian areas,
if any, in front of the occupant's commercial or industrial premises. The area
shall be swept as often as necessary to maintain it free of litter, spillage and
other debris.
G. Unoccupied buildings. All unoccupied buildings, including those areas
visible by the public from the public street or sidewalk, must be
maintained in broom-clean condition and free of litter.
A. Outside storage or display of merchandise or commercial or industrial
material or equipment shall be forbidden. However, this section shall
not apply to outside storage of motor vehicles, trailers, campers, boats,
horticulture or agricultural products or equipment or other similar
merchandise held for retail sale. This section shall apply but not be
limited to storage of merchandise or equipment in trailers, motor
vehicles, shacks, sheds or other outside containers.
B. Waiver of this provision may be applied for by written request to the
Borough Council and granted based upon the size and kind of
merchandise or equipment, duration and location of the outside storage
and the purpose of this code.
§ 21A-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 21A-14
21:92
§ 21A-14. Occupant to report violations.
Upon discovery by an occupant of any condition of the premises which
constitutes a violation of this chapter by the owner or operator, the
occupant shall report same to the Police Department, Construction Code
Official or Health Officer, who shall be responsible for enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 21A-15. Occupant to maintain premises in clean and sanitary
manner.
All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition, and the occupant shall refrain from
performing any acts which would render other parts of the premises
unclean or unsanitary or which would obstruct the owner or operator from
performing any duty required hereunder or maintaining the premises in a
clean and sanitary condition.
§ 21A-16. Premises to be kept free of infestation.
Every operator and occupant shall be responsible for the elimination of
infestation in and on the premises subject to his control.
§ 21A-17. Littering prohibited.
No person shall deposit any litter on the ground in any commercial
premises.37
§ 21A-18. Inspections.
All buildings and premises subject to this code are subject to inspection
from to time by the Construction Code Official, Health Officer, Police
Department or any other borough official charged with the duty of enforcing
regulations governing any aspect or conduct of the activity housed in said
premises. At the time of such inspections, all parts of the premises must be
available and accessible for such inspections, and the owner, operator and
occupant are required to provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate
such inspection. Such inspections shall be made during open hours of
the business occupying said premises unless there is reason to believe a
violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or
safety requiring inspection and abatement without delay.
§ 21A-19. Abatement of violation.
Where the violation or condition existing on the premises is of such a
nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life and limb unless abated
without delay, the Police Department, Construction Code Official or Health
Officer may order the owner, operator or occupant to correct the violation
or condition within the period of time consistent with the hazard involved
37.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 21, Clean Environment, and Ch. 53, Littering.
§ 21A-14 CLEAN ENVIRONMENT § 21A-19
21:93
and with the measures necessary to remove the hazard, and, upon the
failure of the operator, owner or occupant to correct said condition, the
Police Department, Construction Code Official or Health Officer shall abate
said condition immediately thereafter.
§ 21A-20. Lien for abatement.
Where the abatement of any nuisance, as defined herein, or correction of
a defect on the premises or the maintenance of the premises in a proper
condition to conform to applicable ordinances of the Borough of Rutherford
or the laws of the State of New Jersey requires expenditure of the Borough
of Rutherford's moneys therefor, the Police Department, Construction Code
Official or Health Officer shall present a report of the work accomplished to
the governing body of the Borough of Rutherford, along with a summary of
the proceedings undertaken to secure compliance, including notice served
upon owners, operators, occupants or their agents, as the case may be, by
telephone, telegram or as otherwise provided by law. The governing body
shall then approve the expenditures made and assess the same against the
premises collectible as provided by law. A copy of the resolution approving
said expenses shall be certified by the Borough Clerk and filed with the Tax
Collector of the Borough of Rutherford, who shall be responsible for the
collection thereof, and a copy of the report and resolution shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner.
§ 21A-21. Procedure upon discovery of violations. [Amended
2-15-1994 by Ord. No. 2700-94]
A. Except as provided in § 21A-19 hereof, where violations of this code or
the regulations hereunder are found to exist, a written notice from the
Construction Code Official shall be served on the person or persons
responsible for the correction thereof.
B. Notice shall be served personally or by certified mail, addressed to the
last known address of the person to be served. In the case of an
occupant, notice may be posted upon the main entrance door of the
building, and in the case of an owner who does not reside within the
Borough of Rutherford, the last known address shall be the address of
the owner as shown in the office of the Tax Collector.
C. The notice shall specify the violation or violations committed, what
must be done to correct the same, a reasonable period of time, not to
exceed 30 days, to abate the violation, and that the notice shall become
an order of the Construction Code Official in 10 days after service.
D. In the event that the violation is not abated, removed, cured or
otherwise fully remedied within the time period prescribed in the initial
notice or extended time period as permitted by the Construction Code
Official, a summons shall then be issued against such person or persons
charged with the violation.
§ 21A-19 RUTHERFORD CODE § 21A-22
21:94
§ 21A-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation who shall violate
any of the provisions of this chapter or any order promulgated hereunder
shall, upon conviction, be liable or subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter and each day that such violation shall continue shall continue
shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 22
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm equipment installation — See Ch. 6.
Licensing of builders and contractors — See
Ch. 19.
Construction in flood hazard areas — See Ch.
37.
Land subdivision regulations — See Ch. 50.
Numbering of buildings and lots — See Ch.
63A.
Public amusement structures — See Ch. 79.
Unfit dwellings — See Ch. 123.
Fee exemptions for volunteer
organizations — See Ch. 127.
Zoning — See Ch. 131.
§ 22-1. Enforcing agency established.
There is hereby established in the Borough of Rutherford a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Rutherford
Building Department," consisting of a Construction Official, Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode Official,
Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode officials for such
additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community
Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State
Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.
§ 22-2. Qualifications of subcode officials.
Each official position created by this chapter shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended,38 and
N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an
on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the same person,
provided that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and
N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
38.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 21A-22 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 22-3
22:95
§ 22-3. Office of enforcing agency.
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at
one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances, and the office of the Building Inspector of the Borough
of Rutherford, Borough Hall, 176 Park Avenue, Rutherford, New Jersey,
is hereby designated the office of the State Uniform Construction Code
enforcing agency for the borough.
§ 22-4. Appeals.
Appeals from the decisions of the enforcing agency shall be taken to the
Bergen County Construction Board of Appeals pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217,
as amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23.
§ 22-5. Fees for construction permits. [Amended 6-6-1978 by Ord.
No. 2228-78; 12-7-1982 by Ord. No. 2333-82; 6-8-1988 by Ord. No.
2507-88; 8-7-1990 by Ord. No. 2580-90; 7-1-1992 by Ord. No.
2655-92; 5-6-1997 by Ord. No. 2798-97; 3-11-1998 by Ord. No.
2833-98; 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3005-02; 3-27-2007 by Ord. No.
3130-07]
A. General.
(1) The basic construction fee shall be the sum of the parts computed
on the basis of the volume or cost of construction, the number of
plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number of
electrical fixtures and devices, the number of sprinklers,
standpipes, alarm devices (horns, pull stations, access control
devices and like devices) and detectors (smoke, heat and like
devices), at the unit rates and/or the applicable flat fees as
provided herein, plus any special fees. The minimum fee for a basic
construction permit covering any or all of building, plumbing,
electrical or fire protection work shall be $65.
(2) Waiver; disabled persons. No person shall be charged a local
construction permit fee for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement designed and undertaken solely to
promote accessibility by disabled persons to an existing public or
private structure or any of the facilities contained therein.
(3) Waiver; environmental. No person shall be charged a local
construction permit fee for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement designed and undertaken solely to
install solar photovoltaic systems to promote reduction of
emissions of greenhouse gasses.
B. Plan review fee.
(1) The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to be charged
for a new construction permit. The minimum fee for a plan review
shall be $65.
§ 22-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 22-5
22:96
(2) The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to be charged
for the construction permit and shall be paid before the plans are
reviewed. The amount paid for this fee shall be credited toward the
amount of the fee to be charged for the construction permit. This
fee shall not be refundable even if the work is not started or
completed or the permit is not obtained or approved.
C. Building fee; new construction or alteration.
(1) Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of the
structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.28.
(a) Use Groups R-3, R-4, and R-5 (residential one- and two-family
dwellings) shall be in the amount of $0.033 per cubic foot of
building or structure volume, provided that the minimum fee
shall be at least $400.
(b) Use Groups A, B, E, F, H, I, M, R-1 and R-2 shall be in the
amount of $0.055 per cubic foot of building or structure
volume, provided that the minimum fee shall be at least $500.
(c) Use Group U, accessory structure, shall be in the amount of
$150.
(2) Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs or site construction
associated with premanufactured construction, and the external
utility connection for premanufactured construction shall be based
upon the estimated cost of the work:
(a) The fee shall be $65 for the first $1,000 of the estimated cost of
work, and $18 per $1,000 thereafter. For the purpose of
determining estimated cost, the applicant may be requested to
submit to the Construction Official such cost data as may be
available as produced by the architect or engineer of record or
by a recognized estimating firm or by the contractor. A bona
fide contractor's bid, if available, may be requested. The
Construction Official shall make the final decision regarding
estimated cost.
(3) Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as new
construction for the added portion, provided that the minimum fee
for residential one- and two-family dwellings shall be $100.
(4) Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be computed
as the sum of the fees computed separately in accordance with the
subsections above.
(5) The fee for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from
one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $10
per $1,000 of the sum of the estimated cost for moving, for
constructing new foundations, and for placement in a completed
§ 22-5 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 22-5
22:97
condition in the new location, provided that the minimum fee shall
be at least $200.
(6) The fee for tents in excess of 900 square feet or more than 30 feet
in any dimension shall be $92, when required.
(7) In order to provide for the training, certification and technical
support programs required by the act, the enforcing agency shall
collect a surcharge fee to be based upon the volume of new
construction or the value of construction for other types of
construction within the municipality. Said fee shall be accounted
for and forwarded to the Bureau of Regulatory Affairs. This fee
shall be in the amount as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19b. For the
purpose of calculating this fee, volume shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28.
D. Plumbing fees; fixtures and equipment.
(1) For the purpose of computing fees:
(a) Plumbing fixtures shall include but not be limited to each vent
through roof stacks, lavatories, kitchen sinks, slop sinks, sinks,
urinals, water closets, bathtubs, shower stalls, laundry tubs,
floor drains, washing machine connections, hose bibs and
similar fixtures connected to the plumbing system.
(b) Plumbing appurtenances shall include but not be limited to
devices, a manufactured device or an on-the-job assembly of
component parts which is an adjunct to the basic piping system
and plumbing fixtures, gas utility service connections,
pressure-reducing valves, backflow-prevention device, doublecheck
valve assembly, vacuum breakers, grease traps, oil
separators, refrigeration units, interceptors and similar
devices.
(c) Plumbing appliances shall include but not be limited to hotwater
heaters, tankless heaters, heat exchangers, water
storage tanks, solar panels, water pressure booster systems,
sump pumps, dishwashers, ice makers, instant hot-water coils,
boilers, sewerage ejectors, sterilizers, aspirators, water-cooled
air-conditioning units, water conditioners and similar
equipment.
(2) The fee for the installation or the replacement of plumbing fixtures:
(a) In a residential one- and two-family dwelling: $25 each.
(b) In all other uses: $75 plus $30 for each fixture in excess of one
fixture.
(3) The fee for the installation or replacement of a plumbing
appurtenance and/or special device: $75 each.
§ 22-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 22-5
22:98
(4) Installation of new or the replacement of backflow preventors:
(a) In a residential one- and two-family dwelling: $35 each.
(b) All other uses:
[1] Up to one inch in diameter: $50 each.
[2] One and one-fourth inches to two inches: $75 each.
[3] Over two inches: $100 each.
(5) The fee for the installation or replacement of a plumbing appliance:
$65 each.
(6) The fee for the installation, repair or replacement of a house or
building sewer line: $85.
(7) Installation of new or the replacement of heating equipment
connected to sanitary sewer or potable water:
(a) Residential one- and two-family dwellings: $65 each.
(b) All other uses: $100 each.
(8) The fees for the installation, repair or replacement of a house or
building water service line: $65.
(9) Installation of new or the replacement of commercial refrigeration
equipment or air-conditioning equipment: $100 per unit.
(10) The fee for the installation of all lawn sprinkler installations with all
devices necessary, including backflow preventors and check valves:
(a) Residential one- and two-family dwellings: $65 each.
(b) All other uses: $100 each.
(11) The fee for installation or replacement of subsoil drains: $50.
(12) The fee for the removal or abandonment in place of a sewage
disposal system and/or septic tank: $125.
(13) The fee for the installation or replacement of roof drains and/or
area drains: $25; except there is no fee for Use Groups R-3, R-4,
and R-5.
(14) The fee for gas line piping: $35 per each appliance connection.
(15) The fee for the installation or replacement of oil lines or oil tank
piping: $35 each.
(16) Ongoing inspections. The fees for ongoing inspections in
accordance with the provisions under N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23(i) are as
follows:
§ 22-5 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 22-5
22:99
(a) Annual testing of commercial backflow devices: $65.
(b) The fee for cross-connections and backflow preventors that are
subject to testing are as follows:
[1] The fee for cross-connections and backflow preventors
subject to testing, requiring reinspection every three
months; $65 for each device when they are tested three
times annually; and
[2] A fee of $90 for each device when they are broken down
and tested once annually.
E. Electrical fees; fixtures and devices.
(1) Receptacles, fixtures and devices to be counted are lighting
fixtures, wall switches, convenience receptacles, sensors, dimmers,
alarm devices, smoke, heat and CO detectors, communications
outlets, light standards eight feet or less in height, including
luminaries, emergency lights, electrical signs, exit lights or similar
electrical fixtures and devices rated 20 amps or less, including
motors or equipment rated less than 1 hp or 1 kw.
(a) From 1 to 25 receptacles or fixtures: $50.
(b) Each 25 receptacles or fixtures in addition: $30.
(c) Light standards greater than eight feet in height, including
luminaries and communications closet: $15 each.
(2) Motors and electrical devices.
(a) From 1 to 10 horsepower: $45.
(b) From 11 to 50 horsepower: $100.
(c) From 51 to 100 horsepower: $225.
(d) Greater that 100 horsepower: $460.
(3) Service panels, service entrances or subpanels. Temporary wiring
and decorative displays not over sixty-days temporary wiring fees,
with no additional charge for temporary light fixtures:
(a) Less than or equal to 100 amperes: $65 each.
(b) From 101 to 200 amperes: $75 each.
(c) From 201 to 300 amperes: $100 each.
(d) From 301 to 400 amperes: $300 each.
(e) From 401 to 800 amperes: $400 each.
(f) From 801 to 1,000 amperes: $500 each.
§ 22-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 22-5
22:100
(g) From 1,001 to 1,200 amperes: $750 each.
(h) Greater than 1,201 amperes: $950 each.
(i) Additional meters included with service: $45 each.
(4) Transformers, generators, equipment and appliances, including
electrical range oven, dishwasher, dryer, water heater, boiler,
furnace, air conditioner, space heater, therapeutic or whirlpool tub
or spa, or any other fixed or plug-in appliance:
(a) From 1 to 10 kilowatts: $75 each.
(b) From 10 kilowatts to 45 kilowatts: $125 each.
(c) From 45 kilowatts to 112.5 kilowatts: $500 each.
(d) Greater than 112.5 kilowatts: $600 each.
(5) Fire alarms; low-voltage system control panels:
(a) Residential one- and two-family dwellings: $50 each.
(b) All other uses: $95 each.
(6) Swimming pools and spas:
(a) Bonding of reinforced steel, ladders, sockets, diving boards,
etc: $50.
(b) Pool lights: $50 each.
(c) Pool pump, filter, motors: $65 each.
(d) Additional equipment: apply motor schedule or other fee as per
this schedule. No permit to be issued for bonding only.
(e) Aboveground pool, one inspection: $65.
(7) Ongoing inspections. The fees for ongoing inspections in
accordance with the provisions under N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23(i) for
electrical inspections, bonding and grounding certificates for
swimming pools, spas or hot tubs: $75.
(8) For electrical work requiring replacement of service entrance
conductors or feeder conductors only, the fee shall be in
accordance with above based on the designated ampere rating of
the over-current device or the service or feeder.
(9) For the purpose of computing these fees, all electrical and
communications devices, utilization equipment and motors which
are part of premises wiring, except those which are portable plugin
type, shall be counted.
F. Fire-protection and other hazardous equipment, including sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), alarm devices (horns and pull
§ 22-5 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 22-5
22:101
stations) preengineered suppression systems, gas and oil-fired
appliances not connected to the plumbing system, kitchen exhaust
systems, incinerators and crematoriums.
(1) Sprinkler systems:
(a) Twenty or fewer heads: $100.
(b) From 21 to 100 heads: $120.
(c) From 101 to 200 heads: $229.
(d) From 201 to 400 heads: $594.
(e) From 401 to 1,000 heads: $850.
(f) Over 1,000 heads: $1,150.
(2) Fire-suppression system pump: $500.
(3) Fire-suppression system standpipe: $250 each.
(4) Dry pipe alarm, preaction and similar devices: $100 each.
(5) Fire alarm systems:
(a) Detection and initiating-alarm devices:
[1] Twelve or fewer: $65.
[2] Each 20 detectors or devices in addition: $35.
(b) Supervisory devices: $10 per device.
(c) Signaling devices: $10 per device.
(d) Minimum fee for all uses other than one- and two-family
dwellings: $150.
(6) Pre-engineered fire-suppression systems: $100 each.
(7) Gas or oil-fired appliance not connected to the plumbing system:
$65 each.
(8) Commercial kitchen exhaust system: $100 each.
(9) Incinerators and crematoriums: $400 each.
(10) Any equipment, such as but not limited to smoke-control systems or
other system that must be reviewed or inspected by the Fire
Subcode Official shall be $65 for the first $1,000 of the estimated
cost of work, and $18 per $1,000 thereafter of estimated cost of
work, provided that the minimum fee shall be at least $100.
G. Mechanical subcode fees.
(1) Minimum fee for any mechanical permit: $65.
§ 22-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 22-5
22:102
(2) For new one- and two-family residential installations or
replacements of steam boilers, water heaters, hot-water boilers
and hot-air furnaces:
(a) In residential one- and two-family dwellings: $65 each.
(b) All other uses: $100 each.
(3) Installation of new or replacement oil piping: $35.
(4) Installation of new or replacement gas piping: $35 per appliance.
(5) Installation of oil tank:
(a) In a residential one- and two-family dwelling: $100 each.
(b) All other uses: $150 each.
(6) Installation or replacement of fireplace: $75.
(7) Installation of LPG tank: $100 when permitted by Borough Zoning
Code.
H. Elevator device fees.
(1) The fee for plan review for elevator devices in structures in use
groups other than R-3, R-4, and R-5 shall be $260 for each device.
The fee for plan review for elevator devices in structures in Use
Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5 and for elevator devices wholly within
dwelling units in R-2 structures shall be $65 for each device.
(2) Elevators shall be installed and inspected pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-12 et seq. The fees for elevator device inspections and tests
shall be as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-12 et seq.
(3) The minimum fee for the installation of a new elevator device in
structures not in Use Group R-3, R-4, or an exempted R-2 structure
shall be $300 per device.
(4) Ongoing inspections. The fees for ongoing inspections in
accordance with the provisions under N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.3 for
elevator devices shall be as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-12 et seq. with
an administrative fee of 15%.
I. Other permits.
(1) Demolition:
(a) One- or two-family residences (Use Group R-3, R-4 and R-5 of
the building code): $500.
(b) All other use groups: $750.
(c) Demolition of an accessory structure greater than 99 square
feet, residential one- or two-family uses: $75.
§ 22-5 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 22-5
22:103
(d) Demolition of an accessory structure for a commercial or
multifamily structure: $150.
(e) Interior demolition of a residential one- or two-family
structure: $100.
(f) Interior demolition of a commercial or multifamily structure:
$200 per floor or per residential dwelling unit.
(g) The fee for residential tank removal or abandonment for oneand
two-family dwellings (Use Groups R-3 and R-4) shall be
$125. All other use groups shall be $200 per tank.
(2) The fee for construction of a nonfreestanding sign shall be $75 for
each sign; the fee for construction of a freestanding sign shall be
$100 for each sign.
(3) The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement work shall be $85.
(4) The fee for a permit for asbestos hazard abatement shall be
performed and inspected pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-8 et seq. The
fees for asbestos hazard abatements shall be as set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:23-8.
(5) The fee for plan review of a building for compliance under the
alternate systems and nondepletable energy source provisions of
the energy subcode shall be $200 for one- and two-family homes
and for light commercial structures having the indoor temperature
controlled from a single point and $500 for all other structures.
(6) The fee for an annual construction permit shall be charged
annually. This fee shall be a flat fee based upon the number of
maintenance workers employed by the facility and who are
primarily engaged in work that is governed by a subcode.
Managers, engineers and clerks shall not be considered
maintenance workers for the purpose of establishing the annual
construction permit fee. Annual permits may be issued for building,
fire protection, electrical and plumbing. Fees shall be as follows:
(a) One to 25 workers (including foreman): $600; and each
additional worker over 25 workers: $200.
(b) Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training
registration fee of $140 must be sent by the applicant to the
State Department of Community Affairs, Construction Code
Element, Training Section, along with a copy of the
construction permit (Form F-170). The check shall be made
payable to "Treasurer, State of New Jersey."
J. Certificates and variations.
(1) The fees for the certificates of occupancy shall be as follows:
§ 22-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 22-5
22:104
(a) New construction certificate of occupancy:
[1] R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 uses: $100 per dwelling unit.
[2] All other uses:
[a] Up to 20,000 square feet or three stories: $200.
[b] From 20,001 to 40,000 square feet or eight stories:
$300.
[c] Over 40,000 square feet or nine stories: $400.
(b) Certificate of continued occupancy shall be:
[1] R-3, R-4, R-5 uses, co-operative apartments and
condominiums: $125 per dwelling unit.
[2] R-2 uses: $125 for first two units and $50 for each
additional unit.
[3] All other uses:
[a] Up to 20,000 square feet or three stories: $200.
[b] From 20,001 to 40,000 square feet or eight stories:
$300.
[c] Over 40,000 square feet or nine stories: $500.
(c) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a
change of use group shall be the same as for new construction.
(d) The fee for the first renewal of a temporary certificate of
occupancy shall be $25.
(2) The fee for a certificate of approval of asbestos removal shall be
$14.
(3) The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $125 for residential one- and two-family
dwellings and $200 per commercial structure. There shall be no fee
to apply for an application for a variation due to handicapped
accessibility requirements for residential one- and two-family
dwellings.39
39.Editor's Note: Former § 22-5.1, Waiver of construction permit fees, added 7-13-1999 by
Ord. No. 2900-99, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 3-27-2007 by
Ord. No. 3130-07.
§ 22-5 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 22-6
22:105
§ 22-6. Fees for other permits and certificates. [Amended 6-8-1988
by Ord. No. 2507-88; 7-1-1992 by Ord. No. 2655-92; 5-6-1997 by
Ord. No. 2798-97; 5-2-1995 by Ord. No. 2731-95; 3-11-1998 by Ord.
No. 2833-98; 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3005-02; 3-27-2007 by Ord. No.
3130-07]
The following are additional fees payable to the Borough of Rutherford
Construction Official:
A. The fees for certificates of occupancy shall be as follows:
(1) Certificates of occupancy for resale:
(a) For R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 uses: $100 per dwelling unit.
(b) All other uses:
[1] Up to 20,000 square feet or three stories: $200.
[2] From 20,000 to 40,000 square feet or eight stories: $300.
[3] Over 40,000 square feet or nine stories: $400.
(2) Certificate of continued occupancy (i.e., V.A., FHA, etc.) shall be
$125.
(3) Fee for a certificate of occupancy for an approved change of use:
(a) Up to 20,000 square feet or three stories: $200.
(b) From 20,000 to 40,000 square feet or four to eight stories:
$300.
(c) Over 40,000 square feet or nine or more stories: $400.
(4) The fee for a multifamily certificate of occupancy shall be $125 for
the first two units and $50 for each additional unit.
(5) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy for co-operative
apartments and condominiums shall be $125 for each dwelling
unit.
(6) The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy for all uses other
than R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 shall be as follows:
(a) Up to 20,000 square feet or three stories: $200.
(b) From 20,000 to 40,000 square feet or four to eight stories:
$300.
(c) Over 40,000 square feet or nine or more stories: $500.
B. The annual registration fees and periodic elevator inspections and tests
for all uses shall be imposed and calculated in accordance with the fees
set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.1 et seq. and other applicable
§ 22-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 22-6
22:106
§ 22-7. Biannual fee schedule report.
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 22-8. State surcharge fee.
§ 22-9. Establishment of fire limits. [Amended 6-6-1978 by Ord. No.
2228-78]
administrative code sections of the New Jersey State Uniform
Construction Code, as amended.
C. Special inspections.
(1) Special inspection fees. Any person, partnership or corporation
who requests and obtains a required code inspection either before
or after regular Rutherford Building Department hours of business
or on holidays and weekends shall be required to pay, in addition to
any established permit and certificate fees, the current contractual
hourly compensation rate for the code officials performing the
inspections, plus an administrative surcharge of 15% of said
calculated amount. Said fee shall be calculated and based on the
amount of time required for said inspections with payment for a
minimum inspection time of two hours.
A. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations,40 the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified in this chapter, a surcharge fee of $0.0006 per cubic foot of
volume of new construction. Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to the
Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a
quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters ending September 30, December
31, March 31 and June 30 and not later than one month next succeeding
the end of the quarter for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the
regulations first become effective, said fees shall be collected and
remitted for the third and fourth quarters only.
B. The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal year
to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July 31, the
total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year. In the
fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said report
shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
A. The following fire limits are established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5-23:
40.Editor's Note: "The regulations" refers to the regulations established by the Commissioner
of the Department of Community Affairs for the administration of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act.
§ 22-6 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 22-9
22:107
§ 22-10. Repealer.
Any and all ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions
of this chapter, the State Uniform Construction Code Act (Chapter 217,
Laws of New Jersey 1975) or the regulations for the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code as promulgated by the Commissioner of the Department
of Community Affairs are hereby repealed to such extent as they are so in
conflict or inconsistent; provided, however, that the adoption of this chapter
shall not prevent or bar the continuance or institution of any proceedings
for offenses heretofore committed in violation of any existing ordinance of
the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 22-11. Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be
declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remaining portions
of this chapter shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force
and effect, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared
to be severable.
(1) Commencing at the intersection of the Erie Railroad and Chestnut
Street and running thence along the center line of Chestnut Street
to the center line of Park Avenue; thence along the center line of
Park Avenue to the center line of The Terrace; thence along the
center line of The Terrace to the center line of East Passaic Avenue;
thence along the center line of East Passaic Avenue to the center
line of Feronia Way; thence along the center line of Feronia Way to
the Erie Railroad; thence along the Erie Railroad to the center line
of Chestnut Street, the point or place of beginning.
(2) Beginning at the intersection of the Erie Railroad and the center
line of Meadow Road extended and running thence along the
center line of Meadow Road to the center line of Route 17; thence
along the center line of Route 17 to its intersection with the Erie
Railroad; thence along the Erie Railroad to its intersection with the
center line of Meadow Road extended, the point or place of
beginning.
(3) All of the area of the borough as lies east of Route 17 and bordered
on the east by the boundary line of the Hackensack Meadowlands
Development Commission and on the north by the Erie Railroad
right-of-way.
B. The construction officials shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and
Council, biannually, a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire
limits. This report shall indicate the recommendations of the
Construction Official, the Building Subcode Official and the Fire
Subcode Official regarding those areas which should be designated as
within the fire limits, with the reasons therefor.
§ 22-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 22-12
22:108
§ 22-12. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 22A
CONVENIENCE STORES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 53.
Loitering — See Ch. 54.
Noise control — See Ch. 63.
Nuisance Code — See Ch. 64.
Zoning — See Ch. 131.
§ 22A-1. Purpose; definitions.
§ 22A-2. Hours restricted.
All convenience stores located in the Borough of Rutherford, except those
that are located in the ORD Zoning District or the HC Highway Commercial
Zoning District, shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
5:00 a.m. prevailing time on every day of the year.
§ 22A-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction,
be fined a sum not to exceed $500 per offense, or, if the party so convicted is
a natural person, such person may be imprisoned for a term not exceeding
30 days, and/or be fined a sum not to exceed $500 per offense, as the court
A. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the opening and closing hours
of convenience stores in order to safeguard the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Rutherford. It has been
determined that all-night or late-night commercial operations, such as
conveniences stores within the Borough of Rutherford in close
proximity to residential neighborhoods, disturb the peace and repose of
its citizens and cause loitering, litter, traffic and parking noise, and
lighting disturbance, thereby creating a public nuisance.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CONVENIENCE STORE — Any retail establishment offering for sale
any prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and
magazines, and sandwiches and other freshly prepared food meant for
consumption off site.
§ 22-12 CONVENIENCE STORES § 22A-3
22A:109
in its discretion may impose. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute
a separate offense.
Chapter 22B
CONTRACTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative offices — See Ch. 4.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 31.
Finance Department — See Ch. 31A.
Purchasing — See Ch. 81.
Cooperative purchasing — See Ch. 82.
§ 22A-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 22A-3
22A:110
ARTICLE I
Awarding of Public Contracts
[Adopted 9-13-2011 by Ord. No. 3236-1141]
§ 22B-1. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the Borough
and any of its purchasing agents or agencies, its statutory boards, and
its independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an
agreement or otherwise contract on a no-bid basis to procure services
from any professional business entity, if that entity has solicited or
made a contribution of money, or pledged a contribution, including inkind
contributions in excess of the thresholds set forth in Subsection D,
to a campaign committee of any Borough candidate or holder of a public
office in the Borough, whether or not that officeholder has the ultimate
responsibility for the award of the contract, or to any Borough or
Bergen County party committee, or to any continuing political
committee that is organized for the primary purpose of promoting or
supporting Borough candidates or Borough officeholders, if such
contribution or pledge is made within one calendar year immediately
preceding the date of the municipal decision awarding such contract or
agreement on a no-bid basis.
B. No professional business entity or vendor who submits a proposal for,
enters into negotiations for, or agrees to, any contract or agreement on
a no-bid basis with the Borough or any department or agency thereof,
or its statutory boards, or its independent authorities, for the rendition
of professional, banking or insurance services or any other no-bid
consultation services, shall knowingly solicit or make any contribution
of money, or pledge a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to
any Borough candidate or holder of a public office in the Borough,
whether or not that officeholder has the ultimate responsibility for the
award of the contract, or to any Borough or Bergen County party
committee, or to any continuing political committee that is organized
for the primary purpose of promoting or supporting Borough
candidates or Borough officeholders, between the time of first
communication between that business entity and the Borough
regarding a specific professional services agreement, and the later of
the termination of negotiations or the completion of the contract or
agreement.
C. For purposes of this article, a "professional business entity" and a
"vendor" seeking a public contract means any individual owning tenpercent-
or-greater interest in the entity including the individual's
spouse, and any unemancipated child living in the household of such
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it is the public policy of the Borough to
refuse public professional service contracts to professional service providers who
knowingly make substantial political contributions, as herein defined, in the expectation
of being considered for a no-bid contract in excess of $17,500.
§ 22B-1 CONVENIENCE STORES § 22B-1
22A:111
§ 22B-2. Conduct constituting breach of contract.
It shall be a breach of the terms of the Borough's professional service
agreement or agreement for goods or services for a business entity to:
person, a firm, corporation, professional corporation, partnership,
limited partnership, limited liability company, unincorporated
association or similar organization. The definition of a "business entity"
encompasses all principals and partners who own 10% or more of the
equity in the business entity, and any officers employed by the entity, as
well as any subsidiaries directly controlled by the business entity.
D. Any individual meeting the definition of "professional business entity"
or "vendor" under this section may annually contribute a maximum of
$300 each for any purpose to any candidate, for mayor or governing
body, or $300 to the Borough of Rutherford party committee, or $500 to
the Bergen County party committee or to a PAC or candidate committee
referenced in this article, without violating Subsection A of this section.
However, any group of individuals meeting the definition of
"professional business entity" or "vendor" under this section, including
such principals, partners, and officers of the entity or vendor in the
aggregate, may not annually contribute for any purpose in excess of
$2,500 to all Borough of Rutherford candidates and officeholders with
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, and all Borough of
Rutherford or Bergen County political parties, candidate committees,
and PACs referenced in this article combined, without violating
Subsection A of this section. The intentional evasion of pay to play
through indirect means including the practice of "wheeling" as it is
commonly known is expressly prohibited. All professional business or
vendor entities engaged in such practice shall be disqualified.
E. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The governing body of the Borough, if the contract requires
approval or appropriation from the Council.
(2) The Borough Administrator of the Borough, if the contract requires
approval of the Borough Administrator, or if a public officer who is
responsible for the award of a contract is appointed by the Borough
Administrator.
A. Make or solicit a contribution in violation of this article;
B. Knowingly conceal or misrepresent a contribution given or received;
C. Make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of
concealing or misrepresenting the source of the contribution;
D. Make or solicit any contribution on the condition or with the agreement
that it will be contributed to a campaign committee of any candidate or
holder of the public office in the Borough of Rutherford;
§ 22B-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 22B-2
22A:112
§ 22B-3. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any Borough
candidate for Mayor or Council, or municipal or county party committee
that is organized for the primary purpose of promoting or supporting
Borough candidates or Borough officeholders, including any state party
or legislative leadership committee, shall be deemed a violation of this
article, nor shall an agreement for property, goods or services, of any kind
whatsoever, be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was made by the
professional business entity prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 22B-4. Contribution statements; reporting requirements.
E. Engage or employ a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or solicit
any contribution, which if made or solicited by the business entity itself,
would subject that entity to the restrictions of this article;
F. Fund contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members and employees;
G. Engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent of
this article; or
H. Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means, do any
act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of this article.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services with
any professional business entity, including banking or insurance
coverage services, the Borough of Rutherford or any of its purchasing
agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement
from the professional business entity made under penalty of perjury
that the professional business entity has not made a contribution in
violation of § 22B-1 of this article.
B. The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this article that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a contract. The certification required under this subsection
shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the
Borough and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be
required by any other provision of law.
C. Any public official voting upon or participating in the solicitation or
award of any contract covered hereunder shall, by the act of voting,
certify that to the best of said official's knowledge, the vendor or
professional in question has not made a contribution in excess of the
limits herein provided directly or in violation of § 22B-2 hereof to any
organization described in § 22B-1 hereof or to any other political
organization or PAC which thereafter forwarded a contribution to any
§ 22B-2 CONVENIENCE STORES § 22B-4
22A:113
§ 22B-5. Return of excess contributions.
A professional business entity or Borough candidate or officeholder or
municipal county party committee that is organized for the primary purpose
of promoting or supporting Borough candidates or Borough officeholders
may cure a violation of § 22B-1, if, within 30 days after the general election,
the professional business entity notifies the Borough Council in writing
and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from the Borough
candidate or municipal or county political party or state party or legislative
leadership committee.
§ 22B-6. Violations and penalties.
§ 22B-7. Conflict with other provisions.
If any provision of this article conflicts with any state statute, the stricter of
the two regulations shall apply.
§ 22B-8. Severability.
If any sentence, paragraph or section of this article, or the application
thereof to any persons or circumstances shall be adjudged by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, or if by legislative action any sentence,
paragraph or section of this article shall lose its force and effect, such
judgment or action shall not affect, impair or void the remainder of this
article.
§ 22B-9. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts thereof that are inconsistent with this article
are repealed or otherwise modified.
organization supporting candidates seeking any elected office in the
Borough of Rutherford, by prearrangement of agreement.
A. All Borough professional service agreements shall provide that it shall
be a breach of the terms of the government contract for a professional
business entity to violate § 22B-1 or to knowingly conceal or
misrepresent contributions given or received, or to make or solicit
contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution.
B. Any professional business entity which or who knowingly fails to reveal
a contribution made in violation of this article, or who knowingly makes
or solicits contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of
concealing or misrepresenting the source of the contribution, shall be
disqualified from eligibility for future Borough contracts for a period of
four calendar years from the date of the violation.
C. Any contract given in violation of this article shall be voidable at the
option of the Borough.
§ 22B-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 22B-10
22A:114
§ 22B-10. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon final passage and publication
as required by law.
§ 22B-10 CONVENIENCE STORES § 22B-10
22A:115
Chapter 23
CURFEW, EMERGENCY
§ 23-1. Emergency; powers of Mayor.
When there exists in the Borough of Rutherford a state of disaster or
emergency, brought about by natural causes or by the action of any person
or persons, and such state of disaster or emergency causes or may cause
violence and injury to be inflicted upon people in the Borough of Rutherford
and causes or may cause damage and destruction to property in the
Borough of Rutherford, both public and private, all being against the health,
safety and welfare of the people of the Borough of Rutherford, then and
in that event the Mayor shall call a meeting of the Mayor and Council
of the Borough of Rutherford, and upon a determination by a majority of
the Mayor and Council that a state of disaster or emergency exists, the
Mayor shall be given the authority to declare that a state of disaster or
emergency exists and he shall have the authority and be empowered to do
the following:
§ 23-2. Notice.
The Mayor, upon declaring that a state of disaster or emergency exists in
the Borough of Rutherford, shall forthwith advise any newspaper located
within the Borough of Rutherford and request any radio station which
services the Borough of Rutherford that the announced state of disaster or
emergency be publicized at once.
§ 23-3. Authority.
The judgment of the Mayor and Council that a state of disaster or
emergency exists within the Borough of Rutherford and that it has caused
or is likely to cause injury and damage to persons and property within
the Borough of Rutherford shall be final and absolute. This authority is
A. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which
persons shall be prohibited from remaining upon the public streets,
ways and places in the Borough of Rutherford.
B. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which
vehicular traffic shall be prohibited or restricted from traveling over the
streets in the Borough of Rutherford.
C. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which all
businesses licensed by the Borough of Rutherford to dispense or sell in
any way alcoholic beverages shall be closed to business.
D. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which all
sales of gasoline by gasoline service stations in the Borough of
Rutherford shall be closed to business.
§ 22B-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 23-3
23:116
conferred upon the Mayor by the decision of the Mayor and Council and by
virtue of the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:87-31.
§ 23-4. Prohibitions.
After the Mayor has declared that a state of disaster or emergency exists
in the Borough of Rutherford and has issued an order or proclamation
regulating the movements of persons or vehicles in or about the Borough
of Rutherford, or the dispensing or sale by licensed persons of alcoholic
beverages therein, or the sale of gasoline by gasoline service stations in the
Borough of Rutherford, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter
for any person to be upon the streets, ways or places in the Borough of
Rutherford, to drive vehicles over the streets in the Borough of Rutherford,
to dispense or sell alcoholic beverages or to sell gasoline at any gasoline
service station during the hours prohibited by said order or proclamation,
unless otherwise permitted by the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 23-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of an order or
proclamation issued by the Mayor shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a fine not to exceed $500 or be imprisoned for a term not to exceed six
months.
§ 23-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 24z
(RESERVED)
Chapter 25
DISABILITY ACT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 25-1. Creation. [Amended 12-14-2015 by Ord. No. 3382-15]
There is hereby established within the Borough of Rutherford the Mayor
and Council's Americans with Disabilities Act Advisory Committee/Access
for All Rutherford.
§ 25-2. Purpose.
The Mayor and Council's Americans With Disabilities Act Advisory
Committee shall consider, deal with and provide advice and counsel to
the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford as to the concerns
of disabled persons, barrier-free facilities, recreational opportunities,
employment practices and the like and general and specific compliance
§ 23-3 (RESERVED) § 25-2
24z:117
with the requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act42 and any
appropriate legislation dealing with the subject matter thereof.
§ 25-3. Functions and duties.
§ 25-4. Members.
A. The Mayor and Council's Americans With Disabilities Act Advisory
Committee shall be constituted to meet at least quarterly, shall by a
majority vote select a chairperson to serve for a one-year period, such
selection to be made each year and shall act pursuant to bylaws to be
created by the Committee and adopted by a majority vote thereof within
90 days from the formation of the Mayor and Council's Americans With
Disabilities Act Advisory Committee.
B. The record of proceedings of Committee meetings shall be kept and
such record as well as any recommendations or advice of the
Committee to the Mayor and Council, which shall be provided to the
Mayor and Council no later than 60 days after each meeting.
A. Eleven members, of which five shall be persons with disabilities, or
parents of a child with a disability or a resident family member who is
the caregiver of a person with a disability. Six members of the
Committee shall be either residents of, or employed in, the Borough,
and shall be appointed by the Mayor with staggered terms so as to
result in the expiration of no more than three terms in any one year.
Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of an unexpired term.
B. The specific appointments to the aforesaid Committee shall be made by
the Mayor for three-year terms, such appointments to be made within
one month after the adoption of this chapter.
C. In making appointments, the Mayor may, but shall not be required to,
consider representation from the following categories:
(1) Liaison of the Mayor and Council;
(2) Department of Public Works;
(3) Recreation Commission;
(4) School district;
(5) Emergency services (police, fire, etc.); and
(6) Member of the business community.
42.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 25-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 25-4
24z:118
Chapter 26
DOGS, PETS, ANIMALS AND KENNELS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 10.
Cat licensing — See Ch. 20A.
Noise from animals — See Ch. 63.
Playgrounds and recreation areas — See Ch.
73.
Feeding of wildlife — See Ch. 107C.
§ 26-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without
delay.[Added 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 3140-07]
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.[Amended 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 3140-07]
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Added 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 3140-07]
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability-assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.[Added 8-28-2007 by Ord. No.
3140-07]
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement, feces.[Added 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 3140-07]
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either under
the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.[Added 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 3140-07]
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
§ 25-4 DOGS, PETS, ANIMALS AND KENNELS § 26-2
26:119
§ 26-2. License and registration tag required. [Amended 4-22-1964
by Ord. No. 1915]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog within the limits of the
Borough of Rutherford, which has attained the age of seven months or
which possesses a set of permanent teeth, shall apply for and procure from
the Chief of Police a license and official metal registration tag for each
such dog owned, kept or harbored. Said registration tag shall be securely
fastened to a dog collar or harness to be worn by the dog at all times.
§ 26-3. Application procedure and fees; license for potentially
dangerous dogs. [Amended 4-22-1964 by Ord. No. 1915; 5-17-1966
by Ord. No. 1958-66; 1-17-1967 by Ord. No. 1970-67; 2-7-1984 by
Ord. No. 2363-84; 12-30-1996 by Ord. No. 2785-96]
§ 26-4. Application information. [Amended 4-22-1964 by Ord. No.
1915]
Each application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the dog for which license and registration are sought and whether it is of
a long- or short-haired variety and also the name, street and post office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog.
The information on said application and the registration number issued for
the dog shall be recorded on a card record in the office of the Chief of Police
and be preserved for a period of at least three years.
§ 26-5. Leash required.
No dog, whether licensed or not, shall be permitted to leave the premises of
the person who owns, harbors or keeps such dog unless securely held by a
leash in the hands of a person able to control said dog.
A. Applications for licensing and registration of dogs shall be made during
the month of January of each year. In addition, any dog that has not
been previously licensed or registered shall make application during
the month that the dog has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine
pursuant to the regulations of the Start Department of Health or by
June 30 of the year of inoculation, whichever occurs first. The applicant
shall pay an annual fee of $7 per year for a license for each neutered or
nonneutered dog owned, kept or harbored. If a license tag is misplaced
or lost, the Police Department may issue a duplicate license for that
particular dog for a fee of $6. The fees shall not be apportioned pro
rata. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3062-04]
B. Applications for licensing of potentially dangerous dogs shall be made
annually during the month of January to the Chief of Police. The
applicant shall pay a fee of $700 for a license for a potentially
dangerous dog. All licenses shall expire annually on January 31.
§ 26-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 26-6
26:120
§ 26-6. Nuisances prohibited; removal of feces; requirements for
disposal. [Added 3-18-1958 by Ord. No. 1735; amended 5-6-1980 by
Ord. No. 2279-80; 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 3120-06]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons owning, harboring or
having the care, custody or control of any dog to permit such dog to
soil, defile, urinate on, defecate on or commit any nuisance upon any
common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, public street, play area,
park or any place where people congregate or walk or upon any public
property whatsoever or upon any private property without the
permission of the owner of said property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons owning, harboring or
having the care, custody or control of any dog to permit such dog to
walk upon or play, roll, or run, on any Rutherford Board of Education
property, or to soil, defile, urinate on, defecate on, or commit any
nuisance upon any sidewalk, passageway, play area, park or any place
owned by the Rutherford Board of Education, including the following
properties:
(1) Lincoln Avenue, 414 Montross Avenue;
(2) Washington School, 89 Wood Street;
(3) Union School, 359 Union Avenue;
(4) Pierrepont School, 70 East Pierrepont Avenue;
(5) Sylvan School, 109 Sylvan Street; and
(6) Rutherford High School, 56 Elliot Place.
C. The restriction in this § 26-6 shall not apply to that portion of a street
lying between the curblines, which portion may be used to curb such
dog, provided that such person shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such dog as follows:
(1) In no event shall any feces be deposited in any refuse container or
any other place or item owned by the Rutherford Board of
Education. In no event shall any feces be deposited in sewers or
drains, whether storm or sanitary.
(2) Feces shall be picked up with a scoop, shovel, broom, tong or other
similar implement and be deposited directly into an airtight
container, plastic or otherwise, and then subsequently deposited in
a container used for the disposal of refuse or by any other method
approved by the Board of Health, except as stated in § 26-6C(1)
above.
(3) All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and
properly dispose of a pet's solid waste deposited on any property,
public or private, which property is not owned or possessed by that
person. [Added 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 3140-0743]
§ 26-6 DOGS, PETS, ANIMALS AND KENNELS § 26-6
26:121
§ 26-7. Provision for Animal Warden, dog pound.
The Mayor and Council shall establish a dog pound and appoint an Animal
Warden.44
§ 26-8. Dogs to be impounded.
The Animal Warden shall take into custody and impound and thereafter
destroy or dispose of as provided in this section:
§ 26-9. Notification of owner. [Amended 4-22-1964 by Ord. No.
1915]
If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon or
attached thereto the name and address of any person, or a registration tag,
or the owner or the person keeping or harboring said dog is known, the
Animal Warden shall immediately notify the office of the Chief of Police in
writing, setting forth the full information available. The Chief of Police shall
forthwith serve notice upon the person whose address is given on the collar,
or on the owner or the person keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a
notice in writing stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable to be
disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the service
of the notice.
(4) Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a
disability-assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section while such animal is being used for that purpose.
[Added 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 3140-07]
D. Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the Borough's Animal
Control Officer, the Borough Health Department, the Police
Department, or may be enforced by any private citizen by the filing of a
complaint in the Rutherford Municipal Court. [Amended 8-28-2007
by Ord. No. 3140-07]
A. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog which said Warden has reason to believe is a stray
dog.
B. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
C. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog.
43.Editor's Note: This ordinance also retitled Ch. 26 from Dogs and Kennels to Dogs, Pets,
Animals and Kennels.
44.Editor's Note: For clothing allowance of Animal Warden, see Ch. 76, Police Department,
§ 76-26.
§ 26-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 26-10
26:122
§ 26-10. Service of notification.
A notice under this chapter may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode, or at the address given on the collar, or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
§ 26-11. Certificate of release; schedule of fees. [Amended
5-17-1966 by Ord. No. 1958-66, effective 1-1-1967]
The owner or person entitled to the custody of any dog so seized and
impounded may redeem said dog upon making payments for a certificate of
release at the office of the Chief of Police in accordance with the following
schedule:
§ 26-12. Provisions for disposal; report required. [Amended
4-22-1964 by Ord. No. 1915]
When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice or
for seven days after seizure when information is not available for serving a
notice, the Animal Warden may cause the dog to be disposed of or destroyed
in a manner causing as little pain as possible and file a written report of
such disposal immediately at the office of the Chief of Police.
§ 26-13. Kennel, pet shop and shelter licenses required. [Amended
4-22-1964 by Ord. No. 1915]
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, pet
shop or a shelter shall apply to the office of the Chief of Police for a license
entitling him to keep or operate such establishment.
§ 26-14. License application procedure; expiration, revocation.
A. First offense: the sum of $2, plus $1 for each day that the dog has been
impounded.
B. Second offense: the sum of $3, plus $1 for each day that the dog has
been impounded.
C. Third and each succeeding offense: the sum of $5, plus $1 for each day
that the dog has been impounded.
A. The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located and the purpose or purposes for
which it is to be maintained and shall be accompanied by the written
approval of the local health authorities showing compliance with the
local and state rules and regulations governing location of and
sanitation at such establishments.
B. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop or shelter shall state the
purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and all such
§ 26-10 DOGS, PETS, ANIMALS AND KENNELS § 26-14
26:123
§ 26-15. Exemption from individual licensing requirements.
Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure individual
licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such establishments.
Such licenses shall not be transferable to another owner or different
premises.
§ 26-16. Fees for kennels and pet shops.
The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or
fewer dogs shall be $10; and for more than 10 dogs, $25. The annual license
fee for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall be charged for a shelter.
§ 26-17. Disposition of revenue. [Added 4-22-1964 by Ord. No.
1915]
§ 26-18. Control of kennel, pet shop and shelter dogs required.
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop or shelter shall be permitted off such
premises, except on a leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 26-19. Dangerous dogs destroyed.
Any dog running at large and acting in a vicious manner or showing signs
of rabies may be destroyed by any police officer or Animal Warden without
capture and removal to the pound.45
licenses shall expire on the last day of January of each year and be
subject to revocation by the municipality on recommendations of the
State Department of Health or the local Board of Health for failure to
comply with the rules and regulations of the State Department or local
Board governing the same after the owner has been afforded a hearing
by either the State Department or local Board.
A. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this chapter, except registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded to the Borough Treasurer within 30 days after collection or
receipt and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of the
other accounts of the Borough which shall be used for the purpose
provided by law.
B. The registration tag fee required by law for each dog shall be forwarded
within 30 days after collection by the Chief of Police, the official
designated by this chapter to license dogs, to the State Department of
Health for disposition pursuant to law.
45.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 89, Sanitary Code, §§ 89-54 and 89-56 for additional
regulations governing the control and disposal of rabid animals, and Ch. 10, Animals,
Article I, Quarantine.
§ 26-14 RUTHERFORD CODE § 26-20
26:124
§ 26-20. Interference with officials prohibited; penalty. [Amended
8-6-1991 by Ord. No. 2610-91; 5-7-1996 by Ord. No. 2758-96]
Any person who shall interfere with, hinder or molest said Animal Warden
or any person or persons in the performance of the duties imposed upon
them under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of $50 for each offense.
§ 26-21. Muzzling vicious dogs required; penalty. 46 [Amended
5-7-1996 by Ord. No. 2758-96]
§ 26-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-6-1991 by Ord. No.
2610-91; 5-7-1996 by Ord. No. 2758-96]
Any person found guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter other
than those contained in §§ 26-20 and 26-21 herein shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine as listed below, except that, when a person is found
guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter other than those contained
in §§ 26-20 and 26-21 herein and the involved dog has bitten a person or
persons within three days of the violation, the person shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine as listed below in § 26-22C and D respectively:
§ 26-23. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 54, entitled "An Ordinance to Provide a Public Pound Within
the Borough of Rutherford and the Appointment of a Poundmaster
Therefor," adopted on June 17, 1889, and Ordinance No. 1389, entitled
A. No vicious dog shall be permitted to leave the premises of the person
who owns or harbors it unless securely muzzled as well as held by a
leash. Any person who shall suffer or permit any such vicious dog,
owned, kept or harbored by him, to go upon the streets or any public
place in the Borough of Rutherford or upon any premises other than
those owned by the person owning or harboring said dog, unless said
dog shall be securely muzzled and held by a leash, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of $40 for the first offense.
B. Any person who shall suffer or permit any such vicious dog owned, kept
or harbored by him to go upon the streets or any public place in the
Borough of Rutherford or upon any premises other than those owned by
the person owning or harboring said dog, unless said dog shall be
securely muzzled and held by a leash, shall, upon conviction, be subject
to a fine of $100 for the second and each subsequent offense.
A. For the first offense, a fine of $35.
B. For the second and subsequent offense, a fine of $50.
C. For the first offense, a fine of $75.
D. For the second and each subsequent offense, a fine of $250.
46.Editor's Note: For additional muzzling provisions, see Ch. 89, Sanitary Code, § 89-11.
§ 26-20 DOGS, PETS, ANIMALS AND KENNELS § 26-23
26:125
"An Ordinance to Provide for the Licensing and Regulating of Dogs in the
Borough of Rutherford," adopted March 16, 1937, be and they are hereby
repealed.
§ 26-24. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held to be unconstitutional, the decision of the court
respecting such provision or provisions shall not affect the validity of any
other provisions which can be given effect without such invalid provision or
provisions.
Chapter 27
DONATION CLOTHING BINS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solicitations for charitable purposes — See
Ch. 104.
Solicitors, peddlers and canvassers — See Ch.
105
§ 27-1. Requirements.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person shall
place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin, for solicitation purposes,
unless all of the following requirements are met:
A. The person has obtained a permit, valid for a specified period of time,
from the appropriate municipal agency within the municipality in which
the donation clothing bin will be placed, in accordance with the
following:
(1) In applying for such a permit, the person shall include:
(a) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible;
(b) The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent;
(c) The name, and telephone number of the bona fide office,
required pursuant to Subsection B of this section, of any entity
which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin;
(d) Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on
his property;
§ 26-23 RUTHERFORD CODE § 27-1
26:126
(e) A statement that the applicant indemnifies and holds the
Borough of Rutherford harmless for any liability arising from
the deployment, placement, use, and maintenance of the
clothing bin(s). The statement shall contain the following
language:
The applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms
or corporations on whose behalf the application is made,
represent, stipulate, contract, and agree that they do jointly
and severally defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the
Borough of Rutherford against liability for any and all claims
for damage to property or injury to or death of persons arising
out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the
control, maintenance, or ownership of the clothing bin(s)
permitted.
(2) The appropriate municipal agency shall not grant an application for
a permit to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin if it
determines that the placement of the bin could constitute a safety
hazard. Such hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the
placement of a donation clothing bin within 100 yards of any place
which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable
liquids or gases;
(3) The appropriate municipal agency may impose a fee for such
application, not to exceed $25, to offset the costs involved in
enforcing P.L.2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.);
(4) An expiring permit for a donation clothing bin may be renewed
upon application for renewal and payment of any fee imposed by
the appropriate municipal agency for such renewal, not to exceed
$25 annually, to offset the costs involved in enforcing P.L.2007, c.
209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.). Such application shall include:
(a) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible;
(b) The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent;
(c) The name, and telephone number of the bona fide office
required pursuant to Subsection B of this section, of any entity
which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin;
(d) Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on
his property;
(e) A statement that the applicant indemnifies and holds the
Borough of Rutherford harmless for any liability arising from
§ 27-1 DOGS, PETS, ANIMALS AND KENNELS § 27-1
26:127
the deployment, placement, use, and maintenance of the
clothing bin(s). The statement shall contain the following
language:
The applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms
or corporations on whose behalf the application is made,
represent, stipulate, contract, and agree that they do jointly
and severally defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the
Borough of Rutherford against liability for any and all claims
for damage to property or injury to or death of persons arising
out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the
control, maintenance, or ownership of the clothing bin(s)
permitted.
(5) The permit number and its date of expiration shall be clearly and
conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation clothing
bin, in addition to the information required pursuant to Subsection
C of this section.
B. The person, and any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, maintains a bona fide
office where a representative of the person or other entity, respectively,
can be reached at a telephone information line during normal business
hours for the purpose of offering information concerning the person or
other entity. For the purposes of this subsection, an answering machine
or service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office;
and
C. The following information is clearly and conspicuously displayed on the
exterior of the donation clothing bin:
(1) The name and address of the registered person that owns the bin,
and of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin;
(2) The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office or any
other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
(3) In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable
manner, indicating that clothing or other donations collected via
the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given entirely to,
an entity other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying
all such entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
(4) A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
appropriate municipal agency in the most recent permit or renewal
application pursuant to Subsection A(1)(b) and 4(b) of this section,
indicating the manner in which the person anticipates any clothing
§ 27-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 27-1
26:128
§ 27-2. Complaints from public.
§ 27-3. Building Department designated as appropriate municipal
agency.
The Building Department is designated as the appropriate municipal agency
for purpose of this chapter.
§ 27-4. Number of bins permitted.
No more than four clothing bins (total) shall be permitted in the Borough at
any time.
§ 27-5. Denial of permit; amended application.
The Building Department may deny a permit application under this chapter
if the placement of the clothing bin would have a detrimental effect on
the health, safety, and welfare of Borough residents, including for aesthetic
reasons; provided, however, that the Building Department shall allow the
applicant to amend the application to cure any issue for which the permit
might otherwise be denied.
or other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent.
A. The appropriate municipal agency within the municipality in which a
donation clothing bin has been placed shall receive and investigate,
within 30 days, any complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever
it appears to the appropriate municipal agency that a person has
engaged in, or is engaging in, any act or practice in violation of Section
2 of P.L.2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61), the person who placed the
bin shall be issued a warning, stating that if the violation is not rectified
or a hearing with the appropriate municipal agency is not requested
within 45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at the expense of the
person who placed the bin, and any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin will be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed
of. In addition to any other means used to notify the person who placed
the bin, such warning shall be affixed to the exterior of the bin itself.
B. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, the appropriate municipal agency may seize the bin, remove
it, or have it removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin,
and sell at public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the
donations collected via the bin shall be paid to the chief financial officer
of the municipality.
§ 27-1 DOGS, PETS, ANIMALS AND KENNELS § 27-6
26:129
§ 27-6. Duration of permit; renewal
A permit granted under this chapter shall expire one year from issuance;
renewal shall thereafter be required, as set forth in this chapter.
§ 27-7. Permit fee.
The fee for both an initial application under this chapter and for renewal is
$25.
§ 27-8. Location fee.
For clothing bins placed on municipal property, the municipality may impose
a location fee of up to $1,250 per bin per year, in addition to the permit fee,
to be negotiated in a separate agreement and subject to the Local Public
Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1, et seq., where required.
Chapter 28
DRY CLEANING AND LAUNDRY MACHINES, COIN-OPERATED
§ 28-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes an individual, any combination of individuals or a
corporation.
§ 28-2. Hours of operation.
No establishment maintaining and operating coin-operated dry-cleaning
machines or coin-operated laundry machines shall be open for the conduct
of business on any day of the week other than between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m., prevailing time.
§ 28-3. Attendant required for dry-cleaning machines.
Each person who is the owner, operator or manager of an establishment
maintaining and operating for hire coin-operated dry-cleaning machines
shall provide an attendant who is familiar with the operation of such
machines and who shall be in attendance at all times when such machines
are made available for hire.
§ 28-4. Attendant required for laundry machines; hours.
Each person who is the owner, operator or manager of an establishment
maintaining and operating for hire coin-operated laundry machines shall
provide an attendant who is familiar with the operation of such machines
and who shall be in attendance between 6:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m.,
§ 27-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 28-4
28:130
prevailing time, of each and every day when such machines are made
available for hire.
§ 28-5. Age of operators restricted.
Each person who is the owner, operator or manager of an establishment
maintaining and operating for hire coin-operated dry-cleaning machines
shall prevent the operation of such machines by a person who has not
reached his or her 17th birthday.
§ 28-6. Requirements for premises.
Each person who is the owner, operator or manager of an establishment
maintaining and operating for hire coin-operated dry-cleaning machines
or coin-operated laundry machines shall comply with the following
requirements:
§ 28-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not exceeding $200 or to imprisonment in the county jail for a
period not exceeding 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the Judge. Each
day that the terms of this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
§ 28-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately after publication according to
law.
Chapter 29
(RESERVED)
Chapter 31
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative offices — See Ch. 4.
Personnel policies and practices — See Ch.
70.
Salary schedules — See Ch. 87.
A. Provide interior lighting so that all areas of the establishments are
visible from the outside thereof.
B. Provide a telephone to be located in the establishment.
§ 28-4 (RESERVED) § 31-1
29:131
§ 31-1. Findings of fact.
All representatives of the Borough of Rutherford occupy positions of public
trust and must discharge their duties in the sole interest of the public for
whom they act and to whom they are accountable.
§ 31-2. Legislative intent.
It is the intent of this chapter to establish a set of guidelines and procedures
for public officers and employees which will serve the individuals affected
and the citizens of the Borough of Rutherford by helping to ensure that such
officers and employees, neither deliberately nor inadvertently, will deviate
from their public duties because of any financial or personal conflicting
interest. Actual, potential and apparent conflicts of interest are all within
the intention of this legislation, and public officers and employees must be
as rigorous in operating free of apparent conflicts as of real conflicts. Only
thus may true confidence be earned and maintained.
§ 31-3. Interpretation and enforcement of provisions.
It is not the purpose of this chapter to create universal suspicion, and
thereby universal distrust, for the activities of public officers and
employees. Not every remote interest requires a public officer or employee
to disqualify himself from acting with respect to a particular situation.
Where doubt exists, disclosure should be made so that advice of counsel or
of the Mayor and Council may be obtained. A sense of balance consonant
with the beneficial public purposes sought to be achieved is needed in the
interpretation and enforcement of the legislation.
§ 31-4. Application of provisions.
This chapter shall apply to all public officers and employees of the Borough
of Rutherford except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the State
of New Jersey.
§ 31-5. Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context otherwise provides, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
EMPLOYEE — All persons who are not public officers, who are employed on
a full-time, part-time or contract basis by the Borough of Rutherford.
PUBLIC OFFICER — All elected and appointed representatives of the
Borough of Rutherford, including all members of boards or commissioners
as established by ordinance, resolution or statute, except as may be
otherwise provided for by the statutes of the State of New Jersey. This code
does not include the Board of Education or employees thereof.
RELATIVE — The spouse, children, sibling or any relative of such person by
blood or marriage in the first degree of kinship.
§ 31-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 31-5
31:132
SUBSTANTIAL INTEREST — Any employment, investment or other
association or activity which yields or may yield, directly or indirectly, a
monetary or other material benefit, or any personal interest arising from
blood or marriage relationships or from close business or personal
association, whether or not any financial interest is involved.
§ 31-6. Conflicts of interest.47
§ 31-7. Disclosure of confidential information.
No public officer or employee shall, without proper legal authorization,
disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or
affairs of the Borough of Rutherford to any other person, nor shall he use
such information to advance his financial or other private interests of his
own or his relatives.
§ 31-8. Acceptance of gifts.
No public officer or employee shall knowingly accept any gift or gratuity,
whether in the form of service, loan or promise, or in any other form,
from any person, firm or corporation which to his knowledge is interested,
directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings in or
with the Borough of Rutherford; nor shall any official or employee accept
from any person, firm or corporation any such gift or gratuity which may
tend to influence him in the discharge of his duties.
A. Any public officer or employee of the Borough of Rutherford who has a
substantial interest in any contract, sale, purchase or service to the
Borough of Rutherford or a contract supplying the Borough of
Rutherford shall make known that interest in the official record of the
Borough of Rutherford and shall refrain from voting upon or otherwise
participating in any manner as an officer or employee in such contract,
sale or purchase.
B. Any public officer or employee who has a substantial interest in any
decision of, or matter under review by any board, administrative
official, commission or legislative or administrative body of which he is
a member or to which he makes recommendations, shall make known
such interest in the official records of such body and shall refrain from
participating in any manner as an officer or employee in such decision
or matter under review.
C. No public officer or employee shall knowingly engage in any business or
transaction, accept private employment, or have any financial or other
personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the
proper discharge of his official duties in the public interest or would
tend to impair his independence of judgment or actions in the
performance of his official duties.
47.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 51, § 51-26.
§ 31-5 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-9
31:133
§ 31-9. Request for or use of special considerations, favors,
equipment or services.
§ 31-10. Procedure for making charge against violator; hearing;
decision.
A. No public officer or employee shall request, use or permit the use of any
consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the
general practice to grant or make available to the public at large.
B. No public officer or employee shall request, use or permit the use of any
publicly owned property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor or service
for the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or any
other person, except if such use is in the conduct of official business of
the borough.
C. The prohibitions enumerated in Subsections A and B above do not
prohibit the Borough Council, its boards or commissions, acting in their
official capacity, from granting special consideration, treatment,
advantage, favor or use of public property to selected individuals or
groups of individuals where it is in the public interest to grant such
special privileges.
A. Hearing.
(1) In the event that any official or employee of the borough does not
comply with the standards as set forth in this chapter, a charge may
be instituted by the Borough Council or any individual when he has
knowledge or information indicating that a violation exists. Such
charge or charges shall be in writing under oath and shall be
signed by the person making the charge and shall contain a clear
and concise statement of the facts alleged to constitute such
violation.
(2) The Borough Council shall then hold an informal hearing no later
than 15 days after the charge in order to determine if a formal
hearing is necessary. At the informal hearing a majority vote by the
Council is sufficient to justify a formal hearing on the charge.
(3) In the event that a formal hearing is necessary, the governing body
shall promptly set a date for such formal hearing of the charges and
shall serve a copy of the charges on the accused and shall advise
him in writing of the date and place of such hearing at least 10 days
prior to such hearing. Such hearing shall not be public unless
requested by the accused official.
(4) At such hearing, charges shall be presented and evidence in
support thereof shall be received and the accused shall be offered
an opportunity either personally or by counsel, to cross-examine
the accusor and to present evidence on his own behalf. In the event
that the accused shall be a member of the governing body, said
§ 31-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 31-10
31:134
§ 31-11. Penalties.
In the event the Borough Council shall make a determination that the
conduct of any official was improper, the governing body, based upon the
written findings, conclusions and determinations, may institute appropriate
action for public censure, or it may suspend or remove the official from
office by such procedure as may be provided by law to effectuate the
purposes of this chapter.
§ 31-12. Libel and slander.
Any person filing charges shall not be exempt from the libel and slander
laws of the State of New Jersey by reason of his filing thereof, nor shall any
of said charges filed by an individual be considered as privileged under the
libel and slander laws of the State of New Jersey. This information should
be provided when the written charges are first presented to the Borough
Clerk.
§ 31-13. Actions taken by state.
In the event that any action complained of has been approved by or has
been taken pursuant to a state statute or local ordinance, or if said action
has been approved by the courts of the State of New Jersey, then no charges
of possible violation of this chapter shall be brought against any official or
employee of the borough.
§ 31-14. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter are hereby repealed as to such inconsistency.
§ 31-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication in the
manner provided by law.
accused shall not take any part in the deliberations with respect to
the formal hearing or determination thereof.
B. Decision. As soon as practicable after conclusion of the formal hearing,
but not later than 30 days, the governing body shall render a written
decision on the charges and shall mail a copy thereof to the accused and
file a copy with the Borough Clerk. In order to find the accused in
violation of the ordinance, a unanimous decision is necessary or the
charge will be dismissed.
C. Opinion. Upon the request of any official concerned, the Borough
Council shall render an advisory opinion which will also be filed with
the Borough Clerk. The Borough Council may, in its discretion, delete
the name of the official requesting such advisory opinion.
§ 31-10 ETHICS, CODE OF § 31-15
31:135
Chapter 31A
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative offices — See Ch. 4. Purchasing — See Ch. 81.
§ 31A-1. Establishment.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford, deeming it necessary
for the proper and efficient conduct of the affairs of the municipality, and
particularly to create a system of operations and procedures in the areas of
finance and purchasing, do, pursuant to the revised statutes of the State of
New Jersey, hereby establish and create a Finance Department.
§ 31A-2. Composition.
The Finance Department shall consist of the Chief Financial Officer and
such other employees as may be determined by the Mayor and Council.
§ 31A-3. Responsibilities of Chief Financial Officer. [Amended
3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 2928-00]
The Chief Financial Officer shall be the executive officer of the Finance
Department, subject to such rules, regulations and orders as may be
prescribed by the Mayor and Council, and shall be responsible for the
proper financial and fiscal administration of the borough, the supervision
of personnel in the Finance Department and such other duties as may
be designated by the Mayor and Council. Such person shall keep and
maintain the books and records of all financial transactions of the borough
in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Division of Local
Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs of the State
of New Jersey. Such Chief Financial Officer shall also disperse funds in
payment of bills.
Chapter 32
FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND CRIMINAL HISTORY
RECORD CHECKS
§ 32-1. Application.
The application for a fingerprint identification and criminal history record
check shall be submitted, in the form and number of copies thereof as
required by the State Bureau of Identification, Box 7068, West Trenton,
New Jersey 08628-0068, to the Chief of Police or his designated agent, who
§ 31-15 RUTHERFORD CODE § 32-1
31A:136
shall process the application in the manner required by law and the rules
and regulations of the State Bureau of Identification.
§ 32-2. Eligibility.
Persons employed or applying for employment within the boundaries of
the Borough of Rutherford in the following occupations may apply for and
obtain a fingerprint identification and criminal history record check:
§ 32-3. List of applications required.
The Rutherford Police Department shall keep an accurate list of all
applications processed pursuant to this chapter in a book for that purpose.
§ 32-4. Fees.49
A fee of $25 shall be imposed for the taking of fingerprints and the issuance
of the fingerprint and criminal history check application. An additional fee
shall be charged at the rate permitted by State of New Jersey law at the time
said request is made for the purpose of processing fingerprint identification
and criminal history record checks with the State Bureau of Identification.
Members of or applicants for membership to the Rutherford Volunteer
Ambulance Corps shall not be charged a fee for obtaining fingerprint
identification and criminal record checks.
§ 32-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not exceeding $200.
§ 32-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
Chapter 33
A. Nursery school personnel.
B. Child day-care personnel.
C. Home care nurses.
D. Unlicensed medical services home care personnel.
E. Home cleaning service personnel.
F. Rutherford Volunteer Ambulance Corps members.48
48.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 55, Massage and Somatic Therapies, § 55-3D; Ch. 105,
Solicitors, Peddlers and Canvassers, § 105-4; and Ch. 117, Towing, § 117-5A.
49.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 76, Police Department, §§ 76-27 and 76-30.
§ 32-1 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 32-6
32:137
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm equipment installation — See Ch. 6.
Fire safety — See Ch. 34A.
Length of service award program — See Ch.
51A.
Maintenance and disposition of municipal
materials — See Ch. 61, Art. I.
Payment of pensions to dependents of
volunteer fire fighters — See Ch. 67.
Interference with Fire Department
equipment — See Ch. 68.
§ 32-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 32-6
32:138
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 33-1. Companies.
§ 33-2. Membership in Fire Department.
Membership in the Borough of Rutherford Volunteer Fire Department shall
be in accordance with this chapter, the document entitled "Rutherford Fire
Department Fire fighter/Fire Officer Qualifications and Duties," and the
constitution, rules and bylaws of the company to which application is made,
including any amendments to those documents. Membership shall be open
to all persons who are able to perform fire fighter duties and to meet the
criteria set forth in this chapter, without discrimination on the basis of an
applicant's race, creed, color, sex, age, national origin, ancestry, marital
status, or physical handicap.
§ 33-3. Effect of ordinance; compliance with federal and state
statutes.
A. The Volunteer Fire Department of the Borough of Rutherford shall
consist of five companies. The companies are known and designated as
the following:
(1) Union Truck and Bucket Company Number 1;
(2) Rutherford Fire Engine Company Number Two;
(3) West End Engine and Hose Company Number 3, Inc.;
(4) Rutherford Engine Company Number 4; and
(5) Rutherford Fire/Rescue Company Number 5, Inc.
B. Each company shall consist of not more than 17 active members, except
as provided in the section authorizing military leave of absence
replacements and excepting special duty fire fighters assigned to a
company.
C. The Mayor and Council may, at any time, consolidate or dissolve any
company if there is a failure to perform duties or functions. The Mayor
and Council may, at any time, with the recommendation of the
Rutherford Fire Department Officer's Association, authorize the
organization of additional fire companies, consolidate two or more
companies, or dissolve any company. Notice shall be given to the
affected company before consolidation or dissolution occurs, and shall
require public hearing and amendment of this chapter before effect
shall be given to the consolidation or dissolution.
A. In the event of any inconsistency between the provisions of this chapter
and any other document related to the Borough of Rutherford Fire
§ 33-1 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 33-3
32:139
§ 33-4. Review, amendment, and approval of Rutherford Fire
Department Fire fighter/Fire Officer Qualifications and Duties.
The document entitled "Rutherford Fire Department Fire fighter/Fire
Officer Qualifications and Duties" shall be required to be reviewed every
five years by the Rutherford Fire Department Officers' Association. The
Officers' Association shall recommend amendments when necessary to the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford. The Mayor and Council
shall adopt any amendments by resolution. If no amendments are sought,
the Chief shall prepare a report to the Mayor and Council indicating that
the review has been conducted and that the Officers' Association finds that
no amendments are necessary.
§ 33-5. Company constitution, rules and bylaws.
The government and management of the different fire companies shall
be according to such constitution, rules and bylaws as shall be adopted
by them. Such company documents shall not be inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter, the document entitled "Rutherford Fire
Department Fire fighter/Fire Officer Qualifications and Duties," other
Rutherford Fire Department standard operating procedures, policies, and
guidelines, and such reasonable rules and regulations for the efficiency of
the Fire Department as may be adopted from time to time by the Mayor and
Council.
§ 33-6. Requirements for admission to membership.
Department and/or its individual companies, this chapter shall take
precedence and govern over such other inconsistent document.
B. The Fire Department and each company and member therein shall
comply with all applicable federal and state guidelines, rules and
regulations governing the operation of the Fire Department and the
deployment of personnel and equipment.
A. No person shall become a member of the Fire Department of the
Borough of Rutherford or any of the companies thereof unless the
applicant meets the following criteria:
(1) Completes the application process, including revelation of any
criminal history within or without the State of New Jersey,
authorization to obtain criminal record history, authorization to
obtain driving record abstract, and fingerprinting by the Borough
of Rutherford Police Department;
(2) Is at least 18 years of age;
(3) Is a citizen of the United States or is actively seeking citizenship in
the United States and produces evidence of same;
(4) Is able to read, write and speak the English language;
§ 33-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 33-6
32:140
§ 33-7. Application for membership and procedure; auxiliary
member; regular member.
(5) Holds a valid New Jersey driver's license;
(6) Has resided within the Borough for at least 90 continuous days
before the date of his or her application;
(7) Is physically fit and able to perform the duties of a fire fighter,
submits to a medical examination by a physician on behalf of the
Borough (to be paid for by the Borough), and produces evidence in
the form of a medical certificate signed by the physician allowing
fire fighter service;
(8) Is of good moral character;
(9) Has not been convicted of any crime of the first, second, third or
fourth degree or any felony or indictable level charge, regardless of
whether or not the conviction has been expunged;
(10) Has not been convicted of any criminal or quasi-criminal offense
that relates directly to fires, setting of fires, false fire alarms, false
public alarms, or the like, regardless of whether or not the
conviction has been expunged; and
(11) Has not been convicted of any criminal or quasi-criminal offense
that is less than 10 years old and that touches upon the applicant's
ability to properly and adequately serve as a member of the Fire
Department, regardless of whether or not the conviction has been
expunged.
A. The application procedures are as follows:
(1) Every person seeking to join the Fire Department or any of the
companies thereof shall make application to the Fire Department
on forms to be provided by the Fire Department. The applications
are available in the office of the Borough Clerk. Completed
applications shall be returned to the office of the Borough Clerk,
who shall date/time stamp each such application. Applications that
are complete shall be considered in the order in which they are
received.
(2) A Membership Committee comprised of the Chief and the Deputy
Chief and the Assistant Chiefs shall be responsible for evaluating
and ruling upon applications for membership. The Committee,
within 30 days of receipt of a complete application and the driving
abstract, fingerprint identification and criminal history record
check from the Police Department, shall make an initial
determination as to whether or not the applicant qualifies for
auxiliary membership, and shall so advise the company.
B. Auxiliary member procedure.
§ 33-6 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 33-7
32:141
(1) If the application is approved by the Membership Committee and
the company, the applicant shall become and be considered an
auxiliary member of the Fire Department of the Borough of
Rutherford, and notice of same shall be given by the Company
Secretary to the Mayor and Council. The applicant shall serve as an
auxiliary member for at least six months from the date of approval,
during which time the auxiliary member shall undertake
appropriate training and begin the Firefighter One Course, the
Bloodborne Pathogen Course, the Right-to-Know Training Course
and any other required mandatory training, and during which time
the evaluation process shall be continued by the Membership
Committee and by the company. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord.
No. 3064-04]
(2) At the end of the auxiliary period, if the applicant continues to meet
the qualifications for membership set forth in this chapter and has
passed the evaluation period successfully, the Membership
Committee shall report to the company that the auxiliary member
qualifies for regular membership in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and is thus eligible for election by members of the
company.
(3) The applicant shall thereafter be considered for election by the
company. If elected, the applicant shall become a regular member
on probation of the Fire Department of the Borough of Rutherford.
C. Regular member.
(1) After election by the company, the company Secretary shall submit
the probationary member's name to the Mayor and Council for
approval as a regular member of the Rutherford Fire Department.
(2) Thereafter, the Mayor and Council shall proceed to consider and to
approve or disapprove the proposed member. If the Mayor and
Council approve, the name of the person so approved shall be
properly recorded and a certificate shall be issued to the member
stating that the person is a duly qualified fire fighter of the Borough
of Rutherford and a member of the company named therein, said
certificate to be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Borough
Clerk.
(3) The applicant shall remain as a member on probation for a period
of one year from the date of election by the company, which period
may be shortened or lengthened on majority vote of the five Fire
Chiefs. The member on probation must obtain fire-fighting training
and complete and obtain certificates for the Firefighter One
Course, the Bloodborne Pathogen Course, the Right-to-Know
Training Course and any other required mandatory training, within
the probation period. The member on probation must continue to
meet all of the qualifications for membership as set forth this
chapter. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3064-04]
§ 33-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 33-8
32:142
§ 33-8. Requirements for continued membership.
§ 33-9. Additional conditions of continued membership.
A. All members must meet all of the requirements for continued
membership as set forth in this chapter, including the following:
(1) Shall reside within the Borough of Rutherford or within two miles
of the limits of the Borough; [Amended 4-8-2014 by Ord. No.
3322-14]
(2) Shall hold a valid New Jersey driver's license;
(3) Shall be able to perform the duties of a fire fighter;
(4) Shall be of good moral character;
(5) Shall not be convicted of any crime of the first, second, third, or
fourth degree or any felony or indictable level charge;
(6) Shall not be convicted of any criminal or quasi-criminal offense that
relates directly to fires, setting of fires, false fire alarms, false
public alarms, or the like;
(7) Shall not be convicted of any criminal or quasi-criminal offense
touching upon the member's ability to properly and adequately
serve as a member of the Fire Department;
(8) Shall conduct him or herself at all times with proper accord and
dignity, and shall not undertake any action that is unbecoming to a
member or officer of the Rutherford Fire Department;
(9) Shall undertake and complete any required mandatory training
courses, including the Bloodborne Pathogen Course, the Right-to-
Know Training Course and any other required mandatory training,
within the time set forth by the Rutherford Officer's Association;
[Added 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3064-0450]
(10) Shall meet all of the requirements for continued membership as set
forth in the document entitled "Rutherford Fire Department Fire
fighter/Fire Officer Qualifications and Duties" and in Fire
Department standard operating procedures and guidelines; and
(11) Shall meet all of the requirements for continued membership as set
forth in the company constitution, bylaws, and rules and
regulations.
A. All members must meet all of the following additional conditions for
continued membership:
50.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections
A(9) and (10) as Subsection A(10) and (11), respectively.
§ 33-8 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 33-9
32:143
§ 33-10. Suspension or termination of membership.
(1) It shall be the duty of each member to advise his or her company
officer if he or she is arrested at any time. Such notification shall be
required within three days of the arrest. The company officer shall
thereafter immediately advise the Chief of the Department.
(2) It shall be the duty of each member to advise his or her company
officer if any criminal or quasi-criminal charges or offenses,
including domestic violence charges, are filed against him or her at
any time. Such notification shall be required within three days of
the charges being filed. The company officer shall thereafter
immediately advise the Chief of the Department.
(3) It shall be the duty of each member to advise his or her company
officer if his or her driving privileges have been suspended or
revoked at any time. Such notification shall be required within
three days of the suspension or revocation. The company officer
shall thereafter immediately advise the Chief of the Department.
(4) If at any time any member shall become ineligible for or fail to
continue to meet the qualifications of membership, it shall be the
responsibility of the member to so advise his or her company
officer. The company officer shall immediately advise the Chief of
the Department.
(5) Criminal record and fingerprint check.
(a) Each member of every company shall submit to and authorize
criminal record and fingerprint checks once every five years.
This shall be accomplished by requiring each company to
comply in a particular year on the following schedule: 2002 -
Union Truck and Bucket Company Number 1; 2003 -
Rutherford Fire Engine Company Number Two; 2004 - West
End Engine and Hose Company Number 3, Inc.; 2005 -
Rutherford Engine Company Number 4; 2006 - Rutherford
Fire/Rescue Company Number 5, Inc.; and thereafter on a
cyclical basis.
(b) All members of the particular company shall be required to
report to their company officer and submit all necessary
authorization to accomplish the criminal record and fingerprint
checks by no later than February 15 of each year. Failure to do
so shall be reported by the company officer to the Chief of the
Fire Department.
(6) Each member shall authorize a check of his or her driving abstract
on an annual basis.
A. The Chief of the Fire Department or the Mayor may suspend any
member or employee of the Fire Department from active duty pending
the resolution of charges against the member. Such suspension may
§ 33-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 33-10
32:144
occur for an alleged violation of this chapter or an alleged violation
of any other law or Borough ordinance of a criminal or quasi-criminal
nature.
B. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to suspend any member for a
period not to exceed 90 days for failure to comply with the
requirements of continued membership set forth in this chapter. The
affected member shall have the right to appeal such suspension to the
Mayor and Council.
C. The following shall apply in the situations addressed:
(1) Arrest of and filing of charges against any member for a crime of
the first, second, third, or fourth degree, or for any felony or
indictable level charge, or any offense that relates directly to fires,
setting of fires, false fire alarms, false public alarms, or the like,
shall require mandatory immediate suspension until the criminal
charges are resolved. No hearing shall be required for this
suspension.
(2) Conviction of any member for a crime of the first, second, third, or
fourth degree, or for any felony or indictable level charge, or any
offense that relates directly to fires, setting of fires, false fire
alarms, false public alarms, or the like shall result in immediate
permanent termination of the membership. No hearing shall be
required for this termination.
(3) Arrest of and filing of charges for a criminal or quasi-criminal
offense, including domestic violence charges, may result in
immediate temporary suspension pending a hearing before the
Mayor and Council.
(4) Conviction of any member for a criminal or quasi-criminal offense,
including domestic violence charges, may result in issuance of a
reprimand, suspension, reduction in rank or termination of
membership, such punishment to be determined in a hearing
before the Mayor and Council.
(5) Any termination of a member shall require forfeiture of any and all
rights and privileges accruing from membership, with the
exception of LOSAP benefits accrued as of the date of termination.
If state law prohibits forfeiture of those LOSAP benefits, same shall
not be lost to a terminated member.
(6) All criminal or quasi-criminal events involving a member shall
require the Chief of the Fire Department to file a confidential
report to the Mayor and Council at the time of the events, which
report shall also be served upon the member so charged. The
report shall detail the events and criminal charges, and shall
contain the Chief's recommendations for discipline, if any, of the
member, and shall detail any important factors which should be
§ 33-10 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 33-10
32:145
considered by the Mayor and Council, including the member's
service record and prior violations, if any.
(7) At any time when a hearing is required, either to determine
temporary or permanent discipline, the Mayor and Council hold a
hearing within 45 days or within such time as is reasonable under
the circumstances. The Mayor and Council shall advise the affected
member and the Fire Chief of the date and time of the hearing to be
conducted and shall afford the member an opportunity to be heard
and to present evidence and shall consider such other evidence or
testimony proffered. Such hearing shall be conducted in closed
session unless the affected member requests in writing that it be
held in public pursuant to N.J.S.A. 10:4-12b(8). Thereafter, the
Mayor and Council shall deliberate in closed session as provided
under N.J.S.A. 10:4-12b(9), and a decision shall be issued and made
public and served upon the member so affected and the Chief of the
Fire Department.
D. Any other charges or alleged violations shall be dealt with according to
the individual company's constitution, bylaws, and rules and
regulations, but the following minimum requirements shall apply:
(1) Charges shall be in writing and served upon the member. The
charges shall contain such specificity as to advise the member of
the nature of the charges and nature of the proofs against him or
her, and shall cite the ordinance, fire department regulation, bylaw
or constitution, or other law or ordinance alleged to have been
violated.
(2) A hearing before the company membership shall be held and the
affected member shall have the opportunity to be heard and to
present evidence, and the membership shall consider such other
testimony and evidence proffered.
(3) A vote of the company membership shall be required after the
hearing.
(4) A decision shall be issued after the vote and the member advised of
the decision.
(5) There shall be no right of appeal where the disposition is dismissal
of charges, issuance of a reprimand, or suspension for 30 days or
less.
(6) For all other dispositions, the member shall have a right to appeal
to the five Fire Chiefs, who shall either hold a hearing or issue a
decision approving the vote and decision of the company
membership, such option to be determined by majority vote of the
Chiefs.
(7) The member shall have a right to appeal the decision of the Fire
Chiefs to the Mayor and Council within seven days of the date of
§ 33-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 33-10
32:146
§ 33-11. Election of Chief, Deputy Chief, and Assistant Chiefs;
eligibility of members for election to those offices.
the decision, by filing a written request for an appeal. The Mayor
and Council shall hold a hearing within 30 days of the date of
the written appeal or within such time as is reasonable under the
circumstances. The Mayor and Council shall advise the affected
member and the Fire Chief of the date and time of the hearing to be
conducted, and shall afford the member an opportunity to be heard
and to present evidence, and shall consider such other evidence
or testimony proffered. Such hearing shall be conducted in closed
session unless the affected member requests in writing that it
be held in public pursuant to N.J.S.A. 10:4-12b(8). Thereafter, the
Mayor and Council shall deliberate in closed session as provided
under N.J.S.A. 10:4-12b(9), and a decision shall be issued and made
public and served upon the member so affected and the Chief of the
Fire Department.
A. The Chief of the Rutherford Fire Department, the Deputy Chief, the
First Assistant Chief, the Second Assistant Chief and the Third Assistant
Chief shall each be elected by a majority vote of the members of the
Fire Department present and voting, for terms of one year commencing
on the first Saturday on or after January 1st of every year. [Amended
12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3064-04]
B. No two of the above offices shall be filled by members from any one
company. Members seeking to be elected to these offices shall be
required to meet all of the qualifications set forth in this chapter and
the document entitled "Rutherford Fire Department Fire fighter/Fire
Officer Qualifications and Duties."
C. At least five days before the date set for the elections, each company
shall provide both the Mayor and Council and the Officers' Association
with documentation showing proof of eligibility of members for election
to the offices of Chief, Deputy Chief, and Assistant Chief.
D. The election of the above-stated offices shall take place on the third
Saturday in November of each year, with the exception of the year 2014
during which year the annual election shall be held on November 8,
2014. Notice stating the time and place of the election shall be given to
each company by the Borough Clerk at least 30 days before the holding
of the election. The polls at the elections shall remain open for at least
one hour. Individual balloting shall prevail. Only members in good
standing shall be eligible to vote. [Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No.
3031-03; 6-25-2014 by Ord. No. 3331-14]
E. If a contested election or a failure to elect a Chief, Deputy Chief, or
Assistant Chief occurs, another election shall be required to be held no
sooner than 10 days following the fourth Monday in November. Notice
stating the date, time and place for the election shall be given to each
company by the Borough Clerk as soon as practicable after the
§ 33-10 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 33-11
32:147
§ 33-12. Vacancy in Office of Chief, Deputy Chief, or Assistant Chief.
§ 33-13. Election of Captains, Lieutenants, Engineers and Assistant
Engineer; eligibility of members for those offices. [Amended
12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3064-04]
contested election occurs. All other provisions of this chapter shall
apply in the new election(s).
F. Each Chief shall be a member in good standing at all times to continue
to hold office.
A. In the event of a vacancy in any of the offices of Chief, Deputy Chief, or
Assistant Chief, the Officers' Association shall make a recommendation
to the Mayor and Council as to the necessity for filling the open
position. If the Officers' Association recommends that the position be
filled, it shall also recommend a member to hold the position for the
unexpired term of the vacant office. Whenever possible, the
recommended member shall be from the company of the vacating
officer. Such member must meet the qualifications set forth in this
chapter and in the document entitled "Rutherford Fire Department Fire
fighter/Fire Officer Qualifications and Duties."
B. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, may appoint the
recommended member to fill the unexpired term of the vacated office.
A. It shall be the duty of each company to elect from its members a
Captain, a Lieutenant and an Engineer. In addition to those positions,
Fire Engine Company Number 2 shall also elect an Assistant Engineer
for the purpose of providing maintenance for the Special Services Unit.
The elections shall be run in accordance with each company's
constitution and bylaws, but shall not be inconsistent with this chapter.
Only members in good standing shall be eligible to vote.
B. The holding of the elections for Captains, Lieutenants, Engineers and
Assistant Engineer shall be as follows:
(1) Rutherford Engine Company Number 4 on the first Monday of
November of each year;
(2) Union Truck and Bucket Company Number 1 on the first Tuesday of
November of each year;
(3) West End Engine and Hose Company Number 3, Inc., on the first
Thursday of November of each year;
(4) Rutherford Fire Engine Company Number 2 on the first Friday of
November of each year;
(5) Rutherford Fire/Rescue Company Number 5, Inc., on the first
Friday in November of each year.
§ 33-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 33-13
32:148
§ 33-14. Duties and powers of Chief; chain of command.
§ 33-15. Officers' Association.
§ 33-16. Transfers of members between companies.
C. The term for each Captain, Lieutenant, Engineer and Assistant
Engineer shall be for one year commencing on the first Saturday on or
after January 1st of each year.
D. Members seeking to be elected to these offices shall be required to
meet all of the qualifications set forth in this chapter and in the
document entitled "Rutherford Fire Department Fire fighter/Fire
Officer Qualifications and Duties."
E. Each officer must be a member in good standing at all times to continue
to hold office.
A. The Chief shall at all times have sole command over all the companies,
apparatus and equipment of the Fire Department. It shall be his or her
duty to direct all other officers and members of the Department in the
performance of their duties. It shall be his or her duty to examine the
condition of the companies, apparatus, equipment and firehouses as
often as necessary to insure their adequate and proper function and to
report on the same to the Mayor and Council on a quarterly basis.
B. In the absence of the Chief, the Deputy Chief and the Assistant Chiefs,
in the order of their rank, shall perform the duties of the Chief at all
fires and emergencies.
C. In the absence of the Chief, the Deputy Chief and the Assistant Chiefs,
the first arriving company officer of any of the companies to arrive at
the scene of the fire shall act as the incident commander in accordance
with Rutherford Fire Department incident command system standard
operating procedures.
A. The Rutherford Fire Department Officers' Association shall consist of
those members in good standing that hold the offices of Chief, Deputy
Chief, Assistant Chiefs, Captains, Lieutenants, Engineers and Assistant
Engineer. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3064-04]
B. The Officers' Association shall hold a meeting at least once a month. A
majority of all of the members of the Officers' Association must be
present to formally act or make any binding decisions at any meeting.
C. Rules, regulations, standard operating procedures and guidelines shall
be adopted by a majority vote of the officers who are present at the
meeting. No officer shall vote unless he is a member in good standing.
A. When an active fire fighter desires to be transferred from membership
in one company to membership in another company in the Rutherford
Fire Department, he or she shall apply to the company to which he or
§ 33-13 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 33-16
32:149
§ 33-17. Absences and vacancies.
§ 33-18. Removal of apparatus prohibited; exceptions. [Amended
12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3064-04]
Apparatus and equipment shall not be removed or caused to be removed
from any of the firehouses except as follows:
she desires to be transferred. Upon approval by that company, the
application shall then be submitted to the Officers' Association. Upon
the recommendation of the Officers' Association, the Mayor and Council
may then authorize the transfer.
B. The transferred member's annual record of duty for the year of the
transfer shall be based on his or her record in both companies during
that year. The company Secretary from which the member transferred
shall prepare and endorse a transcript of the member's record from the
beginning of the company year up to the date of the transfer, which
shall be provided to the new company. Membership in one company
shall not terminate until admission into the new company occurs.
A. The Mayor and Council may, upon written request, grant permission to
a member for a leave of absence from the Fire Department for such
time as the Mayor and Council shall deem proper, not to exceed six
continuous months, which period may be extended by the Mayor and
Council upon written request of the member.
B. The Mayor and Council may, upon written request, grant permission to
a member for a leave of absence from the Fire Department when the
member is entering the military service of the United States or of the
State of New Jersey. The leave of absence shall remain in effect until the
member is discharged from the military service or submits a written
resignation from the Fire Department, whichever occurs first.
C. When any member of the Fire Department is granted a military leave of
absence, the Mayor and Council may fill the vacant position in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. Upon the
return of the member on military leave of absence to the Fire
Department, the member appointed in his or her stead shall still be
entitled to remain as a member of the Fire Department even though
company may have an active membership of more than 17 persons.
A. For the answering of fire alarms or call(s) for mutual aid assistance
from one of our neighboring towns or for other extreme emergency.
B. For any other reason, including the following reasons, prior written
request shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council, which body shall
grant or deny permission for the removal:
(1) Attendance at wetdowns and parades within the South Bergen
Mutual Aid Zone 1 and Zone 2;
§ 33-16 RUTHERFORD CODE § 33-18
32:150
§ 33-19. Maintenance of equipment.
Each company shall be responsible for the safekeeping and careful usage
of the machines, apparatus and equipment provided for its use by the
Borough of Rutherford. Any loss or damage to machines, apparatus, or
equipment shall be promptly reported by the company to the Chief of the
Fire Department, who shall, in turn, report any loss or damage to the Mayor
and Council.
§ 33-20. Inventory required.
It shall be the duty of each company in the Fire Department to keep a
complete and detailed inventory of all apparatus, supplies and equipment
placed in its charge by the Borough of Rutherford. The inventory shall be
made as of the first of January of each year and a written report shall be
filed with the Borough Clerk no later than February 1 of each year.
§ 33-21. Inspection.
The Mayor and Council may inspect the entire Fire Department or any of
the firehouses, apparatus or equipment at such times as the Mayor and
Council shall determine.
§ 33-22. Retired fire fighters.
§ 33-23. Special duty fire fighters.
(2) Attendance at properly authorized fire academies, training and
drills, except that the Fire Chief may give prior written permission
for attendance at such events if it is not possible to obtain the
Council’s permission before the event is to occur. In the event that
the Fire Chief gives permission, a report shall be made for the next
Council meeting after the event, and the Fire Chief shall be
responsible for his or her act to the Mayor and Council;
(3) Attendance at funerals and memorials that are fire-service related,
except that the Fire Chief may give prior written permission for
attendance at such events if it is not possible to obtain the Council’s
permission before the event is to occur. In the event that the Fire
Chief gives permission, a report shall be made for the next Council
meeting after the event, and the Fire Chief shall be responsible for
his or her act to the Mayor and Council.
A. Any active fire fighter who has completed 20 years of active service and
has reached the age of 60 years or has completed 25 years of active
service may become a retired member of the Fire Department.
B. Retired members shall have the rights, duties and privileges of active
members, except that they shall not perform active fire-fighting duties
nor be eligible to vote for or serve as an officer of the Department or
any company.
§ 33-18 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 33-23
32:151
§ 33-24. Uniform allowance.
A. Due to the problem of diminished manpower response to daytime fire
alarms, there is hereby established as part of the Fire Department of
the Borough of Rutherford the position of special duty fire fighter.
B. Special duty fire fighters for the Fire Department shall consist of not
more than 10 active members.
C. Every person seeking to join the Fire Department as a special duty fire
fighter shall make application in accordance with the procedures in this
chapter.
D. Every person seeking to join the Fire Department as a special duty fire
fighter shall meet the qualifications and requirements set forth in this
chapter for membership, except the applicant shall not be a resident of
the Borough of Rutherford, and except that each applicant shall have
already completed the Fire fighter One course before application and
shall present evidence of the successful completion of the course to the
Borough.
E. Every person admitted to membership as a special duty fire fighter shall
be required to meet the qualifications and requirements set forth in this
chapter for continued membership, except that they shall not be
residents of the Borough of Rutherford.
F. All persons admitted to membership as special duty fire fighters shall
be required to immediately submit to a training session conducted by
the Captains of the Rutherford Fire Department. The training session
shall include a review of Fire Department standard operating
procedures, equipment, apparatus and radio communications, and such
other things necessary to train and familiarize the special duty fire
fighter with the requirements of the Fire Department.
G. Special duty fire fighters shall respond to fire duty calls during the
hours they are within the Borough.
H. Special duty fire fighters shall not be eligible for election to the any
officer's position.
A. On or before the first day of January of each year, the Borough of
Rutherford shall pay a yearly sum of $800 per active member in good
standing for uniform allowance. The payment shall be made to the
companies and distributed by the companies to the active members.
[Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 3165-08; 10-28-2014 by Ord.
No. 3341-14; 5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 3421-17]
B. On or before the first day of January of each year, the Borough of
Rutherford shall pay a yearly sum in the same amount set forth for
active members for each then living retired member on the roles of the
companies. The payment shall be made to the companies and
distributed by the companies to the retired members.
§ 33-23 RUTHERFORD CODE § 33-24
32:152
§ 33-25. Line-of-duty activities. [Added 8-23-2005 by Ord. No.
3085-05]
C. On or before the first day of January of each year, the Borough of
Rutherford shall pay a yearly sum of $360 to each active special duty
fire fighter in good standing who shall have performed not less than
50% of the fire duty calls occurring during the preceding year.
[Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 3165-08]
D. There shall be no uniform allowance for auxiliary members of the Fire
Department.
A. "Line-of-duty activities" are defined as activities that relate to the duties
of members of the Rutherford Fire Department, activities that are
sponsored by the Fire Department or activities that are approved for
member participation by the Fire Department. Line-of-duty activities
include responding to and operating at alarms or incidents, either intown
or for mutual aid; in-town training drills, company drills,
departmental drills and mutual aid drills; and maintenance of Fire
Department apparatus or buildings that house the apparatus.
B. In addition, the following activities shall be considered to be line-of-duty
activities:
(1) Travel to and from any training facility, training program or
training seminar that the Department participates in or when
participation by any member has been approved by the
Department.
(2) Travel to and from any meeting that the Department participates in
or when participation by any member has been approved by the
Department, or when the Department has assigned a member to
attend. These meetings include:
(a) Zone Meetings;
(b) Mutual Aid Meetings;
(c) South Bergen County Chiefs' Meetings;
(d) South Bergen County Active Chiefs' Meetings;
(e) Bergen County Fire Chief Association Meetings;
(f) Bergen County Fire Prevention and Protection Association
Meetings;
(g) New Jersey State Fire Chiefs Association Meetings;
(h) Zone Training Officers' Meetings;
(i) Bergen County Juvenile Fire Prevention Program Meetings;
(j) Emerald Society Meetings;
§ 33-24 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 33-25
32:153
(k) Meetings sponsored or conducted by the State Division of Fire
Safety or the State of New Jersey; and
(l) Regional meetings and New Jersey State Firemen's Convention
attendance by delegates and active duty life members.
(3) Render of aid at any emergency scene where the safety of the
public is at risk, regardless of where the emergency occurs, so long
as the member of the Rutherford Fire Department has completed a
minimum Firefighter I training course.
§ 33-25 RUTHERFORD CODE § 33-25
32:154
ARTICLE II
Member in Good Standing
[Added 8-14-2018 by Ord. No. 3472-18]
§ 33-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a procedure to determine a
member in good standing, along with penalties and the establishment of
a committee to review these members. This article shall also establish
fair and objective standards that apply to all members of the Rutherford
Volunteer Fire Department. A further purpose is to establish a life member
status for the Rutherford Volunteer Fire Department. The policy set forth
in this article was approved by the Rutherford Volunteer Fire Department
Officers' Association in October of 2017. This article shall be retroactive
to January 1, 2018, as the purpose of these amendments is to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
§ 33-27. Member in Good Standing Committee.
§ 33-28. Requirements for member in good standing status.
A. The Committee will consist of two members from each company, and
each company will appoint a member to the Committee.
B. To be eligible to be on the Committee, the member must be an ex-Chief
or have 30-plus years on the Department for the first position, and a
member with less than seven years on the Department for the second.
C. The Committee will review excuses and evaluate what will constitute a
valid excuse regarding the percentage of calls set forth at § 33-28.
D. The Committee will meet at least one time per quarter, which meeting
will be formal, with the Department Secretary present to record
minutes.
E. For voting purposes:
(1) Eight out of 10 members must be present to take action or vote on
anything.
(2) Recommendation will be given by the Committee to the Chief and
Officers' Association, who will have the ultimate decision on the
action taken.
A. The percentage of calls that the Rutherford Fire Department
membership will be required to make is as follows:
(1) Zero to seven years: 25%.
(2) Eight to 14 years: 20%.
(3) Fifteen to 25 years: 15%.
§ 33-26 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 33-28
32:155
§ 33-29. Penalties for not making percentage of calls.
§ 33-30. Eligibility to run for line officer.
To be eligible to run for a position of a line officer, the member shall
maintain good standing status for two quarters in the current year.
§ 33-31. Mandatory training.
(4) Over 25 years: exempt from a percentage requirement and
minimum drill attendance.
(5) Twenty percent for all company officers and Chiefs.
(6) Members must make a minimum of 50% of company and
Department drills per quarter.
B. Members can be excused from the percentage requirement upon
documenting the excuse and presenting their excuse to the Member in
Good Standing Committee. Approved excuses are as follows:
(1) Medical with doctor's note: to be reevaluated after 18 months.
(2) Personal.
(3) Leave of absence
A. The following are penalties for not making a percentage of calls set
forth at § 33-28A:
(1) Must make one out of four quarters to get 25% of clothing
allowance.
(2) Must make two out of four quarters to get 50% of clothing
allowance.
(3) Must make three out of four quarters to get full clothing allowance.
(4) Attending Department Dinner at no cost based upon total
percentage for the year.
(5) Voting at Chiefs' elections based upon total percentage for the year.
B. Percentages are reviewed quarterly by the Member in Good Standing
Committee: January through March, April through June, July through
September, and October through December.
A. Per § 33-8A(9), members are required to take mandatory training.
B. There will be a thirty-day grace period to complete all mandatory
training.
C. Failure to take the mandatory training as set forth at § 33-8A(9) shall
result in being a member not in good standing.
§ 33-28 RUTHERFORD CODE § 33-32
32:156
§ 33-32. Life member status.
§ 33-33. Severability and repealer.
If any article, section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall be
adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication
shall apply only to the article, section, paragraph, clause or provision so
adjudged, and the remainder of this chapter shall be deemed valid and
effective.
A. Any member who has served as Chief of the Department and who has
achieved 35 years of service may request life member status. Any
member who has served 40 years but not served as Chief of the
Department may request life member status.
B. Life members:
(1) Shall not respond to incidents, but may staff radio positions and
may serve as the communications officer.
(2) Shall not drive fire apparatus.
(3) Shall not be issued turnout gear.
(4) Are not responsible to attend mandatory training.
(5) Shall continue to receive a clothing allowance.
(6) May hold corporate office.
(7) May serve on Fire Department committees.
(8) May vote at company and Department elections.
C. Each company may have an unlimited number of life members in
addition to the authorized strength of the fire companies established by
Borough ordinance.
§ 33-32 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 33-33
32:157
Chapter 33A
FIREFIGHTER AUXILIARY PROGRAM, JUNIOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 33.
§ 33A-1. Requirements for membership.
A. Applicant needs to pass a Fire Department physical, using the New
Jersey State Firemen's Association form.
B. Application for membership shall be the same as that of an adult
applicant, as set forth at § 33-7 of the Borough Code,51 accompanied by
a parental permission and release form. Junior applicant will select a
preferred company to join. Application will be reviewed by the Chief of
the Department and the Junior Firefighter Chairperson. Company
choice will be dependent upon current number of junior firefighters
assigned to that company.
C. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-95, no person shall
be eligible for membership in the Junior Firefighter Auxiliary Program
who is less than 16 or more than 18 1/2 years of age. Proof of age is
required. Proof of residency in the Borough of Rutherford is required.
[Amended 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 3483-18]
D. No junior firefighter member may remain as a junior firefighter after
his/her 18th birthday.
E. The junior firefighter applicant must appear before the Department's
Junior Firefighter Committee for an interview. The parent or guardian
of the applicant must be present during the time of the interview. The
Committee will consist of a representative from each company, the
Chief of the Department and/or his designee, and the Chairperson of
the Junior Firefighter Program.
F. A frequently checked email address for the parent/guardian (in addition
to the junior member's email address) must be provided for
communication purposes.
G. A copy of the rules and regulation of the Rutherford Junior Firefighter
Auxiliary will be provided to the applicant at the interview. The
applicant/parent/guardian will sign off on the permission and release
form that they are in receipt of the rules and regulation of the
Rutherford Junior Firefighter Auxiliary and agree with its content.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 33, Fire Department.
§ 33-33 RUTHERFORD CODE § 33A-1
32:158
§ 33A-2. Training.
§ 33A-3. Duties.
H. Acceptance to the Junior Firefighter Auxiliary Program shall be subject
to approval by the Mayor and Council.
A. Training of junior firefighters will include any and all instruction which
the Rutherford Fire Department deems necessary.
B. After acceptance as a junior firefighter member, the junior firefighter
will commit to the completion of a junior firefighting course, which is
based upon the National Fire Protection Agency (NFPA) requirements.
This course is offered at the Bergen County Fire Academy (Junior
Firefighter Firefighting Program) or at another recognized education
institution providing equivalent training. This shall be mandatory for all
members under the age of 18 1/2. [Amended 12-11-2018 by Ord. No.
3483-18]
C. Junior firefighter members shall not perform any task or participate in
any activity prohibited by applicable state and federal laws.
A. Junior firefighter members shall obey all lawful orders given to them by
any line officer in authority of the Rutherford Volunteer Fire
Department, or other member, in the absence of a line officer.
B. Junior firefighter members may ride on the fire apparatus in seated
positions and inside other Department vehicles. (Safety belts shall be
worn at all times.)
C. Junior firefighter members may ride on apparatus only when prescribed
seating is available just prior to the apparatus leaving the firehouse. No
junior firefighter member shall, at any time, ride on the outside of any
apparatus or vehicle.
D. Junior members must relinquish their seat to a fully qualified member if
need be.
E. Junior firefighter members may wash and roll hose, repack hose, clean
equipment and the firehouse and put equipment away on the fire
ground, as long as they are well away from contaminated areas.
F. Junior firefighter members may observe at a safe distance established
by the incident Commander.
G. Junior firefighter members may not participate in Department activities
more than eight hours per day or 40 hours per week, or participate in
any activities prior to 6:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m.
H. While performing any training duties or riding on the apparatus, or
working on the fire ground, all junior firefighter members shall comply
with the Department rules and regulations concerning protective
clothing.
§ 33A-1 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 33A-3
32:159
§ 33A-4. Active status.
§ 33A-5. Rules for junior firefighters
I. Junior firefighter members, when responding to the fire station in a
personal vehicle, shall obey all traffic regulations and speed limits.
Junior firefighter members shall not use blue lights and permits shall
not be issued for same.
J. When being dropped off at the firehouse, parent/guardian must wait for
the apparatus to leave, in the event that there is no room on the
apparatus for the junior firefighter. If he/she is responding to the
firehouse on his/her own, the junior firefighter will return home on their
own as well. Parents/guardians shall be advised of this and agree to
same on the parental permission and release form.
K. When a junior firefighter member is assigned by a line officer to assist a
firefighter in a task, the junior firefighter member shall follow all
instructions given, provided such instructions do not place the junior
firefighter member in a contaminated area or in other physical danger.
L. Junior firefighter members are subject to the bylaws and constitution of
the Rutherford Volunteer Fire Department and the rules and
regulations of the Rutherford Volunteer Fire Department and the
Rutherford Volunteer Fire Company, which they belong to.
M. Junior firefighter members shall attend drills of the Department, except
for good cause (school requirements, religious requirements, JV or
varsity sports, band practice or team games, etc.).
N. Junior firefighter members shall not assist or participate in any drill or
exercise in any other jurisdiction, unless it is with his/her own
department attending as a department.
O. Junior firefighters will not be permitted to respond to known or reports
of haz-mat situations.
P. The junior firefighter will remain with the apparatus chauffer until
given other orders.
A. When a junior firefighter member reaches his/her 18th birthday, the
junior firefighter member is eligible to apply for membership in the
Rutherford Volunteer Fire Department. Junior firefighter members
seeking to join the Rutherford Volunteer Fire Department must satisfy
all requirements of the Department and will be considered for
membership, in part, based on the junior firefighter member's
performance as a junior firefighter.
B. Upon reaching the age of 18, junior member will submit a letter to the
Officer's Association for acceptance into the Rutherford Volunteer Fire
Department as an auxiliary member.
§ 33A-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 33A-5
32:160
A. No junior firefighter member shall be in the firehouse without the
presence of at least two active (nonprobationary) members. Junior
Firefighter members cannot invite guests into the firehouse.
B. No junior firefighter member may remain in the firehouse after 11:00
p.m. or report to the firehouse prior to 6:00 a.m.
C. Junior firefighter members may be permitted to attend meetings of the
Department but shall not have a vote on any Fire Department matter.
D. No junior firefighter member, under suspension, shall respond to any
fire alarm, call, drill, training session or meeting or be in the firehouse
at any time.
E. In the event of a suspension from the Fire Department, a meeting will
be held with the Program Coordinator, Chief of the Department,
Company Officers and parents/guardians to determine the length of
suspension/removal.
F. No junior firefighter member shall participate in any Department
activity or respond to alarms or be in the firehouse when required to be
at home or at school.
G. No junior firefighter member shall start, drive, or in any way move, any
of the Rutherford Fire Department's fire apparatus.
H. The Chief of the Department will issue all junior firefighter members a
complete set of protective turnout gear, which will consist of the
following: helmet, hood, turnout coat, bunker pants with fire boots,
gloves and accountability tag. All gear that is issued to junior firefighter
members is, and shall remain property of the Rutherford Fire
Department and shall be returned upon request of the Chief of the
Department or upon termination of the junior firefighter member's
participation as a volunteer with the Department for any reason. All
equipment and gear is to remain in the firehouse unless it is needed for
fire school.
I. Junior firefighters are not permitted to respond to any mutual aid
requests.
J. The junior firefighter member shall be required to wear what is deemed
appropriate by the Chief of the Department for Fire Department events
and functions.
K. The junior firefighter member shall not borrow or use any Department
equipment or materials for personal use under any circumstances.
L. Junior firefighter members shall not make or issue any public
statements on behalf of the Department concerning any emergency
incidents. All requests for comment are to be referred to the incident
commander or to the Chief of the Department. Junior firefighter
members must abide by the Department's social media policy and are
§ 33A-5 FINGERPRINT IDENTIFICATION AND § 33A-5
32:161
§ 33A-6. Suspension and removals.
forbidden from taking pictures or video of any incidents while acting in
the capacity of the Rutherford Fire Department.
M. During a water or ice rescue, junior firefighter members must remain
on shore at all times. Junior firefighter members shall not ride on a
fireboat under any circumstances.
N. Junior firefighter members may climb ground ladders or aerial ladders
for training purposes only under the direct supervision of a fire officer
or his or her designee. While training with ladders, the junior firefighter
member must wear full protective gear and use a ladder belt or
approved safety harness. Ladders and aerial equipment of another
department may only be used by a junior firefighter member with the
consent of a fire officer from the department that owns the equipment,
or in conjunction with an organized, approved junior firefighter training
program.
O. Junior firefighter members may utilize any nonpowered hand tool and
change self-contained breathing apparatus ("SCBA") bottles only if the
junior firefighter member has received training to do so. Junior
firefighter members must wear turnout gear, when operating such
equipment.
P. Pursuant to applicable child labor laws and subject to change if out of
compliance, under no circumstances shall a junior firefighter utilize any
power or hydraulic equipment, including but not limited to the Jaws of
Life, cutting torches or welding equipment, or come along device.
Q. All communication of scheduled events shall be via email to the parent/
guardian provided email as well as the junior firefighter. The
communication of scheduled events will come from an officer of the
company and include the Chief of the Department and the Junior
Firefighter Program Coordinator.
A. The Chief of the Fire Department may suspend or remove any junior
firefighter member for good cause, including, but not limited to:
(1) Disobeying direct, valid, legal orders;
(2) Failure to obey the rules and regulations of the Department;
(3) Responding or participating against the explicit instructions of
parents or guardians;
(4) Failing to maintain a "C" average or better (or the equivalent) in
school or failure to attend school as required will result in a
discontinuation of service upon notification from the school;
(5) Divulging confidential information of the Department;
§ 33A-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 33A-6
32:162
§ 33A-7. Privileges.
§ 33A-8. Repealer.
All Ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
§ 33A-9. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part of this chapter
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, such judgment shall not affect,
impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter, but shall be confined
in its effect to the section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or other part
of this chapter directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment
shall have been rendered and all other provisions of this chapter shall
remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 34
FILMING
§ 34-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures either on film or videotape
or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational purposes,
intended for viewing on television, computers, in theaters, for institutional
uses, or over the internet. The provisions of this chapter shall not be
deemed to include the filming of news stories within the Borough of
Rutherford.
MAJOR MOTION PICTURE — Any film which is financed and/or distributed
by a major motion picture studio, including but not limited to the following:
Universal Pictures, Warner Brothers, including New Line Cinema, Castle
Rock Cinema, and Turner Production Company, Paramount, 20th Century
(6) Conduct unbecoming to the good reputation of the Rutherford Fire
Department;
(7) Suspension from school.
A. Junior firefighter members may be issued a Fire Department pager if
they are available; which pagers must be surrendered at the discretion
of the Chief of the Department or upon termination of the junior
firefighter member's participation as a volunteer with the Department
for any reason. Junior firefighter members shall not take a Department
issued pager to school.
B. Junior members shall be insured by the Borough of Rutherford under
the South Bergen Municipal Joint Insurance Fund.
§ 33A-6 FILMING § 34-1
34:163
Fox, Columbia/Tri-Star, Disney, MGM United Artists, Dreamworks, and
Sony; or any film for which the budget is at least $5,000,000.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public park or playground or any other public place within the borough that
is within the jurisdiction and control of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 34-2. Permit required.
§ 34-3. Time and location for filming.
A. No person or organization shall film or permit filming, or the setup or
breakdown of filming apparatus, or the parking of commercial vehicles
used for or assisting in filming, on public lands within the Borough of
Rutherford, or on private property, without first having applied for and
obtained a permit from the office of the Borough Clerk. Application for
such permits shall be in a form approved by the Borough Clerk and shall
be accompanied by the permit and other fees required under this
chapter. The application shall require that the applicant designate the
names of all organizations involved in the filming, and shall require a
designation, by name, address, and telephone number, of at least two
persons directly connected with the filming. At least one of these
designees shall be required to be present and in charge at the scene of
the filming at all times.
B. The permit shall set forth the approved location or locations and
approved duration of the filming by specific reference to day or dates.
The permit must be readily available at all times at the site of any
filming.
C. Copies of the approved permit will be sent to the Borough Police
Department and Borough Fire Official before filming takes place, and to
the New Jersey Film Commission. The permit holder shall allow
borough personnel to inspect the site and the equipment to be used,
said inspections not to unreasonably interfere with the filming. The
permit holder shall comply with all safety instructions issued by the
Police Department and/or the Fire Official and/or by any other
authorized borough personnel.
A. No permit shall authorize filming for more than ten consecutive days in
any one location. This limitation may be extended if the requested
filming constitutes a major motion picture, or if a longer term for
filming has been negotiated and approved.
B. Filming in residential areas may be permitted Monday through Friday
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. The setup, production,
and breakdown required by all filming shall be completed during the
hours set forth herein.
C. The Borough Administrator may authorize filming other than during the
days or hours or time period set forth herein. In determining whether to
§ 34-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 34-3
34:164
§ 34-4. Application for permit; notice to residents; appeal process.
allow an extension of time for filming, the following factors shall be
considered:
(1) Traffic congestion at the location caused by vehicles to be parked
on the public streets;
(2) Applicant's ability to remove film-related vehicles off the public
streets;
(3) Restrictions on the use of public streets or public parking during
the course of the filming;
(4) Nature of the film shoot itself, e.g., indoor or outdoors, day or
night;
(5) Prior experience of the film company applicant with the borough, if
any;
(6) Such other factors as shall reasonably be considered in rendering a
decision.
A. No permits will be issued by the Borough Clerk unless application is
made for the permit at least five days before the requested starting
date. The Borough Administrator may waive any part of the five-day
period if, in his or her judgment, the applicant has obtained all
necessary approvals and adjacent businesses, merchants, or residents
do not need to be notified.
B. When directed by the Borough Clerk or the Borough Administrator, or
where the applicant's filming activity, by reason of location or
otherwise, will directly involve or affect any businesses, merchants or
residents, the applicant shall give all affected parties written notice of
the filming application at least three days before the requested starting
date. The affected parties shall be informed that they may file written
objections with the Borough Clerk within one day of the notice of the
filming application being served. Any written objections received by the
Borough Clerk shall form a part of the application and shall be
considered in review of the application. The applicant shall submit
proof of service of the required notices to the Borough Clerk within one
day of the notices being served. The Borough Clerk may require also
that the applicant obtain and submit the signatures of the businesses,
merchants, or residents, each indicating his or her approval or
disapproval, which shall form a part of the application and shall be
considered in review of the application.
C. The Borough Administrator may require that the application and the
proposed filming be reviewed by the Police Department, Fire Official,
and/or such other agencies as deemed necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare, or to ensure the proper operation of
borough services. Any consulted borough personnel shall provide a
§ 34-3 FILMING § 34-4
34:165
§ 34-5. Requirements for issuance of permit.
written summary of the review to the Borough Administrator, which
shall be considered as part of the application.
D. The Borough Administrator may refuse to issue a permit whenever it is
determined, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of the
application, that filming at the location and/or the requested times
would violate any law or ordinance, would unreasonably interfere with
the use and enjoyment of adjoining properties or public lands, would
unreasonably impede the free flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic,
would unreasonably interfere with the proper operation of borough
services, or would otherwise endanger the public's health, safety or
welfare.
E. Any person who is aggrieved by a decision of the Borough
Administrator to grant, deny or revoke a permit, or to grant an
extension of time for filming, may appeal to the Appeal Subcommittee
of the Film and Arts Committee of the Borough of Rutherford. The
aggrieved party shall file a written notice of appeal setting forth the
reasons for the appeal with the Borough Clerk. An appeal from the
decision of the Administrator shall be filed no later than one day from
the date of the Administrator's decision.
F. The Appeal Subcommittee shall consist of three members of the Film
and Arts Committee. The members of the Film and Arts Committee shall
serve on the Appeal Subcommittee on a rotating basis. The Borough
Administrator and the Borough Clerk shall be prohibited from serving
on the Appeal Subcommittee. In any particular matter, any member
with a conflict of interest or an appearance of a conflict of interest shall
not sit on the Appeal Subcommittee.
G. The Appeal Subcommittee shall set the matter down for a hearing and
shall provide notice to the aggrieved person. The hearing shall be held
at any time within three days from the filing of the notice of the appeal.
The hearing shall be open to the public. Immediately after the hearing,
or at such other time as it shall deem appropriate, the Appeal
Subcommittee shall issue its decision in support or rejection of the
Borough Administrator's decision.
A. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the borough with satisfactory proof of the
following:
(1) Proof of insurance coverage for the duration of filming as follows:
For bodily injury to any one person in the amount of $500,000 and
any occurrence in the aggregate amount of $1,000,000 and for
property damage to borough property for each occurrence in the
aggregate amount of $500,000. The applicant shall name the
Borough of Rutherford as an additional named insured on the
policy, and proof of the certificate of insurance shall be required to
§ 34-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 34-5
34:166
be provided before the filming commences. The permit holder shall
be responsible for insuring its own property. In no event shall the
Borough of Rutherford provide insurance for any of the permit
holder's property or actions. The permit holder shall provide
workers' compensation insurance and shall comply with New
Jersey's workers' compensation statutes where necessary under
the law.
(2) An agreement, in writing, in a form approved by the borough and
included in the application, whereby the applicant agrees to
indemnify and save harmless the Borough of Rutherford and its
agents, employees, and personnel, from any and all liability,
expense, claim or damages resulting from the use of public lands or
from the issuance of the permit.
(3) For a major motion picture or an approved longer-term permit, the
posting of a cash bond or a maintenance bond in the amount of not
less than $1,500 running in favor of the borough, or the payment of
a cash security deposit in the amount of not less than $1,500, which
amount can be increased at the discretion of the Borough
Administrator. For all other filming, the necessity for and amount of
a bond or security deposit shall be determined by the Borough
Administrator or the Borough Clerk. The bond or security deposit is
required for the purposes of protecting and insuring that the film
location will be left in a satisfactory condition, tree of debris,
rubbish and equipment, that all required fees will be paid, and that
all borough ordinances and regulations will be followed. Within 14
days after completion of all filming under the permit, the borough
will return the bond or security deposit, provided the permit holder
has complied with all of the terms of this chapter.
B. In addition, each applicant who is issued a permit for filming on either
public or private lands shall be required to abide by the following:
(1) The permit holder shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the
Police Department and/or the Fire Official or other authorized
Borough personnel with respect thereto.
(2) The permit holder shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property
owners attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent
practicable, abate noise and park vehicles associated with such
filming off the public streets. The permit holder shall avoid any
interference with previously scheduled activities upon public lands
and limit, to the extent possible, any interference with normal
public activity on such public lands.
§ 34-5 FILMING § 34-5
34:167
§ 34-6. Fees.
The schedule of fees required for filming are as follows:
(3) The permit holder shall comply with all applicable federal and state
laws and regulations, and shall comply with all applicable borough
ordinances.
(4) If any scenes of partial or total nudity, public urination, violence,
war, or other potentially offensive or harmful material is to be
filmed, the applicant shall be required to state the nature of the
material in the initial application. The permit holder where such
filming shall occur shall take all reasonable steps to shield such
filming and scenes from the public view, and shall respond to and
follow all directives of the Borough Administrator with respect
thereto. Such directives shall be issued whenever there are
concerns about the public health, safety, and welfare.
(5) The Borough Administrator may require one or more on-site police
officers, fire personnel, or other Borough personnel in situations
where the proposed production may impede the proper flow of
traffic, impact on the provision of borough services, or for other
public health, safety, or welfare reasons. The permit holder shall
pay for all costs associated with the use of borough personnel.
Where existing electrical power lines are to be used by the
production, an on-site licensed electrician may be required if the
production company does not have a licensed electrician on staff.
A. Basic permit fee.
(1) Basic filming permit for filming on public or private lands: $100.
(2) Basic filming permit for applicant requesting waiver of the five-day
notice period provided above: $150.
(3) Basic filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for educational
purposes: $50.
(4) Basic filming permit fee is waived for active members of the
Borough BID who are in good standing and for all West End
business owners, so long as the proposed filming is limited to selfpromotion
of the business located in the BID or the West End. The
"West End" is defined as all businesses located on Union Avenue
between Jackson Avenue and Erie Avenue; on Jackson Avenue
between Passaic Avenue and Erie Avenue; on Erie Avenue between
Union Avenue and Washington Avenue. The Borough Administrator,
in his or her discretion, may waive the basic filming permit fee for
other businesses, so long as the proposed filming is for selfpromotion
of the business.
(5) The basic filming permit is nonrefundable and must be paid at the
time of submission of the application.
§ 34-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 34-6
34:168
(6) If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good
cause, filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the
Borough Clerk may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new
permit for filming on other dates, subject to full compliance with all
other provisions of this chapter as deemed necessary by the
Borough Clerk or Borough Administrator. No additional basic
permit fee shall be required for the reissued permit.
B. Daily filming fee.
(1) Daily filming fee for filming on public lands: $500 per day.
(2) Daily filming fee for major motion picture for filming on public
lands: $1,500 per day.
(3) No daily rate is required for nonprofit applicants filming for
educational purposes.
(4) The Borough Administrator, in consultation with the Mayor, may
determine to negotiate a flat fee for filming for approved longerterm
permits.
(5) The daily filming fee shall be payable in full at the time the permit is
approved and issued. There shall be no refunds for any day where
at least part of the day was spent filming. If filming does not occur
on any particular day due to inclement weather or other good
cause, the unused filming fee may be refunded or may be applied to
another day of filming, if extension of filming is approved.
C. Parking fees for filming.
(1) Fee for use of metered space: $25 per day per metered space.
(2) Fee for parking in nonmetered areas: $15 per day per commercial
vehicle.
(3) The Borough Administrator, in consultation with the Mayor, may
determine to negotiate a fiat fee for parking for approved longerterm
permits.
(4) The parking fees shall be payable at the time of issuance of the
permit, and at such other times as shall be required due to
increased or decreased parking by the permit holder. Prepaid
parking fees are refundable where appropriate. The Borough Clerk
shall have the authority to override these fees where negotiation of
a flat fee is more reasonable.
(5) There shall be no overnight parking allowed under any
circumstances.
D. Other fees. The permit holder shall reimburse the borough for any lost
revenue, reimbursement for lower meter revenues, use of borough
resources (such as water or electricity), repairs to or cleanup of public
§ 34-6 FILMING § 34-6
34:169
§ 34-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 34A
FIRE SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 22.
Fire Department — See Ch. 33.
Numbering of buildings and lots — See Ch.
63A.
Firesafety in public amusement structures
and theaters — See Ch. 79.
Smoke control — See Ch. 99.
property, for use of any borough personnel, such as police officers,
and for any other cost incurred by the borough that is connected
to the permit holder's filming. Such reimbursements shall be paid
immediately upon being incurred, or shall be deducted from the bond
or security deposit required under this chapter. If additional monies are
due from the permit holder, the borough shall bill the permit holder,
and all payment is due within 30 days of the date of the invoice. If
full payment is not made within 30 days, the lack of payment shall be
considered a violation of this chapter, and punishable as same.
A. Any person violating this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 per day, or by imprisonment in
the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
B. Violations may be charged against the owner of the property where the
violation occurs, or against the person who is actually committing the
violation, or both. If a corporate entity is involved, the charges may be
lodged against the corporate president, managing agent, registered
agent, and/or shareholders.
§ 34-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 34-7
34:170
ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
§ 34A-1. Enforcement. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04]
The New Jersey Uniform Fire Code found at N.J.A.C. 5:70, as amended, shall
be locally enforced in the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 34A-2. Agency designation. [Amended 3-7-1989 by Ord. No.
2528-89]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Safety in the Borough
of Rutherford.
§ 34A-3. Duties of enforcement agency. [Amended 3-7-1989 by Ord.
No. 2528-89; 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04]
The Rutherford Bureau of Fire Safety shall enforce the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Safety Act found at N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq., as amended, and the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code found at N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq., as amended,
and all regulations adopted therein, in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of the Borough of Rutherford,
other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of both the Act and the Code.
§ 34A-4. Life-hazard uses. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No.
3065-04]
The Rutherford Bureau of Fire Safety shall carry out periodic inspections of
life hazard uses required under the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code on behalf
of the Commissioner of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey.
§ 34A-5. Organization. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04]
The Rutherford Bureau of Fire Safety shall be under the direct supervision
and control of the Fire Marshal of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 34A-6. Supervision; appointments. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord.
No. 3065-04]
The Rutherford Bureau of Fire Safety shall be under the supervision of the
Rutherford Fire Marshal, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council
pursuant to Title 11A, Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes of the State of
New Jersey. The Rutherford Fire Marshal shall be a certified Fire Official/
Fire Inspector of the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:71-3, as
amended.
§ 34A-1 FILMING § 34A-7
34:171
§ 34A-7. Inspectors and other employees. [Amended 12-14-2004 by
Ord. No. 3065-04]
Such inspectors and other employees as may be necessary in the Rutherford
Bureau of Fire Safety shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Rutherford pursuant to Title 11A, Civil Service, of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 34A-8. Appeals. [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04]
Pursuant to applicable sections of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Act,
any person aggrieved by an order of the Rutherford Fire Marshal or of
the Rutherford Bureau of Fire Safety shall have the right to appeal to the
Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Bergen.
§ 34A-9. Definitions. [Added 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04]52
All definitions contained in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Act and in
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code are incorporated herein.
§ 34A-10. Fees. [Amended 3-7-1989 by Ord. No. 2528-89; 9-7-1994
by Ord. No. 2711-94; 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04]
A permit fee shall be charged at the rate permitted by New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code 5:70-2.9, as amended, as of the time the permit is issued by the
Borough of Rutherford.
§ 34A-11. Exemptions. [Amended 3-7-1989 by Ord. No. 2528-89;
9-7-1994 by Ord. No. 2711-94; 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04]
Permit fees and annual local registration fees shall be waived for any
nonprofit, charitable or service organization, municipal government, county
government or any county or regional authority, the Rutherford School
Board, nonprofit private schools or state government, so long as the use is
not a life-hazard use.
§ 34A-12. Additional inspections. [Amended 3-7-1989 by Ord. No.
2528-89; 9-7-1994 by Ord. No. 2711-94; 4-18-2001 by Ord. No.
2963-01; 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04]
In addition to the inspections and fees required pursuant to the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Safety Act and the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, the
following additional local registrations shall be required:
A. All building types or uses (except owner-occupied one- and two-family
dwellings) that are not required to be registered as a life-hazard use in
accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be subject to
an annual local registration and fee as follows:
52.Editor's Note: Former § 34A-9, Permits, was repealed 3-7-1989 by Ord. No. 2528-89.
§ 34A-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 34A-12
34:172
§ 34A-13. Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors. [Added 3-7-1989
by Ord. No. 2528-89; amended 7-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2978-0153]
(1) Use Group R-2 (multiple dwellings) and mixed use with any
residential use:
(a) One to three dwelling units: $90.
(b) Four dwelling units and up: $90 up to three dwelling units and
$15 per each additional dwelling unit.
(2) Use Groups A (Assembly), B (Business), E (Educational), F (Factory/
Industrial), I (Institutional), M (Mercantile), and S (Storage/
Warehouse), based on gross floor area of building or tenant space:
(a) Up to 3,000 square feet: $90.
(b) Over 3,000 square feet: $90 up to 3,000 square feet and $19
for each additional 1,000 square feet or part thereof.
(3) Use Group H (non-life-hazard use): $500.
(4) Use Group T (temporary structure): $150.
(5) Life-hazard use owner: $10.
(6) Owners of non-owner-occupied structures, including vacant
structures, of all use groups excepting R-2 and owner-occupied
one- and two-family dwellings, shall register with the Bureau of
Fire Safety and pay an annual registration fee of $45.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DWELLING — All one- and two-family residential units, condominium
units, and cooperative units, or any unit of any type where persons
reside, located within the Borough of Rutherford. Rental dwelling units
are specifically excluded from the definition of dwelling applicable in
this § 34A-13, as they are covered in other codes.
FLOOR LEVEL — A floor area separated by three or more risers from
another habitable floor area, including basements.[Amended
5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 3204-10]
HABITABLE LEVEL — Any space on any level within the dwelling in
which the area is suitable to reside and conduct normal activities, and
is provided with an interior finish on the walls and ceiling.[Added
5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 3204-10]
53.Editor's Note: This ordinance takes effect 1-1-2002. The language of prior § 34A-13,
Smoke detectors, in effect until 1-1-2002, is available from the office of the Borough
Clerk.
§ 34A-12 FILMING § 34A-13
34:173
§ 34A-14. Additional fees. [Added 9-7-1994 by Ord. No. 2711-94]
The following fees are hereby established for certain services extended and
material distributed by the Bureau of Fire Safety:
§ 34A-15. Reflective symbol. [Added 12-28-2010 by Ord. No.
3216-1054]
B. Applicability of requirements. The requirements of this § 34A-13 shall
apply whenever title or control of a dwelling is sold or otherwise
transferred.
C. Smoke detectors.
(1) Upon sale or transfer of a dwelling, electrical smoke detectors with
A/C 110 volt primary power supply, or an approved equivalent,
equipped with battery back-up shall be required to be installed and
properly operating on each floor level.
(2) Each dwelling shall have a minimum of one electrical smoke
detector on each habitable level, and a minimum of one smoke
detector in the immediate vicinity of each separate sleeping area
within the dwelling. [Amended 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 3204-10]
(3) All electrical smoke detectors shall be interconnected to each other
within the dwelling, except where only one detector is required
because there is only one floor level.
(4) Smoke detectors shall be installed with the applicable
requirements of the latest edition of NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm
Code. [Amended 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 3204-10]
D. Carbon monoxide detectors. Upon sale or transfer of a dwelling, carbon
monoxide detectors shall be required to be installed and properly
operating on each floor level that contains a bedroom or other room
designated for sleeping.
E. Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy or certificate of
continued occupancy as required under Chapter 131, Zoning, of the
Code of the Borough of Rutherford shall issue until the dwelling is in
compliance with this § 34A-13.
F. Inconsistencies. If the requirements of existing ordinances or codes are
inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this § 34A-13, the
requirements that provide the greatest degree of life safety shall
prevail. The Borough official performing any inspection required under
the Borough's applicable codes shall make the determination of the
necessary requirements.
A. Copies of all fire incident reports: $5 each for the first five pages and
$0.50 for each page thereafter.
B. Copies of all photographs of a fire incident: $1 each.
§ 34A-13 RUTHERFORD CODE § 34A-15
34:174
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
ENGINEERED LUMBER — Any prefabricated I-joists, truss joists, truss
roof system, truss floor component, truss roof component, laminated
beams and studs, and lightweight cold-formed steel trusses and joists.
REFLECTIVE SYMBOL — An emblem made of reflective material in the
shape and form approved by the Rutherford Fire Department Officers
Association containing information identifying a structure as containing
engineered lumber.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a building or
structure for occupancy or use, whether constructed on, above, or
below the adjoining grade, including one- and two-family dwellings.
TRUSS — A structural member or assembly being a floor or roof which
attains stability through triangular formations.
B. Requirement for reflective symbol.
(1) This chapter shall apply to all one- and two-family dwellings or
structures, including structures existing at the time of the effective
date of this section.
(2) The Borough Construction Official or Fire Marshall shall determine
if a structure contains an engineered structural element. All
buildings or structures that contain engineered structural elements
must have a reflective symbol affixed to an electrical meter serving
the structure.
(3) The reflective symbol shall be in the form approved by the
Rutherford Fire Department Officers Association, and shall contain
lettering to identify the location of any engineered structural
elements in the structure.
C. This chapter shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Safety and the
Building Department of the Borough of Rutherford.
D. The following shall be the responsibility of the Construction Official:
(1) Notify the Bureau of Fire Safety in writing whenever a construction
permit is released for the construction or alteration of a one- or
two-family dwelling or structure which will utilize engineered
structural elements in the construction or renovation, and when a
temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of occupancy is
issued for newly constructed or renovated buildings or structures.
(2) As part of all continued certificate of occupancy inspections,
determine if the one- or two-family dwelling or structure is
constructed with engineered structural elements, and if so, ensure
54.Editor’s Note: Former § 34A-15, Gas-fired cooking apparatus, added 3-7-1989 by Ord. No.
2528-89, was repealed 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04.
§ 34A-15 FILMING § 34A-15
34:175
§ 34A-16. (Reserved)55
that the dwelling or structure is currently listed on the Fire
Department's inventory of such buildings, and if not listed, make
the appropriate notification to the Bureau of Fire Safety.
E. The following shall be the responsibility of the Fire Marshal:
(1) Maintain an inventory of all one- and two-family dwellings or
structures constructed with engineered structural elements in a
manner approved by the Rutherford Fire Department Officers
Association.
(2) Notify the Chief and Company Officers whenever a building or
structure is added to the inventory list. This notification shall be in
a manner approved by the Rutherford Fire Department Officers
Association.
(3) Notify the owner of any existing one- or two-family dwelling or
structure of the requirements of this section.
(4) Place the approved reflective symbol on the electric meter within
five days of notifying the owner of an existing building or structure
of the requirements.
(5) Place the approved reflective symbol on all newly constructed
building as soon as the electric meter is installed on the building or
structure.
(6) Conduct an annual inspection of all buildings listed in the inventory
to ensure that the required placard is in place. Missing, defaced, or
illegible placards shall be replaced.
F. Funding for the reflective symbols shall be from the Fire Code Penalty
Trust Account, and an adequate supply of the reflective symbols shall
be maintained by the Bureau of Fire Safety.
G. Any person violating this section by refusing to use the reflective
symbol, or by removing or tampering with the reflective symbol, shall
be subject to a fine in an amount of $500 per violation. Each day that a
violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct
offense.
55.Editor’s Note: Former § 34A-16, Violations and penalties, added 3-7-1989 by Ord. No.
2528-89, was repealed 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04.
§ 34A-15 RUTHERFORD CODE § 34A-16
34:176
ARTICLE II
Key Boxes
[Added 5-6-1997 by Ord. No. 2797-97]
§ 34A-17. Key boxes required. [Amended 9-3-1997 by Ord. No.
2812-97; 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04]
All properties within the Borough of Rutherford having an elevator or a
security gate, excepting R-3 uses, shall be equipped with a key box. The key
box shall be of a UL type and approved by the Borough Fire Marshal.
§ 34A-18. Location of key box.
§ 34A-19. Contents of key box. [Amended 9-3-1997 by Ord. No.
2812-97]
The key box or any required secondary key cabinet shall, where applicable,
contain the following:
A. The key box shall be installed at or near a public entrance to the
building or in a public foyer within said building. The key box shall,
when practical, be installed between eight and 12 feet above the
adjoining grade.
B. Should a key box not be of adequate size to accommodate all the keys
and informational material required pursuant to § 34A-19 below, a
locked secondary key cabinet shall be provided. The key to the
secondary key cabinet shall be maintained in the key box, and the
location of the key box and the secondary key cabinet, if required, shall
be approved by the Borough Fire Marshal. [Amended 12-14-2004 by
Ord. No. 3065-04]
A. Keys to the building entrance and all exterior doors.
B. An elevator on/off key.
C. An elevator fire service key.
D. An elevator hoistway door key.
E. Keys to elevator mechanical room(s).
F. Key to open the security gate.
G. Clearly legible instructions for the emergency use and rescue
operations of the elevator.
H. Clearly legible instructions for the automatic and manual operation of
the security gate, including emergency procedures.
I. Any other information relating to the emergency use and/or prefire
planning as may be required by the Borough Fire Marshal or the
§ 34A-17 FILMING § 34A-19
34:177
§ 34A-20. (Reserved)56
§ 34A-21. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04]
Rutherford Fire Department Officers' Association. [Amended
12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3065-04]
A. Any owner, agent or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of
§ 34A-17, 34A-18 or 34A-19 of this chapter, or any of the provisions of
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Act or any of the provisions of the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Code shall be subject to the penalties
as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12 as amended.
B. Any owner, agent or entity who shall violate any other provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine of $500 or by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons or
entities shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects
within a reasonable time, and every ten days that such violations are
continued shall constitute a separate offense.
56.Editor’s Note: Former § 34A-20, Time for compliance, was repealed 12-14-2004 by Ord.
No. 3065-04.
§ 34A-19 RUTHERFORD CODE § 34A-21
34:178
Chapter 35
FIRE LANES OR ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 33. Fire safety — See Ch. 34A.
§ 35-1. Purpose.
It is hereby determined that the unregulated operation and parking of
motor vehicles in parking yards and parking places which are open to
the public or to which the public is invited, including shopping centers,
hospitals, schools, churches, public buildings, office buildings, day-care
and senior care buildings, condominium, cooperative, or rental residential
and commercial buildings, and other similar uses, constitutes a danger to
the public health, safety and welfare in that such unregulated operation
and parking interferes with and impedes the approach, operation, and
departure of fire and other emergency vehicles and equipment. Therefore,
this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority conferred upon the
Borough by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, and such other statutory
and legal provisions as may be applicable to the within subject.
§ 35-2. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough
of Rutherford or the Bureau of Fire Safety, which departments shall have
concurrent jurisdiction in policing and issuing summonses for violations of
this chapter.
§ 35-3. Property owner.
A "property owner" shall be defined as stated in the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code and any amendments thereto.
§ 35-4. Designation of fire lanes or zones.
A. The Borough Fire Official, in consultation with the Chief of Police or his
designated representative, may designate fire lanes or zones on private
property to which the public is invited or which is devoted to public use
if such designation is necessary to provide safety for the public or to
provide proper access for fire or other emergency equipment or
vehicles in the event of an emergency. Fire hydrants and water
connection devices located on private property shall be designated as
fire zones.
B. The Fire Official or Bureau of Fire Safety shall keep drawings of
properties delineating fire lanes and fire zones on file in the office of the
Bureau of Fire Safety.
§ 34A-21 FIRE LANES OR ZONES § 35-5
35:179
§ 35-5. Notification.
Whenever a determination has been made that a fire lane/zone designation
on private property is necessary, the Fire Official shall notify the owner of
the property, in writing, either by certified mail or personal delivery, briefly
describing the property to be designated and the reason for the designation.
§ 35-6. Content, filing, and approval of plan.
§ 35-7. Marking of fire lanes or zones.
A. Within 30 days after receipt of the notification of the necessity for
designation, the property owner shall submit a plan to the Bureau of
Fire Safety. The plan shall be either a formal site plan showing
placement of all proposed markings, striping, curbing, and signage, or a
written descriptive narrative detailing the placement of all proposed
markings, striping, curbing and signage, which narrative shall contain
distances and details of the area.
B. The Bureau of Fire Safety shall approve the submitted plan or shall
amend the submitted plan to include any modifications that are
reasonably necessary to effect the purposes of this chapter. The
approved or amended plan shall be certified by the Bureau of Fire
Safety and shall be forwarded to the property owner thereafter.
A. Within 30 days after the certified plan is sent to the property owner, the
property owner shall install the required markings, striping, curbing,
and signage in accordance with the certified plan and shall take
whatever other necessary steps as are directed by the Fire Official or
his designated representative to establish the fire lanes or zones.
B. Suitable signs bearing the words "No Parking Fire Zone" may be
required. Such signs shall be installed at the beginning of the
designated fire zone and at such other areas as may be necessary to
properly identify the fire zone or as may be required in the discretion of
the Fire Official or Police Chief or his designated representative. Signs
shall be standard twelve-inch by eighteen-inch traffic signs with light
reflective material for the background and black lettering.
C. Striping shall be four inches wide. Fire lanes shall be 18 feet in width
from the curb and shall be striped and painted to state "No Parking Fire
Zone" as directed by the Fire Official. All striping and lettering shall be
yellow in color and reflectorized. Curbing which is required to be
painted shall be painted yellow in color.
D. The owner shall properly maintain any such markings, striping,
curbing, and signage in the designated areas at all times. Defacing,
tampering with, or damaging any such markings, striping, curbing, or
signage, or allowing them to deteriorate so as to reduce their
effectiveness, shall constitute violations of this chapter.
§ 35-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 35-8
35:180
§ 35-8. Obstructions.
It shall be illegal to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, or to place any obstruction on lands, whether
publicly or privately owned, in any designated fire lane or fire zone. It shall
be illegal to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, or to place any obstruction on lands within 10 feet of any fire
hydrant or other water connection device.
§ 35-9. Removal of obstructions.
An enforcing officer is authorized to remove or have removed obstructions
or vehicles as may violate this chapter at the expense of the owner of the
premises, in the case of obstructions, or at the expense of the owner of the
vehicle.
§ 35-10. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 36
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food establishments — See Ch. 36A. Prohibited food packaging — See Ch. 82A,
Art. II.
A. Violators who obstruct a fire lane or fire zone, whether on public or
private land, shall be subject to a minimum fine of $50, which fine shall
be imposed on complaint and conviction in the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Rutherford
B. Property owners failing to timely respond to the initial notification or
failing to timely install the requirements contained in the certified plan
or by the Bureau of Fire Safety or failing to maintain the installations,
shall be subject to a minimum fine of $250 up to a maximum fine of
$1,000 in accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey Fire
Safety Code. A court appearance shall be mandatory upon issuance of
any summons under this § 35-10B.
C. Any other violations of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $1,000.
D. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue, and such violators shall be required to
correct or remedy the violations or defects within a reasonable time,
and each 10 days that such violations are continued shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 35-8 FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES § 35-10
36:181

ARTICLE I
Food and Beverage Machine Code
§ 36-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and beverage
vending machines and licensure thereof; prohibiting the sale or possession
with intent to sell through vending machines of adulterated or misbranded
foods or drinks; authorizing inspection of vending machines and operations
connected therewith; and fixing penalties for violations is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:24-11.1 et seq. Said code is incorporated
by reference herein and made a part hereof.
§ 36-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is Subchapter 11 of
Chapter XII of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, and is described and
commonly known as, "Sanitary Requirements for the Vending of Food &
Beverages."
§ 36-3. Filing.
Three copies of the said code have been placed on file in the office of the
Clerk of this local Board of Health upon the introduction of this chapter and
will remain on file there for the use and examination of the public until final
action is taken on this chapter.
§ 36-1 FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES § 36-3
36:183

ARTICLE II
License Fees
§ 36-4. Licenses required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person, or for any body corporate,
or as an officer of any corporation or otherwise, to engage in the operation,
maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in this
municipality one or more machines or devices offered for public use which,
upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by other means, dispenses
unit servings of food or beverages either in bulk or package, without the
necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending operation,
without first having procured a license from the Board of Health of this
municipality so to do or without complying with any and all of the provisions
of the said code as adopted or amended by the Board of Health.
§ 36-5. License fees.
§ 36-6. Application for and issuance of licenses.
Application for and issuance of licenses as provided in § 36-4 of this chapter
shall be made by application therefor in writing to the Board of Health on
forms provided and approved by said Board.
§ 36-7. Suspension, revocation and reinstatement.
A. The fees for licenses as required by § 36-4 above, for the purpose of
raising revenue, for regulation and control, to be paid annually to this
municipality, are hereby fixed as follows:
(1) For each machine dispensing candy, prepackaged nuts, gumballs or
other nonperishable confections, $20 a year; provided, however,
that this license requirement shall not apply to gumball machines
when the proceeds in full there from are used for approved
charitable organizations.
(2) For each machine dispensing any other food or beverage, $30 a
year.
(3) For each machine dispensing any type of potentially hazardous
food item, $40 a year.
B. All licenses issued under authority of this chapter shall expire on the
31st day of December each year.
C. License fees shall be paid to the Board of Health.
A. Any license issued under the terms of this chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the Board of Health for the violation of any provision of this
chapter or said code or whenever it shall appear that the business,
trade, calling, profession or occupation of the person, firm or
§ 36-4 FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES § 36-7
36:185
§ 36-8. Interstate commerce or other governmental activity not
affected.
No provision of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden upon either interstate commerce or any other activity of local,
county, state or federal governments.
§ 36-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less that
$25 nor more than $500. Each violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, and each day the same is violated, shall be deemed and taken to be
a separate and distinct offense.
§ 36-10. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase hereof shall for any reason
corporation to whom such license was issued is conducted or is
operating in a disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any law
of the United States, the State of New Jersey or any ordinance of the
Borough of Rutherford, or that the person or persons conducting the
food establishment is of a character unfit to conduct the same, or that
the purpose for which the license has been issued is being abused to
the detriment of the public or is being used for a purpose foreign to that
for which the license was issued.
B. A license issued under the terms of the provisions of this chapter shall
not be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall
have been had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and
place of such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three
days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also
contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking,
canceling or.suspending such license. Notice may be given either by
personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or be deposited in
the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at the business address
appearing upon said license. At the hearing before the Board of Health,
the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may
thereafter be heard, and, upon due consideration and deliberation by
the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed or, if the Board
concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated, it
may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the licensee.
C. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder nor any
person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to another
license to carry on the same business within the Borough of Rutherford
unless the application for such license shall be approved by the Board
of Health.
§ 36-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 36-10
36:186
be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this chapter, but they shall remain in effect; it being the
legislative intent that this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity
of any part.
§ 36-11. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect 30 days after first publication thereof.
§ 36-10 FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES § 36-11
36:187
Chapter 36A
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 16.
Commercial property maintenance — See Ch.
21A.
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 36.
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 65.
Prohibited food packaging — See Ch. 82A,
Art. II.
Sanitary Code — See Ch. 89.
§ 36-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 36-11
36A:188
ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 1-79]
§ 36A-1. License required. [Amended 11-22-1982 by Ord. No. BH
2-82]
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or association to conduct,
operate or own any type of agricultural market, food-processing
establishment, mobile retail food establishment, retail food establishment
or temporary retail food establishment as defined and governed by the New
Jersey State Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq.), or any amendments
thereto, without first having procured an annual license from the Board
of Health, which license shall be nontransferable and shall expire on
December 31 of each year.
§ 36A-2. License fees. [Amended 11-22-1982 by Ord. No. BH 2-82;
6-25-1990 by Ord. No. BH 2-90; 10-23-1995 by Ord. No. BH 1-95;
9-27-2004 by Ord. No. BH 1-04]
The following annual nonrefundable fees shall be paid to the Borough of
Rutherford for the following types of food establishment licenses.
Yearly Fee
Type of Establishment by Class 2005 2006
2007 and Each
Year Thereafter
A Agricultural market $115.00 $120.00 $125.00
B Food processing $220.00 $231.00 $243.00
C Mobile $450.00 $473.00 $500.00
D Retail food establishments
(on-premises consumption)
D-1 0 to 25 seats $193.00 $203.00 $213.00
D-2 26 to 50 seats $237.00 $250.00 $263.00
D-3 51 to 100 seats $330.00 $347.00 $365.00
D-4 101 to 175 seats $358.00 $375.00 $394.00
D-5 Over 175 seats $500.00 $525.00 $550.00
D-6 Schools and churches No fee No fee No fee
D-7 Fraternal organizations $70.00 $75.00 $80.00
E Retail food establishments
(off-premises consumption)
E-1 Prepackaged only $65.00 $75.00 $85.00
E-2 Others, up to 5,000 square feet
of retail space
$193.00 $203.00 $213.00
§ 36A-1 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 36A-2
36A:189
Yearly Fee
Type of Establishment by Class 2005 2006
2007 and Each
Year Thereafter
E-3 Others, over 5,000 square feet $500.00 $525.00 $550.00
F Temporary food establishments $25.00 $30.00 $35.00
§ 36A-3. Suspensions and revocations.
Any license issued under the terms of this chapter may be suspended or
revoked by the Board of Health for the violation of any provision of this
chapter or Chapter 12 of the State Sanitary Code or whenever it shall
appear that the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of the
person, firm or corporation to whom such license was issued is conducted
or is operating in a disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any
law of the United States, the State of New Jersey or any ordinance of
the Borough of Rutherford, or that the person or persons conducting the
food establishment is of a character unfit to conduct the same, or that
the purpose for which the license has been issued is being abused to the
detriment of the public or is being used for a purpose foreign to that for
which the license was issued.
§ 36A-4. Hearing required; procedures.
A license issued under the terms of the provisions of this chapter shall not
be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have been
had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior to the
date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement
of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or suspending
such license. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the
person to be notified or be deposited in the United States Post Office in a
sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at
the business address appearing upon said license. At the hearing before the
Board of Health, the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer
and may thereafter be heard, and, upon due consideration and deliberation
by the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or, if the Board
concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated, it may
revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the licensee.
§ 36A-5. Reapplication.
If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder nor any
person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to another
license to carry on the same business within the Borough of Rutherford
unless the application for such license shall be approved by the Board of
Health.
§ 36A-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 36A-6
36A:190
§ 36A-6. Applicability.
No provision in this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 36A-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-22-1982 by Ord. No.
BH 2-82; 6-25-1990 by Ord. No. BH 2-90; 10-23-1995 by Ord. No.
BH 1-95]
Any person, association of persons, firm, business or corporation violating
any of the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 12 of the New Jersey State
Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.), any ordinance of the Borough
of Rutherford or any amendments or supplements thereto shall, upon
conviction thereof in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-70,
be liable for a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000 for
each violation. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 36A-8. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase hereof shall, for any reason,
be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this chapter, but they shall remain in effect, it being the
legislative intent that this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity
of any part.
§ 36A-9. Mobile retail food establishments. [Added 11-22-1982 by
Ord. No. BH 2-8257]
Every mobile retail food establishment licensee shall be subject to the
following regulations:
A. No prepared food or beverage, with the exception of ice cream, ice
cream products, water ices or frozen confectionary products intended
for human consumption, shall be sold or offered for sale or distribution
from any stand, pushcart, truck or mobile vehicle except those
packaged foods that have been carefully wrapped and sealed at some
permanently fixed and approved place in which food is processed or
otherwise prepared and packaged.
B. All food allowable for sale shall be maintained at respective food
temperatures prescribed in the State Sanitary Code.
57.Editor's Note: The provisions of this ordinance removed former § 36A-9, When effective.
§ 36A-6 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 36A-9
36A:191
Chapter 36B
FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 16.
Food establishments — See Ch. 36A.
Sanitary Code — See Ch. 89.
§ 36B-1. Certifications required for certain license classes.
[Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord. No. BH 2-04]
All retail food establishments licensed or required to be licensed as Class
D-1, D-2, D-3, D-4, D-5, E-2 or E-3 establishments, as defined in Chapter
12 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq.) and in
Borough Ordinance Chapter 36A, shall be required to have personnel obtain
education, certification, and licensing pertaining to health, sanitation,
personal hygiene, food-borne illness, dishwashing and sanitizing
procedures, microorganisms, insects and rodents, and other health-related
matters. The required licensing and courses shall be as follows:
§ 36B-2. Required compliance for other license classes.
The Rutherford Board of Health (N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.3 et seq.) may require that
establishments licensed in Classes A, B, C, D-6, D-7, and F participate in and
complete the eighteen-hour food manager's program and/or the three-hour
basic course of instruction in food handling, when it is determined that the
type of operation, food items prepared, and/or frequency of the food service
A. The owner or highest ranking manager actively involved in the daily
operation of the establishment shall possess a current certification of
satisfactory completion of the eighteen-hour food manager's program
given by the Bergen County Department of Health Services. The
certification of satisfactory completion of the eighteen-hour food
manager's program shall be effective for five years from the date of its
issuance. Recertification will be required thereafter on an ongoing
basis.
B. A manager, supervisor, crew chief, or supervisory individual(s) actively
involved in the daily operations and in charge of other employees
serving food on a particular shift, other than the owner or highestranking
manager, shall possess a current certification of satisfactory
completion of the minimum three-hour basic course of instruction in
food handling given by the Bergen County Department of Health
Services. The certification of satisfactory completion of the three-hour
basic course shall be effective for three years from the date of its
issuance. Recertification will be required thereafter on an ongoing
basis.
§ 36A-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 36B-2
36B:192
operations requires food-handling training to protect and maintain a safe
food environment.
§ 36B-3. Required date of compliance. [Amended 9-27-2004 by Ord.
No. BH 2-04]
§ 36B-4. Evidence of satisfactory compliance.
The Rutherford Board of Health may, as it deems appropriate, accept an
individual's certification or proof of successful completion of a food
handler's course from another health authority, accredited educational
institution, private corporation's training program, or any other institution,
provided that the course content, hours of instruction, and date of
successful completion are comparable to the requirements outlined in this
section.
§ 36B-5. Posting of certifications.
§ 36B-6. Self-inspections and reports. [Added 9-27-2004 by Ord. No.
BH 2-0458]
A. All retail food establishments with Class D-1, D-2, D-3, D-4, D-5, E-2 or
E-3 shall be required to comply with this chapter by obtaining the
required food handler's certifications no later than January 1, 2004.
B. Beginning as of January 1, 2004, each new establishment required to be
licensed as Class D-1, D-2, D-3, D-4, D-5, E-2 or E-3 establishments
shalt be required to comply with this chapter by attending and
completing the first available courses to obtain the required
certifications.
A. These certifications must be posted conspicuously near the public
entrance of the establishment together with the license to operate a
retail food establishment and the current inspection rating placard, so
that the public may view the documents.
B. Each retail food establishment shall be required to submit copies of the
required food handler's certifications on an annual basis, together with
the annual fee and annual renewal of the license application as a food
establishment under Borough Ordinance Chapter 36A.
A. All retail food establishments licensed or required to be licensed in
Class A, B, D1, D-2, D-3, D-4, D-5, D-6, E-2 and E-3 as outlined in
Chapter 36A of the Borough Code shall be required to conduct biweekly
self-inspections of the establishment on forms designed, approved and
provided by the Board of Health.
B. The owner, highest ranking manager, supervisor, crew chief or
supervisory individual(s) actively involved in the daily operation of the
58.This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former § 36B-6, Violations and
penalties, as § 36B-7.
§ 36B-2 FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING § 36B-6
36B:193
§ 36B-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of, or order promulgated under, this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be liable to a penalty of not less than $50 nor
more than $590 for each violation (N.J.S.A. 26:3-70). Each day a particular
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 37
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
establishment shall conduct the biweekly self-inspections of the
establishment and shall fully complete the self-inspection report as it
pertains to the establishment. Deficiencies noted shall be corrected
immediately.
C. The establishment shall maintain the original copy of each selfinspection
report on the premises for review by the local health
authority for a minimum of one year.
D. Establishments that are licensed as temporary food establishments
shall meet all of the aforementioned requirements, with the exception
that the self-inspection report shall be conducted on a weekly basis.
§ 36B-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 36B-7
36B:194
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization; Findings of Fact; Purpose and Objectives
§ 37-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Rutherford of Bergen County, New Jersey does ordain as follows:
§ 37-2. Findings of fact.
§ 37-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Rutherford are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 37-1 FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING § 37-3
36B:195
§ 37-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 37-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 37-4
36B:196
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 37-5. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Code Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS), including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA — The most recent available flood
risk guidance FEMA has provided. The best available flood hazard data may
be depicted on but not limited to Advisory Flood Hazard Area Maps, Work
Maps or Preliminary FIS and FIRM.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA ELEVATION — The most recent
available flood elevation FEMA has provided. The best available flood
hazard data elevation may be depicted on an Advisory Flood Hazard Area
Map, Work Map or Preliminary FIS and FIRM.
§ 37-5 FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING § 37-5
36B:197
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals or
exceeds 50% (lower threshold: e.g., replace 50% with 40%) of the market
value of the structure at the time of the improvement or repair when
counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor, elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of
piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the
water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In
an area of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 37-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 37-5
36B:198
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 37-5 FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING § 37-5
36B:199
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRELIMINARY FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (PRE FIRM) — The draft
version of the FIRM released for public comment before finalization and
adoption.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348),59 includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
59.Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.
§ 37-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 37-5
36B:200
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. "Substantial damage" also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions during a tenyear
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market valve of the
structure before the damages occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure during a ten-year period, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. Substantial
improvement also means "cumulative substantial improvement." This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of
the actual repair work performed or repetitive loss. The term does not,
however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 37-5 FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING § 37-5
36B:201
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 37-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 37-5
36B:202
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 37-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Rutherford of Bergen County, New Jersey.
§ 37-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 37-8. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Rutherford
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 37-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Rutherford,
Community No. 340072, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Bergen
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated August 28, 2019.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and Panels 34003C0251H,
34003C0253H, 34003C0254H, 34003C0261H, 34003C0262H,
whose effective date is August 28, 2019.
(3) Best available flood hazard data. These documents shall take
precedence over effective panels and FIS in construction and
development regulations only. Where the effective mapping or base
flood elevation conflicts or overlaps with the best available flood
hazard data, whichever imposes the more stringent requirement
shall prevail.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
are on file at 176 Park Avenue, Rutherford, New Jersey.
§ 37-6 FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING § 37-9
36B:203
and other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 37-10. Interpretation of provisions.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 37-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Rutherford, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 37-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 37-11
36B:204
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 37-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 37-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Code Official
and may include, but not be limited to: plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale,
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
§ 37-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 37-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Code Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 37-25; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 37-27A are met.
B. Use of other flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation and
floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 37-7, Basis
§ 37-12 FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING § 37-14
36B:205
for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction Code
Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 37-24, Residential construction, and §
37-25, Nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 37-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control, and the Land
Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of §
37-24, Residential construction, § 37-25, Nonresidential
construction and § 37-26, Manufactured homes.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between
a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
§ 37-14 RUTHERFORD CODE § 37-14
36B:206
§ 37-15. Variance procedure; appeal board.
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in § 37-15.
A. The Planning Board as established by Mayor and Council shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
B. The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the Construction Code Official in the enforcement or administration
of this chapter.
C. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any taxpayer,
may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New Jersey, as
provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17h and 40:55D-18.
D. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(9) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
§ 37-14 FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING § 37-15
36B:207
§ 37-16. Conditions for variances.
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
E. Upon consideration of the factors of § 37-15D and the purposes of this
chapter, the Planning Board may attach such conditions to the granting
of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter.
F. The Construction Code Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances to
the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in § 37-15D(1)
through (11) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is
the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
E. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in § 37-15D, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
F. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 37-15 RUTHERFORD CODE § 37-16
36B:208
ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 37-17. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required.
§ 37-18. Anchoring.
§ 37-19. Construction materials and methods.
§ 37-20. Utilities.
§ 37-21. Subdivision proposals.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
B. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind
forces.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
B. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
A. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
B. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
C. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding; and
D. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and
other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
A. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
§ 37-17 FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING § 37-21
36B:209
§ 37-22. Enclosure openings.
All new construction and substantial improvements having fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles,
building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
§ 37-23. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 37-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard or in § 37-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required.
§ 37-24. Residential construction.
B. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
C. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage;
and
D. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed new development which contain at least 50 lots or
five acres (whichever is less).
A. A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior walls of each
enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be
provided.
B. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
C. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
A. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities (including all
electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service
equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the more
restrictive, base flood elevation (published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the
best available flood hazard data elevation plus one foot, or as required
by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1;
§ 37-21 RUTHERFORD CODE § 37-24
36B:210
§ 37-25. Nonresidential construction.
In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities as
well as all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service
equipment:
B. Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together with
the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated above the depth
number specified in feet plus one foot, above the highest adjacent grade
(at least three feet if no depth number is specified) or at or above the
best available flood hazard data elevation plus one foot, whichever is
more restrictive, and require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
A. Either:
(1) Elevated at or above the more restrictive, base flood elevation
(published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best available flood hazard
data elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 2-1; and
(2) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's FIRM to
elevate above the depth number specified in feet plus one foot,
above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified) or at or above the best available flood hazard
data elevation plus one foot, whichever is more restrictive, and
require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
B. Or:
(1) Be floodproofed so that below the more restrictive, base flood
elevation (published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best available
flood hazard data elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/
SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 37-14C(2)(b).
§ 37-24 FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING § 37-26
36B:211
§ 37-26. Manufactured homes.
§ 37-27. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 37-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
A. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with § 37-18.
B. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within
an area of special flood hazard shall:
(1) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(2) Be constructed to minimize flood damage.
(3) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
(4) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the more restrictive, base flood elevation
(published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best available flood hazard
data elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 2-1.
(5) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or
other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
no less than 36 inches in height above grade and securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist floatation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 37-27A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
§ 37-26 RUTHERFORD CODE § 37-27
36B:212
ARTICLE VI
Severability
§ 37-28. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 37-28 FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING § 37-28
36B:213

ARTICLE VII
Enactment
§ 37-29. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective after final passage and upon publication and
shall remain in force until modified, amended or rescinded by the Borough
of Rutherford, County of Bergen, and State of New Jersey.
§ 37-29 FOOD HANDLERS TRAINING § 37-29
36B:215
Chapter 39
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fee exemptions for volunteer
organizations — See Ch. 127.
§ 39-1. Procedure for license application.
The application for a license to operate a legalized game of chance shall
be submitted, in the form and number of copies thereof as required by
law60 and the rules and regulations of the Legalized Games of Chance
Commission, to the Borough Clerk not later than during his regular business
hours on the Tuesday preceding any regular meeting of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 39-2. Investigation by Chief of Police.
The Borough Clerk shall deliver said application, not later than during the
business hours of the next business day following receipt of the same, to the
Chief of Police who shall investigate the same in the manner required by
law and the rules and regulations of said Commission.
§ 39-3. Report required.
The Chief of Police shall prepare a written report of his findings and
recommendations resulting from his investigation of said application and he
shall file the same, together with the documents comprising the application,
with the Borough Clerk not later than the Monday preceding the said
meeting of the Mayor and Council. The Chief of Police, within the same
period of time, shall deliver copies of his report to the members of the Police
Committee of the Council. In the event that the Chief of Police cannot file
said report within the same time herein limited, he shall inform the Mayor
and Council in writing, within the same period of time, of his reasons for
such inability.
§ 39-4. Time of operation restricted.
Bingo or an on-premise raffle, as both are defined by law and the rules and
regulations of the said Legalized Games of Chance Commission, shall not be
conducted after midnight of the day for which a license has been issued to
conduct said games of chance.
60.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq.
§ 37-29 RUTHERFORD CODE § 39-5
39:216
§ 39-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, association of persons or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not exceeding
$50 for each offense and, in default of payment thereof, shall be committed
to the county jail for a period of not exceeding 10 days.
§ 39-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
§ 39-7. Sunday operation permitted. [Added 3-4-1980 by Ord. No.
2275-80]
Licenses for games of chance, including bingo and raffle licenses, are
hereby authorized to be issued covering operation of said games on Sunday,
under the authority of N.J.S.A. 5:8-31 and 5:8-58.
Chapter 39A
GARAGE SALES AND LAWN SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Special sales — See Ch. 106. Volunteer organizations — See Ch. 127.
§ 39A-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
GARAGE SALE — Any sale called "garage sale," "lawn sale" or any similar
casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means
whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 39A-2. Notification required; frequency restricted.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the
borough without first notifying the Borough Clerk, either by telephone
or in person, Monday through Friday, between the hours of 8:30 a.m.
and 4:30 p.m., at least two calendar days in advance of the scheduled
garage sale.
B. A garage sale may be held on any one property only three times within a
twelve-month period, and no such garage sale shall be for more than
two consecutive calendar days. In no event shall more than two garage
§ 39-5 GARAGE SALES AND LAWN SALES § 39A-2
39A:217
§ 39A-3. Regulations governing sales.
§ 39A-4. Persons and sales excepted.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
sales be permitted at a property in any calendar month. In the event
that inclement weather causes a scheduled sale to be cancelled, the
property owner shall be entitled to hold the sale the following week on
the same day of the week as originally scheduled.
A. All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m.
B. All signs relating to any garage sale shall have a space allotted whereon
upon which shall be placed the name and address of the person running
the sale. Said signs shall not be posted prior to the date of the garage
sale and shall be removed within 48 hours after the completion of the
sale. No signs advertising such sales shall be placed on any property
other than that of the residence of the person conducting such sale.
C. The person conducting the garage sale and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum
on the premises during all hours of such sale activity. No such person
shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit
vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the
area of such premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable
orders of any member of the Police or Fire Departments of the Borough
of Rutherford in order to maintain the public health, safety and welfare.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any persons selling or advertising for sale not more than five items of
personal property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication or other
communication media who publishes or broadcasts in good faith
without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or
without knowledge that the provisions of this chapter have not been
complied with.
E. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business or wherein such sale would
be permitted by Chapter 131, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of
Rutherford or under the protection of the nonconforming use section
§ 39A-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 39A-4
39A:218
§ 39A-5. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Borough of Rutherford Police Department, the
Chief Construction Official and such other employees, officers or agents
which may from time to time be designated by resolution of the Mayor and
Council to enforce the provisions of this chapter. It shall also be the duty of
the enforcing officer to investigate any violation of this chapter coming to
his attention, whether by complaint or arising from his personal knowledge,
and if a violation is found to exist, he shall file a complaint before the local
Municipal Court pursuant to provisions of this chapter.
§ 39A-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to a
penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $100 for the first offense, not
less than $100 nor more than $400 for the second and not less than $250
nor more than $1,000 for the third offense and all subsequent offenses.
§ 39A-7. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with any of the provisions
of this chapter and the Code established herein are hereby repealed to the
extent of such inconsistencies.
Chapter 40
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Clean environment — See Ch. 21.
Commercial property maintenance — See Ch.
21A.
Littering — See Ch. 53.
Deposit and removal of materials — See Ch.
56.
Recycling — See Ch. 82A.
§ 40-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
AUTOMATED CART — A thirty-two-, sixty-five-, or ninety-five-gallon
container used for the removal of garbage, refuse, rubbish and permitted
construction waste by the Department of Public Works which is emptied by
thereof or any other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or
vendor and which sale would be conducted from properly zoned
premises and not otherwise prohibited by any such other ordinance or
statute.
§ 39A-4 GARAGE SALES AND LAWN SALES § 40-1
39A:219
the use of an automated sanitation truck.[Added 11-23-2015 by Ord. No.
3380-15]
CLEAN FILL — An uncontaminated non-water-soluble, nondecomposable,
inert solid, such as rock, soil, gravel concrete, glass and/or clay or ceramic
products.[Added 2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 2595-91]
CONSTRUCTION WASTE — Waste building materials and refuse resulting
from construction, remodeling and repair operations on houses, commercial
buildings, pavements and other structures.[Added 2-19-1991 by Ord. No.
2595-91]
DEMOLITION WASTE — Waste generated from the razing of buildings,
factories and other man-made structures, including streets, roads and
fences.[Added 2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 2595-91]
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designated or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
shall include any yard, ground, walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibule
belonging or pertinent to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any or all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways in any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except bodily
waste), including garbage, ashes, street cleanings, nonrecyclable household
waste and similar materials normally deposited for municipal garbage
collection.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste (commonly known as "heavy
trash") consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as
appliances, furniture, wood, shingles, glass, bedding and similar materials
normally deposited for municipal heavy trash collection.
§ 40-2. Use of proper containers. [Amended 2-19-1991 by Ord. No.
2595-91; 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 3380-15]
A. It shall be the duty of the owner(s) or occupant(s) of every such
premises to utilize the Borough-issued plastic containers provided by
the Department of Public Works for the removal of garbage, refuse,
rubbish and construction waste permitted by the Department of Public
Works and to remove the Borough-issued containers from the front of
every such premises in accordance with § 40-4B. [Amended
2-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3450-18]
B. Any owner(s) or occupant(s) shall be permitted the use of an additional
thirty-two-, sixty-five- or ninety-five-gallon automated cart upon
§ 40-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 40-2
39A:220
§ 40-3. Removal; exceptions. [Amended 2-19-1991 by Ord. No.
2595-91]
All garbage, refuse, rubbish and permitted construction waste within the
Borough of Rutherford shall be removed, as hereinafter provided, at the
general expense of the borough, except material of any type generated by
private contractors arising from building operations or from the altering,
changing, replacing, remodeling or tearing down of buildings, structures or
machinery of any kind.
§ 40-4. Schedule for removal; specific requirements; restrictions.
[Amended 2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 2595-91]
presentation of the nonrefundable one-time fee in the amount of $100
(payable to the Borough of Rutherford) and upon executing an
automated cart usage agreement. Any additional carts provided under
this section shall remain the property of the Borough of Rutherford
and shall remain at the location referenced on the receipt for same
regardless of change of residence or occupancy. The automated cart
usage agreement form and additional carts shall be available at the
Department of Public Works garage. All fees collected for additional
automated carts shall be collected by the Department of Public Works.
A. The borough shall annually establish a schedule for the separate
collection dates of garbage and refuse and permitted rubbish and
permitted construction waste.
B. Garbage and refuse shall be placed in proper Borough-issued
automated carts and left at curbside after 6:00 p.m. on the day
preceding the collection of garbage and refuse in residential zones and
on the day of collection in residential components of business and
commercial zones. The Borough-issued auto carts left at curbside for
collection in residential zones and residential components of business
and commercial zones must be removed within 24 hours after
collection. [Amended 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 3380-15; 2-27-2018
by Ord. No. 3450-18]
C. Rubbish (heavy trash) and permitted construction waste generated
solely by the owner or owners or occupant or occupants of a premises
shall be placed at curbside for collection in accordance with the
following requirements and restrictions and after scheduling a pickup
time with the Department of Public Works: [Amended 5-3-1994 by
Ord. No. 2705-94; 11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 3380-15]
(1) Any material placed in containers, boxes or cartons shall not
exceed 50 pounds, except bulky fabricated materials such as
furniture, bedding and appliances.
(2) Any loose vegetative material, such as brush, tree branches or
other items, shall be cut in lengths not exceeding four feet and
securely bundled or tied. No bundle shall exceed 50 pounds.
§ 40-2 GARAGE SALES AND LAWN SALES § 40-4
39A:221
(3) All nails, screws and other sharp objects which could result in
injury shall be removed or flattened.
(4) Nonrecyclable broken glass shall be placed in rigid containers or
boxes.
(5) No residential premises shall be permitted to place for collection
on any single prescheduled heavy trash collection date more than
eight containers, boxes, cartons, bulky fabricated materials or
bundles, including any containers, boxes, cartons, bulky fabricated
materials or bundles of construction waste generated solely by the
owner(s) or occupant(s).
(6) Appliances or other rubbish containing refrigerants, including but
not limited to chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), as defined in Section 608 of
the Clean Air Act and 40 CFR 82, shall be placed at curbside for
collection after scheduling a pickup with the Department of Public
Works.
D. No clean fill, demolition waste or automotive parts accumulating on any
residential or business premises shall be removed by the Borough of
Rutherford, and it shall be the duty of the owner or owners or occupant
or occupants to effect the removal of such material so as not to be in
violation of this chapter or any other applicable chapter of the Borough
Code.
E. Business and commercial properties collection.61 [Added 2-27-2018
by Ord. No. 3450-18]
(1) Collection of garbage and refuse is not performed by the Borough
of Rutherford.
(2) Business and commercial garbage and refuse collection is
prohibited prior to 7:00 a.m. and shall take place no later than 7:00
p.m.
(3) Commercial establishments shall not place their waste material at
the public curb for removal by their private waste hauler until after
6:00 p.m. the day prior to pickup.
F. Due to the fact that transfer stations are closed on New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, the Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and
Christmas Day, garbage and refuse generated by business and
commercial properties shall not be placed at curbside the night before
said holidays. Garbage and refuse may be placed at the curbside on the
day of the holiday if a commercial hauler is scheduled to come the
following day, or on the scheduled private hauler collection date in
accordance with § 40-4E(2). [Added 2-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3450-18]
61.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding the use of an overnight truck, was repealed
11-23-2015 by Ord. No. 3380-15.
§ 40-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 40-5
39A:222
§ 40-5. Enforcement. [Added 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 2705-9462]
The Superintendent of Public Works or his duly authorized designees are
hereby designated and authorized as the enforcement officers of this
chapter. They are hereby authorized and directed to establish reasonable
regulations providing for a pre-notification and warning for the improper
disposal of materials, including the noncollection of materials. Any such
regulations shall be first approved by the Borough Clerk.
§ 40-6. Compliance required. [Amended 2-19-1991 by Ord. No.
2595-91]
Garbage, refuse, rubbish and permitted construction waste shall be
removed under the supervision of the Department of Public Works, subject
to the direction of the Mayor and Council, and no such material shall be
removed unless full compliance has been made with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 40-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-1-1988 by Ord. No.
2519-88; 3-27-2012 by Ord. No. 3253-12; 3-13-2018 by Ord. No.
3453-18]
Any owner or owners or occupant or occupants of every such premises or
association of persons or corporations violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to penalties on the following schedule:
§ 40-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
A. Commercial garbage haulers:
(1) First offense: $100.
(2) Second offense: $250.
(3) Third offense: $1,000 and mandatory court appearance.
B. Residents:
(1) First offense: $25.
(2) Second offense: $50.
(3) Third offense: $100 and mandatory court appearance.
62.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 40-5 through 40-7 as §§ 40-6
through 40-8, respectively.
§ 40-5 GARAGE SALES AND LAWN SALES § 40-8
39A:223
Chapter 41
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Commercial property maintenance — See Ch.
21A.
Nuisance code — See Ch. 64.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 68.
Playgrounds, parks, open spaces and
recreation areas — See Ch. 73.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 78.
§ 41-1. Purpose.
The use of broad-tipped pens, paint, spray cans, pencils, pens, crayons
or other marking devices to write graffiti on the walls or other spaces
of public or private buildings, vehicles, areas or facilities causes serious
defacement and contributes to the deterioration of property values. Such
practices exhibit contempt for the property rights of private citizens as well
as governmental authority, contribute to erosion of respect for authority and
depreciate the quality of life in the community.
§ 41-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — Includes any unsightly, offensive or defacing writings or other
written or pictorial matter by any method or device and of any content
which contributes to the defacement of real or personal property and which
contributes to the ugliness and unsightliness of its object, space, area or
community and which is detrimental to the attractiveness, neatness, and
good order of the municipality. This definition includes all writings or other
written or pictorial matter which is commonly understood and accepted by
a reasonable person as "graffiti" and is not intended to infringe upon any
protected artistic expression.
§ 41-3. Defacement of property.
A. The writing or placing of any graffiti on any public or private real or
personal property, or a mixture of both, without the express knowledge
and consent of the owner is prohibited.
B. The marking or defacing of any property, real, personal or mixed, by an
owner thereof in such a manner as to constitute graffiti is likewise
prohibited.
C. To the extent permitted by law, any parent, guardian, or custodian in
charge of a minor who is convicted of violating this chapter who has
neglected to properly supervise such minor shall be presumed to have
§ 40-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 41-3
39A:224
§ 41-4. Responsibility for violations.
In enforcement of this chapter, all persons directly or indirectly involved
shall be as equally responsible and guilty as the individual who actually
defaces the object or area. Any individuals who encourage and participate
in such activity, as well as individuals who make available the tools, writing
materials, ladders, lookouts, material, or assistance or who knowingly
supply funds to acquire materials for such purposes, including parents and
friends, shall be equally guilty and liable for punishment under this chapter.
§ 41-5. Responsibility of property owner to remove graffiti.
§ 41-6. Graffiti removal by Borough.
aided and assisted, allowed, and/or permitted said minor in violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person who applied graffiti not to remove it
within 24 hours of its application. To the extent permitted by law,
parents shall be responsible for the costs of removal when the graffiti
has been applied by his and/or her minor child. To the extent otherwise
permissible by law, should community service be ordered by the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Rutherford or the Family Part of the
Superior Court, the parents and child shall both be involved in said
community service project
A. It shall be the duty and responsibility of all property owners to keep the
exterior of their premises and structures free of all nuisances and
hazards, including, without being limited to, all graffiti on the outside of
their premises. Any property owner upon whose property graffiti is
placed shall be required to remove the graffiti within a reasonable
amount of time after the owner receives written notice from the
Borough of Rutherford of said condition and the requirement of
removal. A reasonable amount of time shall be determined by the Code
Enforcement Official based on the extent and volume of the graffiti, and
such amount of time shall be set forth in the notice served on the
property owner.
B. A violation of the within provision shall only be deemed to exist upon
the occurrence of the following:
(1) The owner of the property is provided with written notice from the
Borough in accordance with the preceding subsection; and
(2) The owner fails to remove the graffiti after having received such
notice; or
(3) The owner fails to provide the Code Enforcement Official access to
the property for the purpose of removal in accordance with this
chapter.
§ 41-3 GARAGE SALES AND LAWN SALES § 41-6
39A:225
§ 41-7. Rewards.
The governing body hereby authorizes the Borough Administrator to
provide for a reward up to $500 leading to the identification, apprehension
and conviction of any person who applies graffiti within the Borough of
Rutherford.
§ 41-8. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the Police Department,
the Department of Public Works, the Health Department, the Property
Maintenance Department, or the Building Department of the Borough of
Rutherford.
§ 41-9. Violations and penalties.
A. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the Code Enforcement Official
and/or Borough Administrator is hereby authorized to hire an
independent contractor, if necessary, to remove graffiti from publicly
and privately owned structures. Prior to causing the removal, however,
the Code Enforcement Official shall make a finding that the graffiti
violates the intent of this chapter. The property owner shall be provided
with the opportunity to first remove the graffiti. The property owner
shall be required to grant the Borough consent to remove the graffiti
and consent to enter upon the premises in order to complete the
removal.
B. Notwithstanding anything set forth herein to the contrary, the property
owner, if he or she fails to remove the graffiti voluntarily, shall be
responsible for all reasonable costs incurred by the Borough of
Rutherford for such removal, including the manpower costs to be
calculated by the Borough Administrator whose determination as to the
cost shall be deemed final.
A. Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100
and not more than $1,000, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days, or both. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. In addition, the Municipal Court is urged to require appropriate
corrective measures and restitution by requiring the offender to remove
the graffiti under the supervision of such municipal employee or other
person designated by the Court.
C. Any minor child under the age of 18 years shall be brought before the
Superior Court, Chancery Division, Family Part, and shall be subject to
the penalties provided by said Court.
§ 41-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 41-10
39A:226
§ 41-10. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit easily removable chalk
markings on public sidewalks or streets in connection with traditional
children's games or any lawful business or public purpose or activity.
§ 41-11. Severability.
In the event that any portion of this chapter is found to be invalid for
any reason by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be
limited in its effect only to that portion of the Ordinance actually adjudged
to be invalid, and the remaining portions of this chapter shall be deemed
severable therefrom and shall not be affected.
§ 41-12. Repealer.
Any provisions of the Rutherford Code that are inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 41-13. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon the approval and
publication of notice of adoption as provided by law.
Chapter 43
GREASE TRAPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health — See Ch. 16.
Food establishments — See Ch. 36A.
Food handlers training — See Ch. 36B.
Plumbing Code — See Ch. 74.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 91.
Sewers and wastewater disposal — See Ch. 94.
§ 43-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer
blockages, backups and obstructions from contributions and accumulation
of fats, oils, and greases into the sanitary sewer system from industrial
or commercial establishments, particularly food preparation and serving
facilities.
§ 43-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 41-10 GARAGE SALES AND LAWN SALES § 43-2
39A:227
BROWN GREASE — Waste vegetable oil, animal fat, grease, etc., that is
recovered from the waste water that is discharged into a drain and grease
trap.
FATS, OILS, AND GREASES — Organic polar compounds derived from
animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride
molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using
analytical test procedures established in the United States Code of Federal
Regulations, 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are
sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases."
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any permanently fixed location that prepares
food for human consumption that generates fat, oil or grease waste as a
part of its business within the Borough and is licensed by the local health
department, in accordance with Chapter 36A of the Borough Code, with the
exception of those establishments licensed in categories D-6 and D-7.
GREASE TRAP — A device for separating and retaining waterborne greases
and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering
the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These devices also
serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation
activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer
collection and treatment system.
INSPECTING OFFICIAL — Representatives from the Building Department,
Department of Public Works and/or Health Department.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution
or discharge of wastewater into sewers within the Borough's boundaries,
including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources,
such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.
YELLOW GREASE — Grease derived from used cooking oil from the food
industry as typically found in frying oils from deep fryers.
§ 43-3. Best management practices.
All food establishments regulated under this chapter shall adhere to best
management practices dealing with fat, oil, and grease disposal and shall
educate their employees to these practices. Best management practices
include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Training kitchen staff on grease handling practices.
B. Hanging grease handling posters in the kitchen.
C. Instructing employees that food waste shall be disposed of in the trash
and not in the sanitary sewer system.
D. Providing ample paper towel dispensers for dry-wiping grease from
spills, pots, frying, grilling equipment, and other surfaces saturated
with fat, oil, and grease residue.
E. Using strainer baskets in sinks to catch food waste.
§ 43-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 43-3
39A:228
§ 43-4. Installation requirements.
§ 43-5. Access.
Access to grease traps shall be available during normal Borough business
hours to allow for their maintenance and inspection by the inspecting
official. Access includes the ability to open the trap, if the inspecting official
requires access. Should an emergency situation arise, the access shall be
provided to the inspecting official immediately.
§ 43-6. Grease trap maintenance.
F. Directing all drains from grease-producing sources to a properly sized
grease trap.
G. Insuring that the hot water in the food establishments is less than 140º
F.
A. All existing, proposed, or newly remodeled food establishments within
the Borough of Rutherford shall be required to install, at the user's
expense, an approved, properly operated and maintained grease trap or
acceptable grease recovery system.
B. The inspecting official may require that a grease trap in a food
establishment be upgraded to the current-day industry standards.
C. Food waste, including fat, oil, and grease, cannot be discarded into a
slop sink, floor drain, toilet or any other plumbing fixture not connected
to a grease trap.
A. Cleaning. The user, at the user's expense, shall maintain all grease
traps to assure proper operation and efficiency. Maintenance of grease
traps shall include the complete removal of all contents, including
floating materials, wastewater, bottom sludge and solids. The decanting
or discharging of removed waste back into the trap from which it was
removed or any other grease trap, for the purpose of reducing the
volume to be disposed, is prohibited. Any needed repairs shall be noted.
Repairs shall be made at the user's expense.
B. Cleaning frequency. The grease trap must be cleaned completely at a
minimum of every 30 days, or more frequently, as determined by the
inspecting official, as needed to prevent carryover of grease into the
sanitary sewer system.
C. Disposal. The waste material from the grease trap must be discarded in
accordance with applicable state, county, and local regulations. The
food establishment shall be responsible, after cleaning the grease trap,
to have the contents of the grease trap removed by a private waste
hauler firm hired by the food establishment. In no way shall the waste
material removed from the grease trap be returned to any private or
public portion of the Borough's sanitary sewer collection system. In
addition, the food establishment shall insure that proper written
§ 43-3 GARAGE SALES AND LAWN SALES § 43-6
39A:229
§ 43-7. Maintenance log; records retention.
§ 43-8. Inspections .
The inspecting official shall have the authority to perform periodic
inspections of those food establishments generating fat, oil or grease in
their operations and shall notify the user of any additional required
maintenance or repairs. Upon written notification by the inspecting official,
the user shall be required to perform the maintenance or repair within the
time period defined. Upon inspection by the inspecting official, the user
may be required to install, at his expense, additional controls to provide a
complete system which prevents discharges of undesirable materials into
the wastewater collection system.
§ 43-9. Additives.
Any biological additive(s) placed into the grease trap or building discharge
line, including, but not limited to, enzymes, commercially available bacteria,
or other additives designed to absorb, purge, consume, treat, or otherwise
eliminate fats, oils, and grease, shall in no way be considered as a
substitution to the maintenance procedures required herein.
§ 43-10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
documentation is established and maintained for 24 months, noting the
name of the waste hauler, address, phone number, date waste removed
and volume in gallons, that the brown grease and yellow grease, was
removed from the premises.
A. Maintenance log. A grease trap cleaning/maintenance log indicating
each cleaning of the grease trap for the previous 24 months shall be
maintained by each food establishment and posted near the grease
trap. This log shall include the date cleaned, by whom, and the
signature of the person cleaning the grease trap. Said log shall be made
available to the inspecting official upon request.
B. Retention of records. Each user shall retain all cleaning, maintenance,
and disposal records for review by the inspecting official upon his or her
request. The records shall be retained for a twenty-four-month period of
time.
A. Recovery of damages. When the discharge from a food establishment
causes an obstruction, damage, or any other impairment to the
treatment works, or causes any expense, fine, penalty, or damage of
whatever character or nature to the Borough, the inspecting official
shall invoice the owner for same incurred by the Borough. If the invoice
is not paid, the inspecting official shall notify the Borough Attorney to
take such actions as shall be appropriate to seek reimbursement.
B. Penalty. Any person who violates this chapter is subject to the following
fines.
§ 43-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 43-10
39A:230
§ 43-11. Remedies nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not mutually exclusive. The
inspecting official may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against a noncompliant person.
Chapter 44
(RESERVED)
Chapter 45
HELIPORT
§ 45-1. Establishment of heliport; dedication of land.
A landing field to be used as a heliport for the landing and takeoff of
helicopters shall be established, constructed and maintained on land
hereinafter described and owned by the Borough of Rutherford, which said
land is hereby set apart for that purpose. The said land is situate, lying and
being within the Borough of Rutherford and is described as follows.
(1) First offense: up to $250 per day until corrected, plus
reimbursement of costs and damages.
(2) Second offense: $500 per day until corrected, plus reimbursement
of costs and damages.
(3) Third or more offenses: $1,000 per day until corrected, plus
reimbursement of costs and damages, plus possible closure of
discharge to the Borough sanitary sewer system.
(4) Failure to follow the following shall result in a fine of $50 per day
until corrected:
(a) The best management practices outlined in § 43-3;
(b) Maintaining the waste hauler information as outlined in
§ 43-6C; and
(c) The maintenance log as outlined in § 43-7A.
(5) Violations of § 43-6, entitled "Grease trap maintenance," may result
in the user hiring a qualified and licensed hauler to maintain the
grease traps for one year from the time of the violation, based on
the determination of the inspecting official.
A. Being known as a part of Plot 65B in Block 219 as shown on the Official
Assessment Map of the Borough of Rutherford and more particularly
described as follows.
§ 43-10 (RESERVED) § 45-1
44:231
§ 45-2. Appropriation of funds.
That the cost and expense of constructing, controlling, equipping,
improving, maintaining, operating and regulating said landing field shall
be appropriated in the manner provided by law for any other municipal
expense.
§ 45-3. Facility limited to helicopters.
The use of said landing field shall be limited to helicopters, and no other
kind of aircraft shall use the same.
§ 45-4. Regulations and fees.
Regulations may be adopted and fees or charges may be established for the
use of said landing field in the manner provided by law.
§ 45-5. Applicability of state and federal laws.
The operation of said landing field shall at all times be subject to the laws of
the State of New Jersey and the United States of America and the rules and
regulations of any agency or officer thereof thereto appertaining.
§ 45-6. Name designated.
" Rutherford Municipal Heliport" is hereby designated as the name of said
landing field.
Chapter 46
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Code — See Ch. 47.
§ 46-1. Intent.
The Borough of Rutherford desires to participate in the area of operations of
the Housing Authority of Bergen County throughout its territorial boundary
B. Beginning at a point in the most easterly corner of Plot 65B in Block 219
as shown on said map, and running thence (1) southwesterly 380 feet
along the southeasterly line of Plot 65B to the southwesterly line of Plot
65B; thence (2) northwesterly along said line 465 feet; thence (3)
northeasterly and parallel with the first course 380 feet to the
northeasterly line of Plot 65B; thence (4) southeasterly along the said
line 465 feet to the point or place of beginning.
§ 45-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 46-1
46:232
and the jurisdiction of its Mayor and Council for the purpose of alleviating
the shortage of safe and sanitary housing for low-income senior citizens.
§ 46-2. Authorization for inclusion in Authority.
The Borough of Rutherford does hereby consent to its inclusion in the area
of operation of the Housing Authority of Bergen County, as set forth in this
chapter.
§ 46-3. Filing with state.
The Clerk be and is hereby authorized and directed to file a certified
copy of this chapter with the Commissioner of the State Department of
Conservation and Economic Development and with the Secretary of the
Housing Authority of Bergen County.
§ 46-4. When effective.
This chapter shall be immediately effective upon proper passage and due
publication as prescribed by law.
Chapter 46A
(RESERVED)
Chapter 47
HOUSING CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boardinghouses and lodging houses — See
Ch. 14.
Clean environment — See Ch. 21.
Fire safety — See Ch. 34A.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 40.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 46.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 63A.
Parking area lighting requirements — See Ch.
66.
Property Maintenance Code — See Ch. 78.
Unfit dwellings — See Ch. 123.
Abandoned vehicles and junk — See Ch. 125.
§ 47-1. Powers of Health Officer.
The Health Officer of the Board of Health, or his representative designated
by him, be and he is hereby designated as the officer to exercise the
powers prescribed by the within chapter, and he shall serve in such capacity
without any additional salary. Said officer is hereinafter called the
"Administrative Authority."
§ 46-1 (RESERVED) § 47-2
46A:233
§ 47-2. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to the provisions of c. 211, P.L. 1946,63 the New Jersey State
Housing Code, as approved by the Departments of Health and Conservation
and Economic Development and filed in the Secretary of State's office is
hereby accepted, adopted and established as a standard to be used as
a guide in determining whether dwellings in this municipality are safe,
sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental. A copy of the New Jersey
State Housing Code is annexed to this chapter and three copies of the same
have been placed on file in the office of the Board of Health Clerk and are
available to all persons desiring to use and examine the same.
§ 47-3. Regulations governing inspections.64
The Administrative Authority is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspection to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units and premises located within the Borough of Rutherford in order that
he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the
occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of making
such inspections, the Administrative Authority is hereby authorized to enter,
examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling,
dwelling unit and rooming unit or the person in charge thereof shall give
the Administrative Authority free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit
or rooming unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose
of such inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling
or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee,
access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at
all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter
or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 47-4. Service of notice.
Whenever the Administrative Authority determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or
persons responsible therefor as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
A. Be put in writing.
B. Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
C. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
63.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-31 et seq.
64.Editor's Note: For enumeration of powers of Building Inspector in this connection see Ch.
123, Unfit Dwellings, § 123-10.
§ 47-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 47-4
47:234
§ 47-5. Provisions for hearing.
Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with
the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Board of Health, provided that such person shall
file in the office of the Board of Health a written petition requesting such
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within
10 days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition
the Administrative Authority shall set a time and place for such hearing
and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such
notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced
not later than 30 days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided
that, upon application of the petitioner, the Administrative Authority may
postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such thirtyday
period if in his judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and
sufficient reason for such postponement. After such hearing the Board of
Health shall sustain, modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon its
findings as to whether the provisions of the ordinance and of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Board
of Health sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be in order.
Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically become an
order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the
Administrative Authority within 10 days after such notice is served.
§ 47-6. Records required.
The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of the
Board of Health, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as
a matter of public record in the office of the Board of Health. Such record
shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with
the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health may
seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this state.
D. Be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the case may
require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant if a copy
thereof is served upon him personally or if a copy thereof is sent by
registered mail to his last known address or if a copy thereof is posted
in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice or
if he is served with such notice by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this state. Such notice may contain an
outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
§ 47-4 HOUSING CODE § 47-7
47:235
§ 47-7. Emergencies.
Whenever the Administrative Authority finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he
may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of
such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
which such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately but, upon
petition to the Administrative Authority, shall be afforded a hearing as soon
as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his findings as to whether
the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Administrative Authority
shall continue such order in effect, modify it or revoke it.
§ 47-8. Rules and regulations authorized.
The Board of Health is hereby authorized and empowered to make and
adopt such written rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the
proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however,
that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter nor in anywise alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The Administrative Authority shall file in his office and in the
office of the Clerk of the Board of Health a certified copy of all rules and
regulations which the Board of Health may adopt.
§ 47-9. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or rent to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein
which does not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey State Housing
Code, established hereby as the standard to be used in determining whether
a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation.
§ 47-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not to exceed
$200 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to exceed 90
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter and each day the same is violated shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 47-11. Repealer.
All other ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict or inconsistent with
this chapter are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of such conflict or
inconsistency, and this chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately
upon its adoption and its publication, as provided by law.
§ 47-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 47-12
47:236
§ 47-12. Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be
declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remaining portions
of this chapter shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force
and effect, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared
to be severable.
§ 47-13. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 30 days after the date of the first publication
thereof.
Chapter 50
LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 22.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 37.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 51.
Parking area lighting requirements — See Ch.
66.
Sewage Disposal Code — See Ch. 92.
Soil removal — See Ch. 102.
Zoning — See Ch. 131.
§ 47-12 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 47-13
50:237

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 50-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision and
Site Plan Regulation Ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford."
§ 50-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide municipal agencies in acting upon site plan and
subdivision development applications in the Borough of Rutherford in order
to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of
the municipality and to ensure the orderly growth and development,
conservation, protection and proper use of the land and adequate provision
for circulation, utilities and services. Standards shall be applied in
accordance with the procedures and regulations contained in the borough's
Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 131, and the Land Use Procedures Ordinance,
Chapter 51, of the Code of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 50-3. Definitions.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in P.L. 1975, c.
291,65 such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition
of such term found in said statute or as more particularly defined in the
Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 131 of the Code, unless a contrary intention is
clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 50-4. Procedural requirements.
Procedural requirements for submission and approval of site plan
applications, subdivision applications and required improvements shall be
in accordance with Chapter 51, Land Use Procedures, of the Code.
65.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 50-1 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 50-4
50:239

ARTICLE II
Plat Design Standards for Site Plans
§ 50-5. Preliminary site plan requirements.
Preliminary site plats shall include the same data as required for a final site
plat in preliminary form but with sufficient detail to indicate the following:
§ 50-6. Final site plan requirements.
A. Compliance with all zoning requirements.
B. Availability of existing utilities.
C. Spot elevations on building site.
D. Building compliance with flood regulations.
E. Vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress and circulation within the
site.
F. Preliminary architectural plans and elevations.
G. Preliminary lighting and landscaping plans.
A. Every final site plan plat shall include the following:
(1) Such site plan shall be an accurate and true plot plan drawn to a
scale of one inch equals 50 feet on a sheet 24 inches by 36 inches as
measured from the cutting edges. If one sheet is not of sufficient
size to contain the entire territory, the map may be divided into
sections to be shown on separate sheets of equal sizes with
reference on each sheet to the adjoining sheets. Said plan shall be
clearly and legibly drawn and presented either as an original
drawing in black ink or translucent tracing cloth, or its equivalent,
of good quality with signatures in ink or as an equivalent
reproduction on translucent cloth, or its equivalent, and shall be
accompanied by a cloth print duplicate thereof.
(2) All distances shall be in feet and decimals of a foot and all bearings
shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds. The error of closure shall
not exceed one in 10,000.
(3) The names of all owners of record of all property within 200 feet
and the block and parcel number of the property.
(4) Existing school zoning and any special district boundaries. Such
features shall be shown on a separate map or as a key map on the
detail map itself.
(5) Boundaries of the property, building or setback lines and lines of
existing streets.
§ 50-5 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 50-6
50:241
(6) A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions that are in tended to
cover all or any part of the tract.
(7) The site plan shall show the principal structure or building and use
proposed and the front, rear and all side elevations, together with
an artist's rendering of such building, including the type and
samples of exterior finishing materials. The site plan shall also
show the proposed sewer connections, proposed screening and
landscaping and such other information as may be required by the
municipal agency.
(8) Location of existing buildings which shall remain and all other
structures, such as wells, fences, culverts, bridges, roadways, etc.,
with spot elevations of such structures.
(9) Location of all existing and proposed storm drainage structures,
septic system and utility lines, whether publicly or privately owned,
with pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow, and if any existing
utility lines are underground, an estimated location of said already
underground utility lines shall be shown.
(10) Existing contours with intervals of one foot where slopes are more
than 3% but less than 15% and five feet when 15% or more,
referred to a datum as provided by the Borough Engineer to be
indicated by a dashed line. Where any changes in contours are
proposed, finished grades should be shown as solid lines.
(11) Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas, single trees not in
wooded areas and with a diameter of at least eight inches or other
significant existing features, including previous flood elevations of
watercourses, ponds and marsh areas as determined by survey.
(12) Title of development, North point, scale, name and address of
record owner, engineer or architect preparing the site plan.
(13) The site plan shall be prepared by a licensed engineer or a licensed
architect of the State of New Jersey and shall show the boundaries
of the parcel and the limits of all proposed streets, recreation areas
and other property to be dedicated to public use. The site plan shall
be accompanied by such other exhibits of an architectural or
engineering or planning nature submitted by the applicant or as
may be required by the municipal agency.
(14) All proposed easements and public and community areas. All
proposed streets with profiles indicating grading and with cross
sections showing width of roadway location and width of sidewalk,
and location and size of utility lines according to the standards and
specifications of all Borough of Rutherford ordinances.
(15) All means of vehicular ingress and egress to and from the site onto
public streets, showing size and location of driveways and curb
§ 50-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 50-6
50:242
§ 50-7. Review standards.
The municipal agency, before approval, shall determine that the proposed
site plan will compare favorably with community standards, other
neighborhood improvements and the properly intended and planned
appearances throughout any street or neighborhood. In making such
determination, the municipal agency shall consider:
cuts, and the location and design of any off-street parking spaces
or loading areas, including the size and location of bays, aisles and
barriers, together with the flow and circulation of traffic.
(16) The location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants and all
sewer lines or alternative means of water supply or sewerage
disposal and treatment in conformance with the applicable
standards in the Borough of Rutherford ordinances.
(17) The proposed location, direction of illumination, power and time of
proposed outdoor lighting in conformance with the applicable
standards of the Borough of Rutherford.
(18) Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site plan
design and shall be integrated into the building arrangement,
including existing and new trees, bushes, shrubbery, ground area
cover, perennials, annuals, plants, sculpture, art and the use of
building and paving materials in an imaginative manner.
B. On applications submitted pursuant to § 51-9, the Board shall have the
power to waive submission of any of the above items which are not
applicable to a particular application. [Added 12-1-1998 by Ord. No.
2873-98]
A. Proposed structure. The proposed structure shall be harmoniously
related to the terrain and to existing buildings and thoroughfares in the
vicinity that have a visual relationship to the proposed building. The
achievement of such relationship shall include consideration of the
following:
(1) The height, bulk and area of buildings.
(2) The architectural design.
(3) The type, color and quality of exterior materials.
B. Preservation of landscape. The landscape shall be preserved in its
natural state, insofar as is practicable, by minimizing tree and soil
removal. If the development of the site necessitates removal of
established trees, special attention shall be given to the planting of
replacement trees. Any grade change shall be in keeping with the
general appearance of the neighboring developed areas.
C. Landscaping. Adequate provisions for landscaping and screening shall
be provided as part of the overall site plan design and shall be
§ 50-6 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 50-7
50:243
integrated into the building arrangement, topography, parking and
buffering requirements. Landscaping shall include trees, bushes,
shrubbery, ground area cover, perennials, annuals, plants, sculpture,
art and the use of building and paving materials in an imaginative
manner.
D. The setback distances from all property lines.
E. The size, location, construction and screening of automobile parking
areas, general service areas and recreation areas.
F. The adequacy of all utilities, including water, sewage, gas, electric,
telephone and television, which shall be installed underground, except
where it's unfeasible.
G. The size, location, design, color, texture, lighting and material of all
permanent signs and advertising fixtures shall not detract from the
design of the proposed buildings, structures, roads and the surrounding
properties.
H. The lighting of buildings and grounds.
I. All parking and traffic problems that will develop as a result of
construction pursuant to the plan.
J. Adequate provision made for the drainage of the site by means of
subsurface and drainage structures.
K. The adequacy of fire protection and lighting facilities.
L. All provisions of the Zoning Ordinance not mentioned specifically above
and the relationship of the proposed project to the health, safety and
general welfare of the community, specifically its relationship to the
Comprehensive Plan of the borough as it is developed.
M. The final plat shall include all data required on the preliminary site plat
drawn to incorporate all changes required as a condition of preliminary
approval.
§ 50-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 50-7
50:244
ARTICLE III
Plat Design Standards for Subdivisions
§ 50-8. Sketch plat.
All plats shall be based on Tax Map information or some other similarly
accurate base at a scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch and shall show or
include the following information. When the sketch plat differs from the Tax
Map, the Planning Board may require substantiating evidence in the form
of deeds, etc., to verify any changes.
§ 50-9. Preliminary plat.
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a
scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet. Preliminary plats shall be
drawn by a licensed New Jersey land surveyor. The plat shall be designed in
compliance with the provisions of § 50-8 and shall show or be accompanied
by the following information. Separate maps shall be submitted for site
plans and topography, a utility map and profile of roads and utilities.
A. Location. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in
relation to the entire tract.
B. Structures; wooded areas. All existing structures and wooded areas
within the portion to be subdivided and within 200 feet thereof.
C. Owners. The name of the owner, all adjoining property owners and
those across existing or proposed streets as disclosed by the most
recent records of the Bergen County Tax Office or the Rutherford Board
of Assessors.
D. Identity. The Tax Map sheet, date of revision, block and lot numbers.
E. Streets, etc. All existing or proposed streets, roads, easements, public
rights-of-way, streams, drainage ditches and natural watercourses in
and within 500 feet of the subdivision, or, in the case of a minor
subdivision, 200 feet.
F. Lots. The original and proposed lot layout, lot dimensions and total area
of each lot.
G. Utility and drainage information. In cases where there is a question on
the adequacy of drainage, sewage and utility facilities, the Board may
require maps showing utility connections and topography as well as
percolation tests conducted at the expense of the applicant.
H. Minor subdivision requiring county approval. Three maps showing
topography, existing bridges and culverts within 500 feet of the subject
property, and storm and sanitary sewer profiles shall also be submitted.
I. Other information. Name and address of prospective purchaser and
person preparing maps as well as old name if submitted previously
under different title.
§ 50-8 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 50-9
50:245
A. Key map. An adequate key map showing the entire subdivision and its
relation to existing areas.
B. Lots. Lot layout, lot dimensions and lot areas in square feet.
C. Other contents. The tract name, Tax Map sheet and date of revision,
block and lot number, date, reference, meridian, graphic scale and the
following names and addresses.
(1) Each record owner or owners of property to be subdivided.
(2) The subdivider.
(3) The person who prepared the map.
(4) The holders of encumbrances or liens.
D. Acreage. Acreage of tract to be subdivided to the nearest tenth of an
acre.
E. Elevation; contours. Sufficient elevations and contours at five-foot
vertical intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater and at two-foot
vertical intervals for land of lesser slope to determine the general slope
and natural drainage of the land and the high and low points. Data of all
elevations shall be that of the Geodetic Control Survey of the State of
New Jersey.
F. Existing and proposed locations. The location of existing and proposed
property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, drainpipes and any natural features, such as wooded areas,
large trees and rock formations.
G. Streets. Plans and profiles of all proposed streets within the subdivision
and profiles of existing or future continuing streets, a minimum
distance of 200 feet beyond the subdivision boundaries. The central
angles of all arcs and curves along all street lines shall be shown.
H. Utilities. Plans for proposed utility layouts, water, gas, storm and
sanitary sewers and electricity, showing connections to existing or
proposed utility systems.
I. Sewers, drains, ditches, etc. Plans and profiles of all proposed and
existing sanitary sewers, storm drains, drainage ditches and streams
within the subdivision, together with the locations, sizes, elevations,
grades and capacities of any existing sanitary sewer, storm drain,
drainage ditch or stream to which the proposed facility shall be
connected. When storm drains, drainage ditches or brook-channel
improvements are proposed or required, the plans for such
improvement shall be approved by the State Department of
Environmental Protection, if so required by the Planning Board.
J. Further information. When the development of the subdivision or
improvements within the subdivision are contingent upon information
§ 50-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 50-9
50:246
§ 50-10. Final plat.
The final plat and all plans and profiles of improvements shall be filed with
the Secretary at least two weeks prior to the meeting of the Board when the
plat is to be considered. The plat shall be drawn by a licensed New Jersey
land surveyor on tracing cloth 24 inches by 36 inches at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 50 feet in compliance with all the provisions in N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq., as the same may be amended. An additional copy of linen
tracing cloth shall be filed with the Engineer after all signatures have been
affixed for Tax Map purposes. The final plat shall show or be accompanied
by the following:
outside the boundaries of the subdivision, such information shall be
supplied by the subdivider prior to Board consideration for subdivision
approval.
K. Setback line. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
L. Deed restrictions. A copy, in triplicate, of any protective covenants or
deed restrictions applying to the land being subdivided shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat.
M. Stormwaters. Topographical information and storm drainage studies on
any storm- or surface water disposal problems in accordance with rules
and regulations of the Board. If, in the opinion of the Board, the
subdivision may create or contribute to a drainage problem, the Board
may require additional guaranties from the applicant in addition to
those normally required.
N. Open spaces. Open spaces to be dedicated for public parks or
playgrounds or other public use and the locations and use of all
property reserved by covenant in the deed for the common use of all
property owners.
A. Identity. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner,
graphic scale and reference meridian.
B. Other contents. Tract boundary lines; right-of-way lines of streets;
street names; easements and other rights-of-way; land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use; all lot lines and other site lines, with accurate
dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and central
angles of all curves; and the square foot area of all lots within
subdivision.
C. Public use. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated
to public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of site other
than residential shall be noted.
D. Block and lots. All block and lot numbers shall be approved by the
Engineer and shall be related to existing block and lot numbers as
shown on the Official Tax Map of the borough.
§ 50-9 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 50-10
50:247
E. Setback lines. Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other
sites.
F. Monuments. Location and description of all monuments.
G. Owners. Names of owners of adjoining properties and those across any
existing or proposed street.
H. Accuracy. Certification by the surveyor or Engineer as to accuracy of
details of plat.
I. Consent of owner. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of
the land or that the owner has given consent under an option
agreement.
J. Approval. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body,
whether municipal, county or state, approval shall be certified on the
plat.
K. Profiles. Cross sections and profiles of streets, curbs or gutters, catch
basins and storm sewers, showing grades and approved by the
Engineer.
L. Contours. Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or
greater, and at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
M. Sewers; mains. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and
water mains approved by the Engineer.
N. Streams. Plans, profiles and cross sections of all streams, ditches and
watercourses.
O. Taxes. Certificate from Borough Tax Collector that all taxes to date and
assessments are paid in full.
§ 50-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 50-10
50:248
ARTICLE IV
Improvements
§ 50-11. Required improvements.
Prior to the granting of final approval, the developer shall have installed
or furnished performance guaranties for the ultimate installation of the
following items and other items which the Borough Council, with the advice
of the Planning Board and Borough Engineer, may find necessary in the
public interest.
A. Streets.
(1) Reconstruction or improvements.
(a) Reconstruction or improvements to public streets or roadways
being considered part of the subdivision requirements as
specified in the terms and conditions of preliminary approval
shall be completed prior to any other utility or roadway
construction within the proposed subdivision limits. These
shall include:
[1] All underground utilities.
[2] Base course shall consist of four inches of compacted twoand-
one-half-inch crushed trap rock which shall be bound
with dust.
[3] Intermediate course shall be two inches of compacted oneand-
one-half-inch crushed trap rock and shall be
penetrated with 1.7 gallons per square yard of OA-4
Asphalt Road Oil. Voids shall be filled with a light cover of
five-eighths-inch crushed trap rock.
[4] Surface course shall be two inches of compacted
bituminous concrete, hot-mixed. Bituminous concrete shall
be of Type SM-1 as set forth in the New Jersey State
Highway Standard Specifications, dated 1941, or equal.
Streets other than arterial streets shall be seven inches
deep and of a type known as "bituminous penetration
macadam." Pavement shall consist of a four-inch base
course of compacted two-and-one-half-inch crushed trap
rock bound with dust and a three-inch surface course of
compacted one-and-one-half-inch crushed trap rock
penetrated with between 2 1/2 to three gallons of road oil
per square yard. Road oil to be applied in three
applications with voids to be filled with five-eighths-inch,
three-eighths-inch and one-quarter-inch crushed trap rock
successively.
(b) Under no circumstances shall an existing public street or
roadway be completely closed to vehicular traffic during
§ 50-11 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 50-11
50:249
construction or reconstruction. Access to existing driveways
having ingress and egress to existing public streets or
roadways being affected by the improvements shall be
maintained at all times.
(c) All roadway and utility construction on any roadways within an
approved subdivision shall not be performed during the winter
months between November 15 and March 15 of any year,
unless written approval has been obtained from the Borough
Engineer to allow construction of such utilities or
improvements during this time period.
(2) Street signs. Street signs shall be of the same type and design as
the street signs currently in use and shall be installed in
accordance with applicable borough ordinances and state statutes
in such manner that the name of each intersecting street is clearly
visible to approaching traffic.
(3) Curbs and gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed in
accordance with the construction standards and specifications of
the borough. Concrete shall be Class B, 1 to 175 to 3 to 5 mix,
properly spaded in forms and screened. The curb shall be 20 inches
deep, six inches wide at the top and nine inches wide at the bottom.
The top of the curb shall be one inch above the center-line elevation
of the road. The curb face shall be seven inches with a three-inch
batter from gutter to the top of the curb. Prior to the initial set, the
forms shall be stripped and the face shall be wood floated in an
approved manner. No plastering of exposed surfaces shall be
permitted. Division plates shall be one-eighth-inch steel plates set
10 feet on center and have a three-inch square cut out in the
bottom or rear of the plate. Expansion joints shall be preformed
bitumen cellular-type joint filler, 1/2 inch thick, which shall be inset
1/4 inch from the top and face and set 30 feet on center. All edges
shall be properly tooled and rounded. The top face of the curb shall
be rounded to a one-and-one-half-inch radius, and the top back of
the curb shall be rounded to a one-fourth-inch radius. At all
driveways, depressed curbs shall be so constructed that there shall
be two inches from the top face of the curb to the top of the
pavement, with a one-half-inch batter on the top of the curb sloping
upward to the back of the curb. The curb shall be depressed five
inches over a length of two feet.
(4) Catch basins. Catch basins shall be constructed in accordance with
the construction standards and specifications of the borough as
approved by the Engineer and located where directed by the
Engineer.
(5) Streetlighting. In all major subdivisions streetlights shall be
installed at street intersections and approximately 300 feet apart
along one side of the street.
§ 50-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 50-11
50:250
B. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required in all areas and shall, in all
cases, be of sufficient width to accommodate the maximum pedestrian
traffic, but in no case shall they be less than eight feet in width in a
business zone and four feet in width in all other zones, and they shall be
constructed in accordance with the construction standards and
specifications of the borough.
C. Shade trees.66 Shade trees shall be located and of a size and shall be of
species approved by the Planning Board. All trees not surviving after
one growing season shall be replaced by the developer. The Board may
require the subdivider or developer, at his sole expense, to retain a
qualified person to report to the Engineer as to what can be done to
save existing trees and preserve existing landscaping. [Amended
8-6-1991 by Ord. No. 2615-91]
D. Topsoil protection.67
(1) No topsoil shall be removed from the subdivision site or used as
spoil or fill. In addition, topsoil removed during the course of
construction shall be redistributed in the subdivision so as to
provide equal distribution of cover to all areas of the subdivision
and shall be stabilized by seeding and planting. At least six inches
of topsoil shall be provided on all portions of lots not occupied by
buildings or walks.
(2) No change shall be made in the elevation or contour of any lot or
site by the removal of earth to another lot or site other than a
required minimal amount as determined by the Engineer and
Board. All changes in elevation and contour approved by the
Engineer and Board shall be shown on the preliminary and final
plat and profiles and shall further meet the requirements of
Chapter 102, Soil Removal, of the Code.
E. Monuments. Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11 and shall be placed in accordance with the
requirements of the statute and the specifications of the borough.
F. Culverts, storm drains, sewers and utilities. Provision shall be made for
culverts, stormwater drains, sanitary waste disposal and utilities. All
such installations shall be connected with an adequate approved system
and shall be adequate for all present and future development of the
subdivision and surrounding areas and shall be made in accordance
with construction and specification standards of the borough and
Bergen County, where applicable, and as approved by the Engineer. All
stormwater drains shall have a minimum inside diameter of 15 inches.
G. Gas mains. Gas mains shall be installed in accordance with the
requirements of the applicable ordinances of the borough or the gas
supplier.
66.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 120, Trees and Shrubbery.
67.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 102, Soil Removal.
§ 50-11 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 50-11
50:251
H. Sewers.
(1) Sanitary sewers. Each lot within a subdivision area shall be
provided with sewage disposal facilities by the required extension
of sewer mains and connections to a public sanitary sewer system.
All such installations of sewer mains shall be made in accordance
with the construction standards of the borough as approved by the
Engineer and the State Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) Installation of sewer lines. The subdivider shall install within the
subdivision a complete sewer pipe system, including provisions for
the connection thereto at each lot.
I. Fire hydrants, fire-alarm boxes, pumping stations and standpipes. Fire
hydrants, fire-alarm boxes, pumping stations and standpipes shall be
installed on water mains at intervals as directed by the borough's
Construction Code Official in accordance with the standards of the
National Board of Fire Underwriters. All hydrants and alarm boxes shall
be placed at or near street intersections or at property lines in such a
manner as approved by the Board, so as to least interfere with the use
of roads and property. All major subdivisions without fire hydrants or
waterlines shall be required to provide pumping stations or standpipes
as required by the Board.
J. Water mains. Water mains shall be installed in accordance with the
standards and specifications of the borough or the water utility
company.
K. Disposal of dead trees, debris, etc. All stumps, litter, rubbish, brush,
weeds, dead and dying trees, rocks, roots and debris shall be removed
or destroyed immediately upon the request of and to the satisfaction of
the Engineer. None of the debris shall be buried without written
permission of the Engineer. A copy of such written permission shall be
filed with the Planning Board.
L. Guardrails. Guardrails shall be installed where deemed necessary by
the Engineer and to his specifications.
M. Erosion and landslides. Upon determination by the Engineer, an
appropriate amount shall be included to cover the cost and grading of
banks or the erection of retaining walls to prevent erosion and
landslides. If it is found that, due to the topography of the land, a
structure, when built upon such land, would contribute greatly to a
drainage and erosion problem, the Borough Engineer may require that
appropriate measures be provided to control such runoff.
N. Rock excavation. An amount of money shall be determined to cover
possible rock excavation.
O. Damage to adjacent property. An appropriate amount of money shall be
determined to cover possible damages to adjacent land and structures,
§ 50-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 50-11
50:252
including but not limited to fences, trees, uprooting of property,
monuments, etc.
P. Borrow and fill. An amount shall be determined to cover the cost of
borrow or fill required to meet any requirement established herein.
Q. Site conditions. An amount shall be determined by the Engineer to
ensure that during construction the site is maintained and, after
construction, left in a safe and sanitary manner and that any condition
which could lead to injury or property damage is immediately corrected
by the subdivider upon request by the Engineer.
R. Stream improvements. An amount shall be determined by the Engineer
to improve existing streams or watercourses where storm drainage
flowing into the stream from a subdivision is likely, in the opinion of the
Engineer, to cause flooding problems.
S. Recycling areas. Recycling areas shall be established in multifamily
housing developments in accordance with the following standards.68
[Added 10-19-1993 by Ord. No. 2688-93]
(1) There shall be included in any new multifamily housing
development that requires subdivision or site plan approval an
indoor or outdoor recycling area for the collection and storage of
residentially generated recyclable materials. The dimensions of the
recycling area shall be sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or
containers which are of adequate size and number, and which are
consistent with anticipated usage and with current methods of
collection in the area in which the project is located. The
dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or containers shall be
determined in consultation with the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator and shall be consistent with the district recycling plan
adopted pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.13), and any applicable requirements of the Municipal
Master Plan adopted pursuant to Section 6 of P.L. 1987, c. 102.69
(2) The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source-separated recyclable materials, preferably
near, but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
(3) The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles
shall be able to access the recycling area without interference from
parked cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be
taken to protect the recycling area and the bins or containers
placed therein against theft of recyclable materials, bins or
containers.
68.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 82A, Recycling.
69.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16.
§ 50-11 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 50-11
50:253
§ 50-12. Engineering fees; deposit required.
No final plat shall be approved until the applicant shall have deposited with
the municipality a sum of money sufficient to defray the cost and charges
of the Borough Engineer for his inspection and services in connection with
the said required improvements in a sum to be determined by said Engineer
calculated on the cost of said improvements.
(4) The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials
unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used for the
collection of recyclable paper or cardboard and which are located
in an outdoor recycling area shall be equipped with a lid, or
otherwise covered, so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
(5) Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to
the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped
with signs indicating the materials to be placed therein.
(6) Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor
recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing
manner.
T. Other items. An appropriate amount shall be determined as may be
required by specific problems which are peculiar to any particular
development or which might arise during construction. [Amended
10-19-1993 by Ord. No. 2688-93]
§ 50-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 50-12
50:254
ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 50-13. Severability.
If any article, section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall be
adjudged invalid, such ajudication shall apply only to that article, section,
paragraph, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this
chapter shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 50-14. Violations and penalties.
If, before final approval has been obtained on any subdivision or site plan
application, any person transfers or sells, as owner or agent, any land which
forms a part of a subdivision under which the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment is required to act, such persons shall be subject to a fine not to
exceed $200 or to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, and each parcel,
plot or lot so disposed of shall be deemed a separate violation.
§ 50-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication according to law.
§ 50-13 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 50-15
50:255
Chapter 51
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 22.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 37.
Land subdivision and site plan regulations -
See Ch. 50.
Numbering of buildings and lots — See Ch.
63A.
Soil removal — See Ch. 102.
Stormwater management — See Chs. 107A,
107B, and 107C.
Zoning - See Ch. 131.
§ 50-15 RUTHERFORD CODE § 50-15
50:256
ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 51-1. Establishment.70
There is hereby established pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 291,71 in the Borough
of Rutherford a Planning Board of nine members consisting of the following
four classes:
§ 51-1.1. Alternate members. [Added 12-18-1979 by Ord. No.
2273-79]
§ 51-2. Terms of office.
A. Class I: The Mayor.
B. Class II: One of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the governing body to be appointed by the Mayor.
C. Class III: A member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: Six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor, with consent of Council. The members of Class IV shall hold no
other municipal office, except that one member may be a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of
Education.
A. In addition to the regular members, there shall be two Class IV
alternate members of the Planning Board.
B. The alternate members shall serve for terms of two years and shall be
designated numerically by the Board Chairman and appointed in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first. The term of a Class IV
member who is also a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or
Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no longer a member
of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV term, whichever
occurs first.
B. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
70.Editor's Note: This chapter has been enacted In conformance with the provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law (c. 291, P.L. 1975) to revise administrative procedures for land
use and development (including subdivision of land and zoning) in the Borough of
Rutherford. Where conflicts or inconsistencies exist between this chapter and other
chapters or sections of the Code, § 51-43 of this chapter has provided for the repeal of
such inconsistencies. Action will be taken in the future by the Mayor and Council to
amend other sections of the Code In conformity with this chapter and the Land Use Law.
71.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 51-1 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-2
50:257
§ 51-3. Vacancies.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 51-4. Organization.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a member
of the Planning Board or a municipal employees designated by the Planning
Board.
§ 51-5. Planning Board Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint and fix the compensation of or agree upon
the rate of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney, provided that it
does not exceed the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use.
The Planning Board Attorney shall be an attorney other than the Municipal
Attorney.
§ 51-6. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not
exceed, however, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the governing body for its use.
§ 51-7. Powers and duties generally.
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
the expiration of such term shall be distributed evenly over the first
four years after their appointment as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the terms for which they
were appointed. Thereafter all Class IV members shall be appointed
for terms of four years, accept as otherwise hereinabove provided. All
terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment is
made.
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Borough of Rutherford, including any areas
outside its boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear essential
relation to the planning of the Borough of Rutherford, in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
§ 51-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-7
50:258
B. To administer the provisions of the Land Subdivision Ordinance and
Site Plan Review Ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford72 in
accordance with the provisions of said ordinances and the Municipal
Land Use Law of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
C. To participate with the Mayor and Council in the preparation and
review of programs or plans required by state or federal law or
regulations.
D. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
E. To prepare every two years a program of municipal capital
improvement projects projected over a term of six years, and
amendments thereto, and recommend same to the governing body.
F. To consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation, revisions or
amendments thereto, submitted to it pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, and also pass upon other matters specifically
referred to the Planning Board by the governing body of the Borough of
Rutherford, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
G. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(1) Variances pursuant to Section 57c of c. 291, L. 1975,73 from lot
area, lot dimensional, setback and yard requirements, provided
that such relief from lot area requirements shall not be granted for
more than one lot.
(2) Direction pursuant to Section 25 of said Act 74 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to Section 23 of said Act.75
(3) Direction pursuant to Section 27 of said Act76 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to Subsection G, notice of a
hearing on the application for development shall include reference
to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit,
as the case may be.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations.
73.Editor's Note: see N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
74.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34.
75.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
76.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
§ 51-7 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-7
50:259
§ 51-8. Time requirements for decision; default appeals.
H. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officer.
A. Minor subdivisions. The approval of a minor subdivision, which is
defined in the Subdivision Ordinance as three lots or fewer,77 shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a
complete application to the Planning Board or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor
subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board
approval, unless within such period a plat in conformity with such
approval and the provisions of the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141
(N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.) or a deed clearly describing the approved
minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the county recording
officer, the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any
such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall be signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board before it will be
accepted for filing by the county recording officer.
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be considered by
the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.
C. Ancillary powers, Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in Article I, § 51-7G, of this chapter, the Planning Board shall grant
or deny approval of the complete application within 95 days after
submission by the developer of a complete application or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
approval of the application, and a certificate of the administrative
officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on
request of the applicant.
D. Final approval. Upon submission of a completed application for final
subdivision approval, the Planning Board shall grant or deny said
application within 45 days of submission of a complete application or
77.Editor's Note: Under the provisions of the 1998 Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
Rutherford, "subdivision" is defined as "the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. See
§ 131-2C.
§ 51-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-8
50:260
§ 51-9. Procedure for filing applications. [Amended 3-7-1989 by
Ord. No. 2530-89]
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board
pursuant to the provision of c. 291, P.L. 1975, shall be filed with the Building
Inspector. The applicant shall file, at least 30 days before the date of the
monthly meeting of the Board, 11 copies of a sketch plat, 11 copies of
an application for minor subdivision approval, 11 copies of an application
for major subdivision approval or 11 copies of an application for site plan
review, conditional use approval or planned development. At the time of
filing the application, but in no event less than 30 days prior to the date
set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plat plans, maps or other
papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of
the Planning Board. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the
Secretary of the Planning Board. The Secretary of the Planning Board shall
inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of
the regular meeting dates of the Planning Board.
§ 51-9.1. through § 51-9.2. (Reserved)78
§ 51-10. Citizens' Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
§ 51-11. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat, unless within such period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the county recording officer.
The Planning Board shall, for good cause shown, extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat.
78.Editor's Note: Former § 51-9.1, Appeals to Planning Board from decisions of Park Avenue
Business Improvement District Management Corporation, and former § 51-9.2, Appeal
applications and time requirements, were repealed 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3406-16.
§ 51-8 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-12
50:261
§ 51-12. Administrative officer.
For purposes of this chapter, the administrative officer shall be the Building
Inspector.
§ 51-12 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-12
50:262
ARTICLE II
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 51-13. Establishment; composition. [Amended 12-18-1979 by Ord.
No. 2273-79]
§ 51-14. Officers.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
its members and shall also select a Secretary who may be either a Board of
Adjustment member or municipal employee.
§ 51-15. Board of Adjustment Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint and
fix the compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney, provided that it does not exceed the
amount appropriated by the governing body for its use. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment Attorney shall be an attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 51-16. Experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body
for its use.
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 and shall consist of seven residents of the Borough of
Rutherford as regular members, plus two alternate members. All
members, regular and alternate, shall be appointed by the Mayor with
consent of the Council, regular members serving for terms of four
years, and alternate members serving for terms of two years, from
January 1 of the year of their appointment. The terms of the members
first appointed shall be so determined that the expiration of such terms
shall be distributed evenly over the next succeeding years, provided
that the initial term of regular members shall not exceed four years and
those of alternate members shall not exceed two years. Nothing in this
chapter shall, however, be construed to affect the term of any present
members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, all of whom shall continue
in office until the completion of the terms for which they were
appointed.
B. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality.
C. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
§ 51-13 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-17
50:263
§ 51-17. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 51-18. Powers generally.
§ 51-19. Appeals and applications.
A. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., and amendments and supplements
thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
B. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred
upon such Board, including but not by way of limitation the authority, in
connection with any case, action or proceeding before the Board, to
interpret and construe the provision of this chapter or any term, clause,
sentence or word hereof, and the Zoning Map, in accordance with the
general rules of construction applicable to legislative enactments.
C. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein and with the general rules hereby laid down that equity shall be
done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of this
chapter would work undue hardship.
D. The powers and duties of the Board having been delegated to and
imposed upon it by statute, the Board shall in all cases follow the
provisions applicable to it in said c. 291, P.L. 1975, or subsequent
statutes in such case made and provided, and it shall from time to time
furnish to any person requesting the same a copy of its rules and
information as to how appeals or applications may properly be filled
with the Board for its decision thereon.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of the Building Inspector. Each appeal
shall be taken within the 65 days prescribed by the statute79 by filing a
notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal was taken,
together with 9 copies of said notice with the administrative officer.
Said notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for said appeal. The
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
79.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72, as amended, now prescribes a time limit of 20 days for
filing an appeal with the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 51-17 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-19
50:264
§ 51-20. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975, or amendments thereto
or subsequent statutes applying thereto, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part,
or may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from, and to that and have all the powers of the
administrative office from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 51-21. Expiration of variance.
Any variance hereafter granted by the Board of Adjustment permitting
the erection or alteration of any structure or structures or permitting
a specified use of any premises shall expire by limitation unless such
construction or alteration shall have been actually commenced on each
and every structure permitted by said variance, or unless such permitted
use has actually been commenced, within 9 months from the date of entry
of the judgment or determination of the Board of Adjustment; except,
however, that the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall
be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Board of
Adjustment to the governing body, or to a court of competent jurisdiction,
until the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
§ 51-22. Powers granted by law.
B. Completed applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the
Board of Adjustment without prior application to an administrative
officer shall be filed with the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment of
the Borough of Rutherford. Nine copies of the completed application
shall be filed. At the time of filing the appeal or completed application,
but in no event less than 30 days prior to the date set for hearing, the
applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other papers required by
virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of the Board of
Adjustment. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. The Secretary of the Board of
Adjustment shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate
proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the Board. [Amended
3-7-1989 by Ord. No. 253-89]
C. An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to
the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed
with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by the Superior
Court of New Jersey on application or notice to the officer from whom
the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
§ 51-19 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-22
50:265
§ 51-23. Additional powers.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law
to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.80
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Zoning Ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such Board is authorized by the Zoning Ordinance to
pass.
(3) Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions, or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation in the Zoning Ordinance would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property,
grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such property, a
variance from such strict application so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship; provided, however, that no variance shall
be granted under this subsection to allow a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structure or use; and provided
further that the proposed development does not require approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use
in conjunction with which the Planning Board shall review a
request for a variance pursuant to Section 47a of the Municipal
Land Use Law of 1975 (c. 291, L. 1975).81
(4) Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use in particular cases and for special
reasons, but only by the affirmative vote of at least 2/3 of the full
authorized membership of the Board.
B. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance.
Any application under any subsection of this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its
report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Zoning.
81.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60a.
§ 51-22 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-23
50:266
§ 51-24. Time requirements for decision.
§ 51-25. Administrative officer.
For purposes of this chapter, the administrative officer shall be the Building
Inspector.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in § 51-22 of this Article, have power given by law to:
(1) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
(2) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Article 6 of c. 291, P.L.
1975, or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67
whenever the Board is reviewing an application for approval for a use
variance pursuant to Article II, § 51-22A(4), of this chapter.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120
days after the date a notice of appeal has been filed with the
administrative officer from the decision of an administrative officer, or
the submission of a complete application for development as defined
herein, to the Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40-55D-70b.
B. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
§ 51-23 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-25
50:267

ARTICLE III
Provisions Applicable to Both Boards
§ 51-26. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, a personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating hereto. The Code of Ethics of the Borough of Rutherford shall be
applicable in these matters.82
§ 51-27. Meetings.
§ 51-28. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
completed applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which meetings shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with all applicable
legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum, except as
otherwise required by any provision of Chapter 291, Laws of New
Jersey 1975.83
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, Chapter 231, Laws of
New Jersey 1975.84 An executive session for the purpose of discussing
and studying any matters to come before either Board shall not be
deemed a regular or special meeting in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 31, Ethics, Code of.
83.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 51-26 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-28
50:269
office of the Borough Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right
to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as
provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 51-29. Fees. [Amended 9-8-1982 by Ord. No. 2325-82; 12-17-1985
by Ord. No. 2424-85; 12-1-1982 by Ord. No. 2667-92; 6-17-1997 by
Ord. No. 2803-97]
In addition to those established elsewhere in this Code, all applicants or
appellants to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, Construction Code
Officials or Mayor and Council shall pay the following:
A. Minor subdivision or resubdivision.
(1) At the time of filing a sketch plat for a minor subdivision, the
subdivider shall deposit with the Borough Clerk a filing fee of $300,
by check made payable to the Borough of Rutherford, to cover the
administrative costs of the Borough, together with an amount in
cash to be held by the Borough in escrow of $1,500 which shall be
charged for the actual out-of-pocket expenses to the Borough for
services rendered to it, including but not limited to legal and
engineering fees. If the subdivision is classified by the Planning
Board as a major subdivision, the subdivider shall promptly deposit
the amount required by Subsection B(1) hereof, but he shall receive
a credit for any amount paid pursuant to this section. [Amended
11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 3192-09]
(2) When the amount deposited under this subsection for the actual
out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough has been obligated or
exhausted, the subdivider shall, upon request, deposit additional
amounts as required for legal, engineering, publication, filing,
recording, transcribing and similar items within two weeks of
notification by the Borough Clerk and prior to the time the Borough
authorizes further expenditures.
B. Major subdivision.
(1) At the time of filing a sketch plat for a major subdivision, the
subdivider shall deposit with the Borough Clerk a filing fee of $500
plus $400 per lot to be created by such major subdivision, by check
make payable to the Borough of Rutherford, to cover the
administrative costs of the Borough, together with an amount in
cash to be held by the Borough in escrow of $2,000 which shall be
charged for actual out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough for
services rendered to it, including but not limited to legal and
engineering fees. [Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 3192-09]
(2) When the amount deposited under this subsection for the actual
out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough has been obligated or
§ 51-28 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-29
50:270
exhausted, the subdivider shall, upon request, deposit additional
amounts as required to cover further out-of-pocket expenses of
the Borough for legal, engineering, publication, filing, recording,
transcribing and similar items within two weeks of notification and
prior to the time the Borough authorizes further expenditures.
C. Chapter 131, Zoning, interpretations pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b:
$250.
D. Use variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d: $300, together with an
amount in cash to be held by the Borough in escrow of $1,000, which
shall be charged for actual out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough for
services rendered to it, including but not limited to legal and
engineering fees. When the amount deposited under this subsection for
the actual out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough has been obligated or
exhausted, the subdivider shall, upon request, deposit additional
amounts as required to cover further out-of-pocket expenses of the
Borough for legal, engineering, publication, filing, recording,
transcribing and similar items within two weeks of notification and
prior to the time the Borough authorizes further expenditures.
[Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 3192-09]
E. Variance applications other than use variances by the Board of
Adjustment: $300, together with an amount in cash to be held by the
Borough in escrow of $1,000, which shall be charged for actual out-ofpocket
expenses of the Borough for services rendered to it, including
but not limited to legal and engineering fees. When the amount
deposited under this subsection for the actual out-of-pocket expenses of
the Borough has been obligated or exhausted, the subdivider shall,
upon request, deposit additional amounts as required to cover further
out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough for legal, engineering,
publication, filing, recording, transcribing and similar items within two
weeks of notification and prior to the time the Borough authorizes
further expenditures. [Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 3192-09]
F. Minor site plan.
(1) At the time of filing a sketch plat for a minor site plan, the applicant
shall deposit with the Borough Clerk a filing fee of $300, by check
made payable to the Borough of Rutherford, to cover
administrative costs of the Borough together with an amount in
cash to be held by the Borough in escrow of $1,500, which shall be
charged for the actual out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough for
services rendered to it, including but not limited to legal and
engineering fees.
(2) When the amount deposited under the subsection for the actual
out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough has been obligated or
exhausted, the applicant shall, upon request, deposit additional
amounts as required to cover further out-of-pocket expenses of the
Borough for legal, engineering, publication, filing, recording,
§ 51-29 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-29
50:271
transcribing and similar items within two weeks of notification and
prior to the time the Borough authorizes further expenditures.
G. Major site plan.
(1) At the time of filing a sketch plat for a major site plan, the applicant
shall deposit with the Borough Clerk a filing fee of $600, by check
made payable to the Borough of Rutherford, to cover
administrative costs of the Borough, together with an amount in
cash to be held by the Borough in escrow of $2,500, which shall be
charged for the actual out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough for
services rendered to it, included but not limited to legal and
engineering fees. [Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 3192-09]
(2) When the amount deposited under this subsection for the actual
out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough has been obligated or
exhausted, the applicant shall, upon request, deposit additional
moneys as required to cover further out-of-pocket expenses of the
Borough for legal, engineering, publication, filing, recording,
transcribing and similar items within two weeks of notification and
prior to the time the Borough authorizes further expenditures.
H. Simultaneous applications for site plan review and subdivision and/or
variance applications shall be charged the filing fees established for
each application as if filed separately.
I. All other applications, including but not limited to conditional use
approval or an application for issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 or 40:55D-36: $250, together with an amount in cash to be
held by the Borough for services rendered to it, including but not
limited to legal and engineering fees. When the amount deposited
under this subsection for the actual out-of-pocket expenses of the
Borough has been obligated or exhausted, the applicant shall, upon
request, deposit additional amounts as required to cover further out-ofpocket
expenses of the Borough for legal, engineering, publication,
filing, recording, transcribing and similar items within two weeks of
notification and prior to the time the Borough authorizes further
expenditures.
J. Reinstatement of dismissed applications: $150.
K. Resubmission of minor and/or major subdivision applications, following
previously granted approval by the Planning Board, caused by failure of
the applicant to file said subdivision map and/or deed as required by the
Municipal Land Use Law: $200.
L. Informal review of concept plan.
(1) At the time of filing a sketch plat for an informal review by the
Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.1, the applicant
shall deposit with the Borough Clerk a filing fee as listed below. The
amount of any fee so deposited shall be a credit toward the fee
§ 51-29 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-29
50:272
required to be deposited at the time a formal application for said
development project is filed with the Board.
(a) Minor subdivisions: $150.
(b) Major subdivision: $200.
(c) Minor site plan: $150.
(d) Major site plan: $300.
(e) Variance: $100.
M. Miscellaneous.
(1) List of owners requiring notice: $10 or $0.25 per listed owner,
whichever is greater.
(2) Reproducing, by photostat or otherwise, any public record: the per
copy charge established by statute.85
N. At the time of filing a sketch plat for a subdivision or site plan involving
property on which wetlands are located, the applicant shall deposit with
the Borough Clerk a filing fee of $500, by check made payable to the
Borough of Rutherford, to cover administrative and engineering costs
of the Borough. Said amount shall be in addition to any fees required to
be deposited pursuant to this section.
O. Special meetings. At the time of filing a request for a special meeting of
the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall deposit
with the Borough Clerk a filing fee of $500, plus the cost of fees paid to
professionals to attend said meeting, by check made payable to the
Borough of Rutherford, to cover administrative costs of the Borough.
Said amount shall be in addition to any fees required to be deposited
pursuant to this section. The escrow deposit required for a special
meeting is hereby set at a minimum of $1,000; however, based on the
nature of the matter and whether it is determined by the Board to be
complicated, it may be increased to an amount which the Board feels is
adequate to ensure payment of professional fees. [Added 9-3-1997 by
Ord. No. 2811-97; amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 3192-09]
P. Appeal application submitted pursuant to Code § 51-9.1. [Added
12-1-1998 by Ord. No. 2872-98]
(1) At the time of filing an application pursuant to Code § 51-91.1, the
applicant shall deposit with the Borough Clerk a filing fee of $100,
by check made payable to the Borough of Rutherford, to cover the
administrative costs of the Borough, together with an amount in
cash to be held in escrow of $500 which shall be charged for the
actual out-of-pocket expenses to the Borough for services rendered
to it, including but not limited to legal and engineering fees.
85.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2.
§ 51-29 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-29
50:273
(2) When the amount deposited under this subsection for the actual
out-of-pocket expenses of the Borough has been obligated or
exhausted, the applicant shall, upon request, deposit additional
amounts as required for legal, engineering, filing, recording,
transcribing and similar items within two weeks of notification by
the Borough Clerk and prior to the time the Borough authorizes
further expenditures.
Q. Zoning review. [Added 10-14-2014 by Ord. No. 3340-14; amended
4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 3365-15]
(1) A fee of $30 shall be charged by the Building Department for
zoning review. The fee of $30 shall include, but is not limited to, the
following:
(a) New construction.
(b) Add-a-level or dormer.
(c) Additions.
(d) Steps.
(e) Decks.
(f) Patios.
(g) Pools.
(h) Porches.
(i) Hot tubs or portable spas.
(j) Garages or carports.
(k) Generators.
(l) Sheds.
(m) Retaining walls.
(n) Signs and awnings.
(o) Fences.
(p) Driveways.
(q) Central air conditioners.
(r) Commercial space.
(2) Applications for zoning review requests shall be kept on file in the
Building Department.
R. Tax Map revision. [Added 8-14-2017 by Ord. No. 3427-17]
§ 51-29 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-29
50:274
§ 51-30. Hearings.
§ 51-31. Notice requirements for applications and hearings.
[Amended 3-7-1989 by Ord. No. 2530-89; 9-17-1991 by Ord. No.
2623-91; 12-30-1991 by Ord. No. 2636-91]
(1) In addition to any other fees or deposits required by this chapter,
an application for development which is approved and results in a
change or revision to the Tax Map of the Borough shall pay an
additional fee to the Borough to cover the cost for changes or
revisions to the Tax Map. This additional fee shall be the greater of
$300 per lot or unit created by the application or the amount
determined in accordance with Subsection R(2). This fee shall be
paid to the Borough Clerk and shall be paid prior to the issuance of
any certificate of occupancy for the approved application.
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection R(1) above, if the Borough Engineer
determines that the cost for revision of the Tax Map is greater than
the fee set forth at Subsection R(1), the Borough Engineer shall
advise the applicant of the additional fee and the reasons therefor.
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitation as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense. Such
interested party shall be charged a fee for the transcript or a duplicate
recording as provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 51-29 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-31
50:275
A. Notice shall be given to public utilities and cable television companies
that possess rights-of-way or easements situated within the limits of the
property that is the subject of minor subdivision or site plan
applications. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the
corporate secretary of all public utilities and the general manager of all
cable television companies or by mailing a copy thereof by certified
mail.
B. Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:17-16 and 40:55D-1 et seq. the applicant shall
give notice thereof at his expense as follows:
(1) Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper
of the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on
the current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
whether located within or without the municipality in which the
applicant's land is located. Such notice shall be given by serving a
copy thereof on the owner as shown on said current tax duplicate
or his agent in charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof
by certified mail to the property owner at his address shown on said
current tax duplicate. A return receipt is not required. Notice to a
partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner.
Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its
president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation.
(3) Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice
required to be given pursuant to § 51-31B(2) of this Article to the
owners of lands in such adjoining municipality which are located
within 200 feet of the subject premises.
(4) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to an existing county road or
proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the County
Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within 200
feet of a municipal boundary.
(5) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
(6) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
§ 51-31 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-31
50:276
§ 51-32. List of property owners furnished.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the administrative officer
of the Borough of Rutherford shall, within seven days after receipt of a
request therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee of $15, make and
certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of
owners of whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to Article
III, § 51-31B(2) of this chapter.
§ 51-33. Decisions.
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Section
6b of Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975.86
(7) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
corporate secretary of all public utilities and the general manager
of all cable television companies that own land or any facility or
that possess a right-of-way or easement within 200 feet of the
subject premises.
(8) All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at
least 10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant
shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the administrative
officer for the Board holding the hearing on the application for
development.
(9) Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
C. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this section shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the
nature of the matters to be considered; identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office; and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which resolution shall include
findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
86.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
§ 51-31 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-33
50:277
§ 51-34. Publication of decision.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
administrative officer and paid for by the applicant in accordance with the
rules and regulations set forth by the respective Board. Said notice shall be
sent to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of
any such decision.
§ 51-35. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application or, if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief
granted by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt
payment of such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate provision
for the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be
adequately protected.
§ 51-36. Conditional approvals.
by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be
filed in the office of the Borough Clerk, who shall make a copy of such
filed decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality.
A. Pursuant to the provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-22, an application for
development submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment proposing a development that is barred or prevented,
directly or indirectly, by a legal action instituted by any state agency,
political subdivision or other party to protect the public health and
welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health and welfare, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall process such application for development in accordance with said
Act and this chapter, or rules and regulations as established by said
Boards, and, if such application for development complies with the
Borough's development regulations, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall approve such application conditioned on
removal of such legal barrier to development.
B. In the event that development proposed by an application for
development requires an approval by a governmental agency other
than the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in appropriate instances,
condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of such
§ 51-33 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-36
50:278
§ 51-37. Removal from office.
Any member of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment may (except a
Class I member of the Planning Board), after public hearing if he requests
it, be removed by the governing body for cause. Cause shall be, but is not
limited to, absence from four regular meetings during the current year or
absence from three consecutive regular meetings during the current year.
governmental agency, provided that said Boards shall make a decision
on any application for development within the time period provided in
this chapter or within an extension of such period as has been agreed
to by the applicant, unless the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment is prevented or relieved from so acting by the operation of
law.
§ 51-36 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-37
50:279

ARTICLE IV
Appeals
§ 51-38. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by an interested
party affected by any decision of the administrative officer of the Borough
based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or Official
Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 65 days by filing a notice of appeal
in the manner set forth in Article II, § 51-19A, of this chapter and in
accordance with the provisions of Article 9 of the Municipal Land Use Law
of 1975.87
§ 51-39. (Reserved)88
§ 51-40. Appeals from Zoning Board of Adjustment to governing
body. [Amended 8-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2481-87]
An appeal from any final decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment which
grants or approves a variance under Article II, § 51-22A(4), herein (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70) may be taken to the governing body, provided that such appeal
shall be made within 10 days of the date of publication of such final decision
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 51-41. Procedure for appeals to governing body. [Amended
8-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2481-87; 3-12-1991 by Ord. No. 2598-91]
A. Notice of appeal. The appeal to the governing body shall be made by
serving the Borough Clerk and successful applicant in person or by
certified mail with a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and
the name and address of the appellant and the name and address of his
attorney, if represented. Such appeal shall be decided by the governing
body only upon the record established before the Board of Adjustment.
The parties may submit oral and written argument on the record at the
governing body meeting, and the governing body shall provide for
verbatim recording and transcripts of such meeting to an interested
party at his expense. The applicant and the appellant will be given
notice of the time of the hearing.
B. Default approval. The governing body shall conclude a review of the
record below not later than 45 days from the date of receipt of the
transcript of the hearing but in no case later than 95 days from the date
of publication of such final decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
unless the appellant consents in writing to an extension of such period.
The appellant, at his own expense, shall arrange for a transcript for use
87.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72, as amended, now prescribes a time limit of 20 days for
filing an appeal with the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
88.Editor's Note: Former § 51-39, Appeals from Planning Board to governing body, was
repealed 8-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2481-87. Said repeal was restated in Ord. No. 2598-91,
adopted 3-12-1991.
§ 51-38 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-41
50:281
by the governing body. Failure of the governing body to hold a hearing
and conclude a review of the record below and to render a decision
within such specified period, without such written consent of the
appellant, shall constitute a decision affirming the action of the Board.
C. Stay of proceedings. An appeal to the governing body shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect to which the
decision appealed from was made unless the Board certifies to the
governing body, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the
Board, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior
Court on application upon notice to the Board and on good cause
shown.
D. Modifications of final decision. The governing body, by affirmative vote
of a majority of its fully authorized membership, may reverse, remand
or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the final decision of the
Board of Adjustment.
E. Notice of decision. The governing body shall mail a copy of the decision
to the appellant or, if represented, then to his attorney, without separate
charge, and for a reasonable charge to any interested party who has
requested it, no later than 10 days after the date of the decision. A brief
notice of the decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the
municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the applicant or the
Borough Clerk at the applicant's expense. The period of time in which
an appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction may be made shall run
from the first publication, whether arranged by the municipality or the
applicant.
§ 51-41 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-41
50:282
ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 51-42. Definitions. [Amended 12-1-1998 by Ord. No. 2872-98]
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in P.L. 1975, c.
291, such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition
of such term found in said statute or as defined in the Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 131 of the Code, unless a contrary intention is clearly expressed
from the context of this chapter.
§ 51-43. Repealer.
All sections of the Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, Zoning
Board of Adjustment Ordinance, Planning Board Ordinance or any other
ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford which contains provisions contrary
to the provisions of this chapter shall be and are hereby (to the extent of
such inconsistency) repealed.
§ 51-44. Ordinances continued.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975,
Section 81, the substantive provisions of the existing Land Subdivision
Ordinance and Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford and the
development regulations set forth therein shall continue in full force and
effect until the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford exercises
the authority delegated by said ordinance to regulate development.
§ 51-45. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on
any such applications shall be governed by the provisions of Article IV of
this chapter.
§ 51-46. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford."
§ 51-47. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on January 1, 1977.
§ 51-48. Filing of copies.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law.
The Clerk shall also file with said County Planning Board copies of all other
ordinances of the municipality relating to land use, such as the Subdivision,
Zoning and Site Plan Review Ordinances.
§ 51-42 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-49
50:283
§ 51-49. Severability.
If any article, section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall
be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to that article,
section, paragraph, clause or provision so adjudged and the remainder of
this chapter shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 51-49 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-49
50:284
ARTICLE VI
Development Review Procedures
[Added 12-27-78 by Ord. No. 2248-781]
§ 51-50. Site plan approval required. [Amended 12-1-1998 by Ord.
No. 2872-98]
No building permit shall be issued for any of the uses listed below unless a
site plan application shall first have been approved by the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment:
§ 51-51. Procedure for filing applications.
All development review filing procedures shall be in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 51-52. Determination of completeness of submission; appeal of
determination. [Amended 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 3231-11]
A. Any use other than a one- or two-family dwelling involving the
construction or major alteration of same.
B. Conditional uses.
C. Use variances.
D. Parking areas for more than four or more vehicles.
A. Applications to Planning Board. Applications for development within
the jurisdiction of the Planning Board shall be filed in accordance with
§ 51-9 or 51-9.1 and in accordance with § 51-57. [Amended 12-1-1998
by Ord. No. 2872-98; 11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 3035-03]
B. Applications to the Board of Adjustment. Applications for development
before the Board of Adjustment shall be filed in accordance with the
provisions of § 51-19 of the Code.
A. Development proposals shall be deemed filed with the Planning Board
or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable, (the "Municipal
Agency") for purposes of determining the completeness of the
development proposal on the date the application for development
together with all required filing fees and escrow payments are received
by the Municipal Agency. The period of 45 days within period within
which the Municipal Agency shall determine if an application for
development is complete, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3, shall
commence on the date an application is filed.
B. The Municipal Agency, through its engineer, shall review and take
action on accepting or rejecting the application for development as a
complete application. If not found to be complete, the applicant shall be
notified in writing of the deficiencies within 45 days of the date on
which the application was filed. An applicant may request that one or
§ 51-50 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-52
50:285
§ 51-53. Simultaneous review.
The municipal agency shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with a review for subdivision
approval without the developer's being required to make further application
or the municipal agency's being required to hold further hearings. The
longest time period for action by the municipal agency, beyond which time a
development proposal shall be deemed approved, whether for subdivision,
conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a
conditional use is requested by the developer in conjunction with a site plan
or subdivision, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include reference to
the request for such conditional use.
§ 51-54. Development applications for minor subdivisions.
[Amended 3-16-1999 by Ord. No. 2886-99]
more of the submission requirements be waived. An applicant may
appeal to the Municipal Agency any determination by the Municipal
Engineer which appeal shall be heard and determined at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Municipal Agency. If an application
for development is deemed complete, such application for development
shall be heard and determined within the time periods set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and/or under the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
A. Contents. The minor subdivision plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn
by a licensed New Jersey engineer, land surveyor or architect and shall
be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet. The minor plat
shall contain the following:
(1) The location of that portion which is to be developed in relation to
the entire tract.
(2) The tract name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, date,
reference, meridian, graphic scale and the following names and
addresses:
(a) The name and address of the record owner or owners.
(b) The name and address of the developer.
(3) Existing and proposed lot lines and dimensions.
(4) The location of existing streets and buildings within 200 feet
thereof.
(5) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being developed.
(6) Certification by the Collector of Taxes that all taxes are paid to
date.
(7) Compliance with all zoning requirements.
§ 51-52 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-54
50:286
§ 51-55. Development applications for site plans and major
subdivisions.
Preliminary plats are required for all site plans and major subdivisions. The
following shall apply:
(8) Availability of existing utilities, if pertinent.
(9) Spot elevations on the building site.
(10) Compliance with flood regulations.
(11) Vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress and circulation within
the site.
(12) Architectural plans and elevations.
(13) Lighting and landscaping plans.
A.1. All applications for minor subdivision approval shall include a survey
prepared no more than five years prior to the filing of the application
and certified to the owner of record as of the date of the application.
[Added 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 3231-11]
B. Upon receipt of a complete application for minor subdivision approval,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board, the
Board shall schedule a date of hearing and give due notice to the
applicant, who shall, in accordance with this chapter and the Municipal
Land Use Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12), notify the surrounding property
owners of such hearing. No action shall be taken until completion of the
public hearing.
C. Should the municipal agency determine that any proposed development
may create, either directly or indirectly, an adverse effect on either the
remainder of the property being developed or nearby property, the
municipal agency may require the developer to revise the plat. Where
the remaining portion of the original tract is of sufficient size to be
developed or subdivided further, the developer may be required to
submit a plat of the entire remaining portion of the tract to indicate a
feasible plan whereby the design of the proposed development,
together with subsequent subdivisions or development, will not create,
impose, aggravate or lead to any such adverse effect.
D. The following rights shall be conferred upon minor subdivision
approval. Upon approval of a minor subdivision, the zoning
requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or
otherwise, upon which minor subdivision was granted, shall not be
changed for a period of two years after the date of approval, provided
that in the case of minor subdivision, the same shall have been duly
recorded pursuant to the Map Filing Law.
§ 51-54 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-55
50:287
A. Filing procedure. A developer shall file preliminary major subdivision
applications or site plans with the Building Inspector as prescribed in
§ 51-9 of the Code.
(1) All applications for site plan and major subdivision approval shall
include a survey prepared no more than five years prior to the filing
of the application and certified to the owner of record as of the date
of the application. [Added 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 3231-11]
B. Referral to agencies and officials. The Planning Board shall submit one
copy of the plat and supporting data to the following officials and
agencies, where appropriate, for review and recommendation: the
County Planning Board, Municipal Engineer, Board of Health, Building
Inspector and any other officials or agency affected by the subdivision.
Upon mutual agreement between the County Planning Board and the
municipal agency, with approval of the applicant, the thirty-day period
for a County Planning Board report may be extended for an additional
30 days, and any extension shall so extend the time within which the
municipal agency is required to act.
C. Preliminary approval of site plans; time requirements. The municipal
agency shall grant or deny a preliminary site plan approval within the
following time periods unless some further time has been consented to
by the developer:
(1) A site plan for 10 acres of land or less: within 45 days of submission
of a complete application.
(2) A site plan of more than 10 acres of land: within 95 days of
submission of a complete application.
(3) Upon receipt of a complete application for site plan approval, and
in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board, the
Board shall schedule a date of hearing and give due notice to the
applicant, who shall, in accordance with this chapter and the
Municipal Land Use Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12), notify the
surrounding property owners of such hearing. No action shall be
taken until completion of the public hearing.
D. Substantial amendments; rehearing. If the approving authority requires
any substantial amendment in the layout of improvements in either a
site plan or subdivision as proposed by the developer, and that plan had
been the subject of a hearing, an amended application for development
shall be submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of the original
application for development. The municipal agency shall, if the
proposed development complies with this chapter, grant preliminary
approval.
E. Preliminary agency action. Following required public hearing, the
municipal agency may approve, disapprove or approve with conditions
the application. The decision shall be in writing and shall be sent to the
applicant. If the municipal agency grants preliminary approval, its
§ 51-55 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-55
50:288
§ 51-56. Filing of final applications for major development
proposals.
chairman and secretary (or the vice chairman or assistant secretary in
their absence, respectively) and the Borough Engineer, for subdivisions
only, shall sign each page of the preliminary plat for a subdivision or
site plan. If the plat is conditionally approved, it shall not be signed until
all conditions are satisfied. If all conditions are not met, the conditional
approval shall lapse.
F. Preliminary approval; rights conferred. Preliminary approval shall
confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year period
from the date of the preliminary approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; any requirements peculiar to site plan approval,
except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
municipality from modifying by ordinance such general terms and
conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health and
safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary plat.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the municipal agency may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of
two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance, such revised standards shall govern.
A. Filing procedures.
(1) The developer shall file final major subdivision applications or site
plans with the Building Inspector, as prescribed in § 51-9 of the
Code.
(2) The final plat shall be accompanied by letters directed to the
chairman of the municipal agency and signed by a responsible
officer of the applicable sewer authority and utility companies
having jurisdiction in the area, which authority and companies
provide water, gas, electricity and sewerage. Such letters shall
review each proposed utility installation design and state the
adequacy of the facility.
(3) The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the Borough
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities and
other improvements, both in the development and off-tract
improvements, in exact location and elevation; that he has
§ 51-55 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-56
50:289
examined the drainage, erosion, stormwater control and excavation
plans and found that the interests of the Borough and of nearby
properties are fully protected and identifying those portions of any
improvements already installed; and that the subdivider has either:
(a) Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the preliminary plat approval
with a maintenance guaranty accompanying the final plat; or
(b) Posted a performance guaranty in accordance with this
chapter and the preliminary plat approval for all partially
completed improvements or improvements not yet initiated.
B. Action by the municipal agency.
(1) The municipal agency shall grant final approval if the detailed
drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for final
approval conform to the standards established for final approval,
the conditions of preliminary approval and, in the case of a major
subdivision, the standards prescribed by the Map Filing Law,
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
(2) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 or 40:27-6.6, the
municipal agency shall condition any approval that it grants upon
timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board
by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
(3) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52, the zoning requirements applicable
to the preliminary approval first granted and all other rights
conferred upon the developer pursuant to the Act,89 whether
conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of final approval. If the developer has followed
the standards prescribed for final approval, the municipal agency
may extend such period of protection for extensions of one year, but
not to exceed three extensions. Upon granting of final approval, the
time period conferred upon the applicant by the granting of
preliminary approval shall be terminated.
(4) The developer shall supply sufficient copies of the approved final
plat so that the administrative officer can distribute one copy of
each to the following: Borough Clerk, Borough Engineer, Municipal
Tax Assessor, Planning Board and any other agency or person
directed by the municipal agency.
(5) In order for a subdivision plat to be accepted for filing by the
county recording officer, such plat shall first have been approved by
the municipal agency as indicated on the instrument by the
signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board or a
89.Editor's Note: "The Act" refers to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:550-1 et seq.
§ 51-56 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-56
50:290
§ 51-57. Pre-application review procedures. [Amended 11-25-2003
by Ord. No. 3035-03]
certificate shall have been issued as to the failure of the municipal
agency to act within the required time. The signatures of the
Chairman and Secretary shall not be affixed until the developer
has posted the required guaranties. If the county recording officer
records any plat without such approval, such recording shall be
deemed null and void and, upon request of the Borough, the plat
shall be expunged from the official record.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish the procedure for
Planning Board review and action on applications for site plan
approvals. The procedure is intended to provide orderly and
expeditious processing of such application.
(1) At the request of either the developer or the Borough employee
designated to receive development application, a preapplication
conference may be held before the Site Plan Review Advisory
Board, as authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39f. The purpose of the
preapplication conference is to:
(a) Acquaint the applicant with the substantive and procedural
requirements of the Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance.
(b) Provide for an exchange of information regarding the proposed
development plan and applicable elements of the Master Plan,
Zoning Ordinance and other development requirements.
(c) Advise the applicant of any public sources of information that
may aid the application.
(d) Otherwise identify policies and regulations that create
opportunities or pose significant constraints for the proposed
development.
(e) Review any proposed concept plans and consider opportunities
to increase development benefits and mitigate undesirable
project consequences.
(f) Permit input into the general design of the project.
(2) The preapplication conference allows the applicant to meet with
appropriate Borough representatives who constitute the Site Plan
Review Advisory Board. These individuals, who shall be designated
by the Mayor and governing body, may include;
(a) Borough Administrator.
(b) Borough Engineer.
(c) Borough Planner.
§ 51-56 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-57
50:291
(d) Borough Construction Officer and/or Borough Zoning Officer.
(e) Representative(s) from the Planning Board;
(f) Legal representatives, as deemed appropriate.
(g) Representatives from Borough Environmental, Historic
Preservation and other Commissions, as deemed appropriate.
(h) Subdivision and Site Plan Committee or representative(s) if
this Committee is established.
(i) Any other Borough representative(s) invited by the Planning
Board Chairperson or the Borough Administrator.
(3) Applicants seeking a preapplication conference shall submit the
information set forth in § 51-57B at least 20 days before the
preapplication conference.
(4) The applicant shall not be required to pay a fee for the
preapplication conference. If requested and paid for by the
applicant, a brief written summary of the preapplication
conference shall be provided within 20 working days after the
conference.
(5) The applicant shall not be bound by the determination of the
preapplication conference nor shall the Planning Board or
Subdivision and Site Plan Committee be bound by any such review.
B. Submissions by applicant. Applicants shall be required to submit the
following for the purpose of conducting a preapplication conference:
(1) Name and address of owner and name and address of applicant.
(2) Name, signature, license number and address of engineer, land
surveyor, architect, professional planner and/or landscape
architect, as applicable, involved in preparation of plat.
(3) Title block denoting type of application, Tax Map sheet, county,
name of municipality, block and lot and street location.
(4) A key map at specified scale showing location of tract with
reference to surrounding properties, streets, municipal
boundaries, etc., within 500 feet.
(5) A schedule of required and provided zone district(s) requirements,
including lot area, width, depth, yard setbacks, building coverage,
open space, parking, etc.
(6) North arrow and scale.
(7) Basic depiction of wetlands, topography and other environmental
conditions affecting proposed development.
§ 51-57 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-57
50:292
§ 51-58. Guaranties required; surety; release.
(8) Such other items as shall reasonably be requested by the Site Plan
Review Advisory Board.
(9) Such other items as the applicant deems necessary for review by
the Site Plan Review Advisory Board.
A. Performance and maintenance guaranties.
(1) Before approval of final subdivision plats or as a condition of final
site plan approval, the municipal agency may require and shall
accept in accordance with the standards adopted by this chapter,
for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of ontract
improvements:
(a) The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the
Borough in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
installation for improvements it may deem necessary or
appropriate, including streets, grading, pavement, gutters,
curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade trees, surveyor's
monuments, as shown on the final map and required by the
Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.),
water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other
means of sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control
and sedimentation control devices, public improvements of
open space and, in the case of site plans only, other on-site
improvements and landscaping.
(b) Provision for a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the
governing body for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed
15% of the cost of the improvement.
(2) In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or that the
improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance
guaranty to another governmental agency, no performance or
maintenance guaranty, as the case may be, shall be required by the
municipality for such utilities or improvements.
B. The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the
governing body, by resolution, when portions of the improvements have
been certified by the Borough Engineer to have been completed. The
time allowed for installation of the improvements for which
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by said body
by resolution.
C. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Borough for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the Borough may either,
§ 51-57 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-58
50:293
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete such
improvements.
D. When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall notify the governing body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Borough Clerk of the completion of said
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough Engineer.
Thereupon, the Borough Engineer shall inspect all of the improvements
and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the governing body,
indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of the
improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection. If partial
approval is indicated, the cost of the improvements rejected shall be set
forth.
E. The governing body shall either approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements on the basis of the report of the Borough Engineer and
shall notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of
said report and the action of said municipal agency with relation
thereto not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the
obligor of the completion of the improvements. Where partial approval
is granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guaranty, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure provision of the improvements not yet approved. Failure of the
governing body to send or provide such notification to the obligor
within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the
improvements and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from
all liability, pursuant to such performance guaranty.
F. If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the municipal
agency may require the obligor to complete such improvements and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
G. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
governing body or the Borough Engineer.
§ 51-58 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-58
50:294
ARTICLE VII
Affordable Housing Production
[Added 10-18-2005 by Ord. No. 3092-05; amended 5-11-2015 by
Ord. No. 3367-15; 9-10-2015 by Ord. No. 3375-15]
§ 51-59. Affordable housing requirements.
A. In order to provide the Borough of Rutherford's fair share of affordable
housing, all developments within the Borough of Rutherford shall be
governed by the following ratio requirements for the provision of
affordable housing:
(1) Residential development requirements:
(a) All residential development proposing the creation of five or
more new residential units in any zoning district shall be
required to provide affordable housing at the following ratio:
[1] For rental housing, at least 15% of all units in the
development shall be affordable units; and
[2] For "for sale" units, at least 20% of all units in the
development shall be affordable units.
(b) If the application of either of the foregoing results in less than
a whole number, then the developer shall be required to
contribute the fractional amount as a development fee,
consistent with the Borough of Rutherford ordinance or as an
additional affordable housing unit. For the purposes of this
article, "residential development" shall include newly
constructed market-rate residential units as well as new
market-rate residential units created from the conversion of a
nonresidential building to residential unit(s) requiring the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(2) Any residential development proposing the creation of less than
three new residential units shall also require the payment of a
development fee, consistent with the Borough of Rutherford's
ordinance, said fee to be contributed to the Affordable Housing
Trust Fund.
(3) Nonresidential development requirements. Nonresidential
development shall require the payment of a development fee,
consistent with the Borough of Rutherford ordinance, said fee to be
contributed to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(4) Except for inclusionary development constructed pursuant to lowincome
tax credit regulations:
(a) At least half of all affordable units within each inclusionary
development will be affordable to low-income households;
§ 51-59 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-59
50:295
(b) At least half of all rental units within each inclusionary
development will be affordable to low-income households; and
(c) At least one-third of all affordable units within each
inclusionary development, constructed with each bedroom
distribution in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.3, will be
affordable to low-income households.
(5) Inclusionary developments that are constructed shall be
constructed in accordance with the Fair Share Housing Act and the
regulations duly adopted thereunder and not found invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
B. Priority for meeting affordable housing requirements. The priority for
providing affordable housing shall be as follows:
(1) The provision of the required number of affordable units shall be
met and required first through on-site construction, and on-site
construction shall be treated as the highest and best preference for
provision of affordable units. If on-site construction cannot be
accomplished, then the obligation shall be met through the
creation of affordable units elsewhere within the Borough of
Rutherford.
(2) A payment in lieu of construction to the Borough of Rutherford
shall only be allowed for satisfaction of a fractional obligation of
less than one unit. With approval by the Borough, a builder or
developer may round-up a fractional obligation to provide
construction in accordance with § 51-59B(1) above.
C. Specific regulations for construction of affordable housing within a
residential development.
(1) The design of the building or buildings for affordable housing units
shall resemble as nearly as possible the design for the market units
within the development.
(2) All required setbacks, building height and coverage limits for the
underlying zone shall be applicable on residential lots containing
affordable housing units, except that, for the purposes of
accommodating walkways and parking for the affordable units, the
maximum impervious lot coverage on any lot containing affordable
units may be increased by up to 15% more than the coverage limit
otherwise allowed on the lot.
(3) All affordable units shall comply with COAH's rules pertaining to
the phasing of construction, integration, split between low- and
moderate-income units, controls on affordability, bedroom
distribution, affirmative marketing, heating source and
administration of the affordable units, as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:94
et seq., as amended, and elsewhere in the COAH rules.
§ 51-59 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-59
50:296
D. Specific regulations for affordable units within a nonresidential
development and/or mixed-use development.
(1) Affordable housing units may be constructed within or converted
from space above the first floor level in nonresidential mixed-use
buildings or may be constructed as new space above the first floor
level on the same site as a permitted nonresidential use or
development, subject to site plan review by the Board having
jurisdiction. This shall only be allowable where residential
dwellings situated above the first floor level are permitted as an
accessory use pursuant to the zoning district regulations as set
forth in the Zoning Ordinances of the Borough of Rutherford.90
(2) All required setbacks, building height and coverage limits for the
underlying zone shall be applicable on nonresidential lots
containing affordable housing units, except that, for the purposes
of accommodating walkways and parking for the affordable units,
the maximum impervious lot coverage on any lot containing
affordable units may be increased by up to 15% more than the
coverage limit otherwise allowed on the lot.
(3) In computing the required parking for any mixed-use development
containing affordable housing units, consideration shall be given to
shared parking opportunities.
(4) All affordable units shall comply with COAH's rules pertaining to
the phasing of construction, integration, split between low- and
moderate-income units, controls on affordability, bedroom
distribution, affirmative marketing, heating source and
administration of the affordable units, as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:94
et seq., as amended, and elsewhere in the rules.
E. Payments in lieu of construction. Payments in lieu of the construction of
affordable housing shall only be allowable only to satisfy a fractional
obligation of less than one unit. The cost of construction of one
affordable housing unit is deemed to be $100,000 per unit. The
payment in lieu of construction for satisfaction of a fractional obligation
shall be pro rata in accordance with that cost.
F. Regulations with respect to prior approvals or agreements.
(1) Development that has received preliminary or final approval before
the effective date of this article shall not be required to provide
affordable housing as set forth herein unless a substantial change
in the development is sought. If a substantial change to a prior
preliminary or final approval is sought, then the developer shall be
required to comply with this article. For the purpose of preliminary
or final approvals existing before the effective date of this article, a
"substantial change" to such an approval is defined as follows:
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Zoning.
§ 51-59 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-59
50:297
(a) Five feet of improvements into any yard setback.
(b) Seven feet in building height.
(c) One percent in floor area ratio.
(d) One percent in impervious coverage.
(e) Five feet in building spacing or location.
(f) Three parking spaces.
(g) Five feet in driveway locations.
(h) One percent in site disturbances.
(i) Five feet in lot line locations.
(j) Any change in residential density.
(k) Any change in use that encompasses more than one percent of
the approved building floor area.
(l) Any new variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40-55D-7c or d.
(m) Any such change enumerated above shall not alter the
percentage of low- or moderate-income housing in an approved
project, if applicable.
(2) When a prior approval exists, this article shall be applicable as a
condition of approval under the following additional circumstances:
(a) In any application that seeks to extend or modify the expiration
date of a development approval.
(b) In any application that seeks to extend or modify the statutory
period of protection as applicable to the particular
classification of approval granted.
(3) This article shall not change any existing and approved developer's
agreement between a developer and the Borough of Rutherford so
long as the agreement contains a negotiated and approved
requirement for meeting COAH obligations generated by the
development.
G. Other regulations.
(1) Every development applicant shall be required to submit a
proposed affordable housing production plan (AHPP) at the time
the application is made. The AHPP shall be a condition of the
completeness determination. Each AHPP shall be the subject of
review for consistency with COAH's rules, the Fair Housing Act,
this article, and the Borough's Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan as proposed and/or approved by COAH, and such other rules
and regulations as may be applicable. This review shall be
§ 51-59 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-59
50:298
§ 51-60. Development fees; Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
conducted by the Borough Planner or by such other person or
entity as shall be designated to administer the Borough's COAH
matters.
(2) The AHPP shall be approved by the board hearing the development
application. The board shall consider the Borough-wide impacts of
providing affordable housing, as well as the impacts upon the
Borough's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan as proposed and/
or approved by COAH.
(3) Compliance with COAH's rules and with the approved AHPP shall
be a condition of the board's resolution of approval and may be
covered by appropriate performance and maintenance guarantees
as with any other required improvement.
(4) The board hearing a development application shall ensure that this
article is applied to every development within the Borough of
Rutherford. The board shall require that the applicant or successor
in interest shall comply with the terms of this article. The manner
and method of compliance with the article shall be set forth in the
board's resolution of approval or shall be set forth in a written
developer's agreement between the applicant and the Borough of
Rutherford, which developer's agreement must be approved and
executed before any building permit is issued.
(5) It shall be the developer's responsibility, at its sole cost and
expense, to contract with a COAH-approved and Boroughdesignated
experienced entity for the initial and ongoing
administration of the controls on affordability so as to ensure full
COAH compliance. The designated administrative entity shall, by
February 1 of each year, and as needed throughout the year, file
with the Borough Clerk of the Borough of Rutherford such
certifications, reports and/or monitoring forms as maybe required
by COAH to verify the continuing compliance of each affordable
unit with COAH's rules.
(6) Developments covered by this article shall be exempt from the
payment of development fees pursuant to any development fee
ordinance adopted by the Borough.
A. Purpose. As affirmed by the New Jersey Supreme Court in Holmdel
Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township 121 N.J. 550 (1990), the
purpose of the mandatory development fee is to provide funding for the
Borough's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan approved by the
governing body of the Borough of Rutherford.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following words are intended to
have the same meaning as given to them by the New Jersey Supreme
Court in the Mount Laurel II decision and as clarified or otherwise
§ 51-59 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-60
50:299
modified by subsequent decisions, if any, by a court of competent
jurisdiction, or by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, if
applicable.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined by state law.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the municipality's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a one-hundred-percent affordable development.
COUNCIL/COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted by law.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current equalization ratio for the municipality. Estimates
at the time of building permit may be obtained by the tax assessor
utilizing estimates for construction cost. Final equalized assessed value
shall be determined at project completion by the municipal tax assessor.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A residential development
containing housing units designed for low- and moderate-income
households as well as market-rate units. This term includes, but is
not necessarily limited to: new construction, the conversion of a
nonresidential structure to residential and the creation of new
affordable units through the reconstruction of a vacant residential
structure.
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by the Council or
a court of competent jurisdiction approving a municipality's Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan in accordance with the provisions of the
Fair Housing Act and COAH regulations, if applicable.
C. Residential development fees.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection E below, all residential
developers shall pay a mandatory development fee equal to 1.5% of
the equalized assessed value for each residential unit constructed,
provided that no increased density (above what is permitted as of
right by the existing zoning) is permitted. This mandatory fee shall
be calculated as follows: 0.015 x equalized assessed value x
number of units.
(2) If a "d" variance is granted by the Borough of Rutherford Zoning
Board of Adjustment, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d)(5),
permitting an increase in residential density, then the additional
§ 51-60 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-60
50:300
residential units realized (above what is permitted as of right by the
existing zoning) will incur a bonus development fee of 6% rather
than a development fee of 1.5%. However, if the zoning on a site
has changed during the last two-year period preceding the filing of
the "d" variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two years preceding the filing of the
"d" variance application.
(3) The Borough of Rutherford may collect fees exceeding the amount
set forth in Subsection C(1) or (2) above pursuant to the terms of a
written developer's agreement approved by the Borough Council,
which agreement shall provide to the developer a financial
incentive for the payment of the higher fee.
D. Nonresidential development fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, a mandatory development fee shall be
paid as provided in this Subsection D.
(2) For nonresidential development involving new construction on
unimproved lot or lots, the fee shall be based on the equalized
assessed value of the land and improvements. If an existing
structure is demolished and replaced, the development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the land and preexisting improvements thereon
and the equalized value of the newly constructed structure and the
land. Such calculation being made at the time the final certificate of
occupancy is issued. If the calculation required under this section
results in a negative number, the nonresidential development fee
shall be zero.
(3) For nonresidential development involving additions or alterations
to an existing structure, the development fee of 2.5% shall be
calculated based on the increase in equalized assessed value that
results from the addition or alteration.
(4) If a "d" variance is granted by the Borough of Rutherford Zoning
Board of Adjustment, permitting an increase in floor area pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d)(4), then the developer will incur a bonus
development fee of 6% rather than 2.5%. However, if the zoning on
the site has changed during the two-year period preceding the
filing of such a variance application, the base floor area for the
purposes of calculating the bonus development fee shall be the
highest floor area permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application.
E. Exemptions, eligible exactions and ineligible exactions.
(1) Inclusionary developments, as defined herein, are developments
where the developer is providing for the construction of affordable
housing units elsewhere within the Borough, and developments
§ 51-60 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-60
50:301
where the developer has made a payment in lieu of constructing
affordable housing units are exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final approval,
prior to the effective date of this section, are exempt from
development fees during the effective period of said approval,
unless the developer seeks a substantial change in the approvals
granted.
(3) Owner-occupied residential structures that are being altered or
reconstructed as a result of damage occurring from fire, flood or
natural disaster shall be exempt from paying development fees.
(4) All development by nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from
development fees.
(5) Development otherwise exempted by applicable state law.
F. Timing of payments.
(1) Fifty percent of the total mandatory development fee owed to the
Borough of Rutherford, whether for residential or nonresidential
development, shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building
permit required in connection with the development.
(2) For nonresidential developments: 50% payment required prior to
the issuance of any building permit.
(3) The remaining portion of the development fee shall be paid prior to
the issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any development or
any part thereof, whether residential or nonresidential, and shall
be calculated using the actual assessed valuation of the
development as determined by the Borough's Tax Assessor.
(4) Because the initial payment required prior to the issuance of a
building permit is calculated using an estimated assessed valuation
based on estimates for construction costs, the developer's
certificate of occupancy payment shall be equal to the difference
between the actual assessed valuation and the initial payment
required prior to the issuance of any building permit.
G. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the Bergen County Board of Taxation.
Pending a review and determination by the Board, collected fees
shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the
Borough of Rutherford. Appeals from a determination of the Board
may be made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of
the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq.,
within 90 calendar days after the date of such determination.
Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the
prevailing party.
§ 51-60 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-60
50:302
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the State of New
Jersey Division of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by
the Director, which shall be made within 45 calendar days of the
receipt of the challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an
interest-bearing escrow account by the Borough of Rutherford.
Appeals from a determination of the Director may be made to the
tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax
Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 calendar
days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
H. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(1) All mandatory development fees collected pursuant to this section
shall be deposited in an interest-bearing escrow account entitled
"Affordable Housing Trust Fund: Mandatory Fee Account."
(2) The Affordable Housing Trust Fund: Mandatory Fee Account shall
be maintained by the Borough of Rutherford's Chief Financial
Officer. The Borough of Rutherford Administrator is hereby
authorized and designated as the official responsible for filing and
ensuring reporting compliance with the maintenance of this fund.
(3) The following additional funds shall also be deposited in the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund and shall, at all times, be
identifiable by source, amount and date of deposit:
(a) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable housing
units;
(b) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(c) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(d) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(e) Recapture funds;
(f) Proceeds from the sale of affordable housing units; and
(g) Any other funds collected in connection with the Borough of
Rutherford's affordable housing program.
I. Use of funds.
(1) Money deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund may be
used for any activity approved by COAH or the court, as applicable,
for addressing the Borough's low- and moderate-income housing
obligation. Such activities may include, but are not necessarily
limited to, housing rehabilitation; new construction; regional
§ 51-60 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-60
50:303
contribution agreements; the purchase of land for low- and
moderate-income housing; extensions and/or improvements of
roads and infrastructures to low- and moderate-income housing
sites; assistance designed to render units to be more affordable
to low- and moderate-income people; and administrative costs
necessary to implement the Borough of Rutherford's Housing
Element. The expenditure of all monies shall conform to the
approved spending plan.
(2) At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned
shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
Borough's Fair Share Plan. One third (33%) of the affordability
assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or
less than median income by region.
(3) The Borough of Rutherford may contract with a private or public
entity to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18. In addition, the Borough of
Rutherford may enter into a partnership with a public or nonprofit
third party for the development of supportive and/or special needs
housing serving developmentally disabled (or physically disabled)
persons.
(4) No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or affirmative marketing
program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20%
of the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended
for such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be
used for income qualification of households, monitoring the
turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance with COAH's or
the court's monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related to
litigation opposing affordable housing units are not eligible uses of
the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
J. Spending plan.
(1) Within three years from the date of the adoption of this section, the
Borough of Rutherford shall review all monies collected within the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund and shall devise an initial spending
plan for said monies, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10.
(2) Once developed, the Borough of Rutherford's spending plan shall
be submitted to COAH's review and approval, if applicable,
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3, or submitted for court approval via a
declaratory judgment action.
§ 51-60 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51-60
50:304
(3) Following the initial spending plan development and approval, the
Borough of Rutherford shall develop and submit a spending plan
for each three-year period thereafter, so as to prevent loss of funds
pursuant to the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:270-329.2 and
52:270-329.3.
K. Monitoring. The Borough of Rutherford shall complete and return to
COAH, if applicable, or the court or the court's designee, all monitoring
requirements related to the collection of development fees from
residential and nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of
constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans and any other funds
collected in connection with the Borough of Rutherford's housing
program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation
of the plan as certified by COAH and/or approved by the court. All
monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by COAH and/
or the court.
§ 51-60 LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN § 51-60
50:305
Chapter 51A
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARD PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 33. Volunteer organizations — See Ch. 127.
§ 51A-1. Program created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is hereby created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 199791 to reward members
of the Rutherford Volunteer Fire Department and the Rutherford First
Aid Ambulance Corps for their loyal, diligent, and devoted services to the
residents of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 51A-2. Annual contributions.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferredincome
account for each volunteer member that meets or exceeds the
criteria set forth below; that such contributions shall be made in accordance
with a plan that shall be established by the Borough of Rutherford pursuant
to P.L. 1997, c. 388; and that such plan shall be administered in accordance
with the laws of the State of New Jersey, the United States of America
Internal Revenue Code and this chapter.
§ 51A-3. Criteria for eligibility.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
that meets or exceeds the criteria as follows:
§ 51A-4. Estimated cost.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
A. One hundred points are required for a member to be eligible for the
maximum annual contribution.
B. Five years of service are required for vesting.
C. The annual contribution shall be $1,441 per eligible member, which
amount shall be adjusted to reflect an annual cost of living increase in
accordance with the published consumer price index as stated by the
State of New Jersey, Division of Local Finance. [Amended 6-28-2005
by Ord. No. 3080-05; 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. 3176-08]
A. For regular annual services: $125,000 per year. [Amended
12-16-2008 by Ord. No. 3176-08]
91.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.
§ 51-60 RUTHERFORD CODE § 51A-5
50:306
§ 51A-5. Points.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the volunteer fire company/First Aid Ambulance Corps
in accordance with the following schedule:
§ 51A-6. When effective.
This chapter shall not take effect unless and until it is approved by the
voters as a public question at the next general election.94
Chapter 52
LIBRARY PROPERTY AND BOOKS
§ 52-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIBRARY — The Free Public Library of Rutherford, New Jersey, as
established by the Borough of Rutherford in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:54-1 et seq.
§ 52-2. Time limit for return of materials.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any
other article borrowed from the library after 30 days have elapsed from
the date of posting by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a notice
demanding return thereof, addressed to said person at the last address
furnished.
§ 52-3. Destruction of library materials.
No person shall cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage or destroy any book,
periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction, phonograph recording,
audiovisual material or other article, or any part thereof, which is borrowed
from, owned by or is in the custody of such library.
A. Fire Department: See Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof.92
B. First Aid Ambulance Corps: See Schedule B attached hereto and made
a part hereof.93
92.Editor's Note: Said Schedule A is on file in the borough offices.
93.Editor's Note: Said Schedule B is on file in the borough offices.
94.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2906-99 was approved at the general election held November
2, 1999.
§ 51A-5 LIBRARY PROPERTY AND BOOKS § 52-4
52:307
§ 52-4. False information.
No person, with intent to defraud, shall register or furnish a false name
or address or use any card other than the one issued to said person
for the purpose of borrowing any book, periodical, pamphlet, phonograph
recording, audiovisual material or other articles from said library.
§ 52-5. Rules, regulations and procedures.
The Library Board of Trustees shall adopt and post in a conspicuous place
in the Free Public Library Building rules, regulations and procedures
governing the borrowing of books, periodicals, pamphlets or any other item
or article which may be available to the public for such borrowing.
§ 52-6. Compliance required.
No person shall remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any other item
or article from the Free Public Library Building without complying with the
rules, regulations and procedures of the library for borrowing such items or
articles.
§ 52-7. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Director of the
library or such other person as may, from time to time, be designated
by the Board of Trustees of the library. The Director, or his designated
agent, is authorized to file a complaint in the Municipal Court of Rutherford
for any violations. In the event of a complaint for overdue material, said
Director shall first, by certified letter, return receipt requested, inform the
person that the book or material is overdue and that he or she is subject to
prosecution pursuant to this chapter, 30 days prior to filing complaint.
§ 52-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed
$50 or twice the cost of the book, whichever is greater, and a penalty of not
more than $100 for the second and each succeeding offense.
§ 52-9. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication according
to law.
§ 52-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 52-9
52:308
Chapter 53
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Clean environment — See Ch. 21.
Commercial property maintenance — See Ch.
21A.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 40.
Deposit and removal of materials — See Ch.
56.
Health nuisances — See Ch. 64.
Feeding of pigeons — See Ch. 72.
Litter in playgrounds and recreation
areas — See Ch. 73.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 78.
Sanitary Code — See Ch. 89.
Shopping carts — See Ch. 96.
Water pollution — See Ch. 129.
§ 53-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Anti-Litter
Ordinance."
§ 53-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle required by the borough.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Rutherford.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material; but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.[Amended 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 3140-07]
PARK — A park, playground, recreation center or any other public area
owned or used by the borough and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 52-9 LITTERING § 53-2
53:309
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designated or used either wholly or in part for private residential purpose,
whether inhabited or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include
any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibule belonging or
appurtenant to such dwelling house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, road, highway, boulevard, alley, curb,
sidewalk, or other public way, any and all public parks, fields, squares,
spaces, grounds, memorials, or buildings, and any public watercourse or
water source of any kind, including fountains, rivers, lakes, streams,
wetlands, drainage ditches, or skating rinks.[Amended 8-28-2007 by Ord.
No. 3140-07]
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard,
tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
SHOPPING CART — A contrivance of baskets, mounted on wheels and
propelled by hand, provided by stores or other business establishments for
the convenience of their customers in the carrying of packages, bags or
other receptacles.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway.
§ 53-3. Littering prohibited. [Amended 8-28-2007 by Ord. No.
3140-07]
No person shall throw, sweep into or deposit litter, refuse, rubbish, or
garbage of any kind into any gutter, street, waterway, or other public place.
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise place
any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than in a litter
receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain. Persons owning
or occupying property shall keep the sidewalks in front of the premises free
of litter.95
§ 53-4. Regulations governing shopping carts; fee.96
Any shopping cart found upon a street or other public place may be removed
by the borough from whom it may be redeemed by the owner upon payment
to the Clerk of the Municipal Court on behalf of the borough of a fee of $2.
§ 53-5. (Reserved)97
95.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 109, Streets and Sidewalks, § 109-11.
96.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 96, Shopping Carts.
97.Editor's Note: Former § 53-5, Deposit of refuse prohibited; exception, was repealed
8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 3140-07.
§ 53-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 53-6
53:310
§ 53-6. Littering from vehicles prohibited. [Amended 8-28-2007 by
Ord. No. 3140-07]
No person while a driver or a passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street, public place, or upon private property. Whenever any
litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from any vehicle in violation
of this chapter, the operator or owner, or both, of the motor vehicle shall
also be deemed to have violated this chapter.
§ 53-7. Regulations governing vehicles.
No person shall load, drive or move any truck or other vehicle unless such
vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter
from being blown or deposited upon any street or other public place, nor
shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck, the wheels or tires of
which carry onto or deposit in any street or other public place, mud, dirt,
sticky substance, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 53-8. Littering prohibited in watercourses. [Amended 8-28-2007
by Ord. No. 3140-07]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any water source, fountain,
stream, river, skating rink, or other body of water within the Borough.
Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from any boat
or watercraft in violation of this chapter, the operator or owner, or both, of
the boat or watercraft shall also be deemed to have violated this chapter.
§ 53-9. Advertising restricted.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole, traffic sign, parking meter or shade tree or upon any public
structure or building, except as may be authorized by law.
§ 53-10. Handbills on vehicles restricted.
No person shall affix or place any notice or other paper for a commercial
purpose on any vehicle parked or standing in a street or other public place,
except as may be authorized by law.
§ 53-11. Vacant property protected; exception.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or vacant private
property whether owned by such person or not; provided, however, that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain private
receptacles for the collection of litter.
§ 53-6 LITTERING § 53-12
53:311
§ 53-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-5-1988 by Ord. No.
2496-88; 11-1-1988 by Ord. No. 2520-88]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 and, in default
of payment thereof, may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for
a term not exceeding 90 days; or shall be subject to a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 53-13. Enforcement. [Added 8-28-2007 by Ord. No. 3140-07]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Borough of Rutherford Building
Department. The Borough Construction Official or his or her duly
authorized designees are hereby designated and authorized as the
enforcement officers of this chapter. They are authorized to establish
reasonable regulations providing for warning for the improper disposal
of materials, and enforcement thereafter by issuance of summonses for
violation of this chapter. Any such regulations shall be approved by the
Borough Administrator.
Chapter 54
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 7.
Curfew - See Ch. 23.
Peace and good order - See Ch. 68.
Playgrounds and recreation areas - See Ch.
73.
§ 54-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location, and shall include
the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and
shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around."
PARENT or GUARDIAN — Any adult person having care or custody of a
minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court or
otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access and shall
include any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also include the
front or the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other
place of business, and public grounds, areas, parks, as well as parking lots
or other vacant private property not owned by or under the control of the
person charged with violating this chapter, or in the case of a minor, not
owned or under the control of his parent or guardian. This definition shall
§ 53-12 RUTHERFORD CODE § 54-1
53:312
include the entirety of the Kip Garage.[Amended 9-25-2012 by Ord. No.
3273-12]
§ 54-2. Certain types of loitering prohibited.
§ 54-3. Discretion of police officer.
Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or
is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 54-2, he may, if he
deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order
that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
§ 54-4. Loitering by minors.
No parent or guardian or a minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly
permit that minor to loiter in violation of this chapter.
§ 54-5. Notice of violation.
Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is charged with a violation
of this chapter, his parent or guardian shall be notified of this fact by the
Chief of Police or any other person designated by him to give such notice.
§ 54-6. Presumption.
If at any time within 30 days following the giving of notice as provided in
§ 54-5 the minor to whom such notice relates again violates this chapter,
it shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that the
minor did so with the knowledge and permission of his parent or guardian.
A. No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
(1) Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
(2) Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
(3) Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
(4) Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in § 54-1. This subsection shall include the making
of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting
nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to
whom, or in whose hearing, they are made.
B. No person shall loiter in or around the Kip Garage where such hanging
around has no visible or discernible connection to any purpose or use of
the Kip Garage. [Added 9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 3273-12]
§ 54-1 LITTERING § 54-7
53:313
§ 54-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $200 or by imprisonment
not exceeding 30 days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
§ 54-8. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 54-9. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 54A
MARRIAGE AND CIVIL UNION CEREMONIES
§ 54-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 54-9
53:314
ARTICLE I
Fees
[Adopted 3-25-2008 by Ord. No. 3152-08]
§ 54A-1. Legislative authority; fees established.
N.J.S.A. 37:1-13 et seq. permits mayors to perform such ceremonies to
solemnize marriages and civil unions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, fees
collected in association with the service or performance of a marriage or
civil union ceremony are hereby as follows:
A. Persons seeking to be married or joined in civil union by the Mayor of
the Borough of Rutherford shall remit a fee of $100, to be paid to the
Borough of Rutherford Finance Office.
§ 54A-1 LITTERING § 54A-1
53:315
Chapter 55
MASSAGE AND BODYWORK THERAPIES
§ 55-1. Purpose.
The Borough of Rutherford acknowledges that massage and bodywork
therapy is a legitimate professional field that provides health benefits and
that the Massage and Bodywork Therapist Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53
et seq., requires licenses for all those who engage in the practice of
massage and bodywork therapy and that all massage and bodywork therapy
establishments register with the New Jersey Board of Massage and
Bodywork Therapy. The Borough nevertheless finds that the practice of
such therapy by untrained and unlicensed practitioners can both cause
injury and illness to clients and can encourage and foster prostitution. It is
declared that the operation of a massage establishment, as defined in this
chapter, is a business affecting the public health, safety and welfare of the
Borough of Rutherford and its residents. The purpose of this chapter is to
provide standards to help assure that the practice of massage and bodywork
therapy does not cause injury or disease to clients and does not degenerate
into prostitution.
§ 55-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply:
MASSAGE AND BODYWORK THERAPIES — Any systems of activity of
structured touch which include, but are not limited to, holding, applying
pressure, positioning and mobilizing soft tissue of the body by manual
technique and use of visual, kinesthetic, auditory and palpating skills to
assess the body for purposes of applying therapeutic massage and
bodywork principles. Such application may include, but is not limited to,
the use of therapies such as heliotherapy or hydrotherapy, the use of moist
hot and cold external applications, explaining and describing myofascial
movement, and self-care and stress management as it relates to massage
and bodywork therapies. Massage and bodywork therapy practices are
designed to affect the energetic system of the body for the purpose of
promoting and maintaining the health and well-being of the client. Massage
and bodywork therapies shall not include the diagnosis or treatment of
illness, disease, impairment, or disability.
§ 55-3. Employment of unlicensed massage and bodywork
therapists prohibited; display of state-issued licenses for therapists;
establishment registration.
A. No person shall practice massage or related therapies as a massage and
bodywork therapist employee or otherwise in the Borough of
Rutherford unless he or she annually presents proof of a valid and
subsisting massage and bodywork therapist's license issued by the
State of New Jersey licensing agency known as the "New Jersey Board
§ 54A-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 55-3
53:316
§ 55-4. Compliance with health codes required; prices and
standards to be posted; sanitary requirements.
Every massage and bodywork therapy establishment shall comply with the
following:
of Massage Therapy," a part of the New Jersey Department of Law and
Public Safety within the State Division of Consumer Affairs pursuant to
the Massage and Bodywork Therapist Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53
et seq., to the Borough Health Department, no later than January 10
of each year. All newly employed massage and bodywork therapists
to existing massage and bodywork establishments within the Borough
shall provide a copy of their valid and subsisting massage and bodywork
therapist's license issued by the State of New Jersey licensing agency
known as the "New Jersey Board of Massage Therapy" before practicing
massage and related therapies within the Borough of Rutherford and
then annually thereafter no later than January 10 of each year.
B. No person shall employ anyone as a massage or bodywork therapist in
the Borough of Rutherford unless the massage and bodywork therapist
has presented proof of a valid and subsisting massage and bodywork
therapist's license issued by the State of New Jersey licensing agency
known as the "New Jersey Board of Massage Therapy," a part of the
New Jersey Department of Law and Public Safety within the State
Division of Consumer Affairs pursuant to the Massage and Bodywork
Therapist Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq., to the Borough
Health Department.
C. No massage and bodywork establishment shall operate within the
Borough of Rutherford unless the establishment presents proof every
two years of a valid registration issued by the State of New Jersey
licensing agency known as the "New Jersey Board of Massage Therapy,"
a part of the New Jersey Department of Law and Public Safety within
the State Division of Consumer Affairs pursuant to the Massage and
Bodywork Therapist Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq., to the
Borough Health Department, no later than January 10 of the applicable
year.
D. The massage and bodywork therapy establishment shall display the
licenses of each and every massage and bodywork therapist employed
in the establishment as well as the establishment's registration issued
by the State of New Jersey licensing agency known as the "New Jersey
Board of Massage Therapy" in an open and conspicuous place on the
premises of the establishment.
A. Every portion of the massage and bodywork therapy establishment,
including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in
a sanitary condition.
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers.
§ 55-3 LITTERING § 55-4
53:317
§ 55-5. Conduct of massage and bodywork therapy.
The conduct of licensed massage and bodywork therapists and massage and
bodywork establishments shall be in accordance with the New Jersey Board
of Massage and Bodywork Therapy law set forth at N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.,
and the regulations pertaining to same set forth at N.J.A.C. 13:37A-1.1.
C. All employees, including massage and bodywork therapists, shall be
clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments. Dressing rooms
must be available on the premises. Doors to such dressing rooms shall
open inward and shall be self-closing.
D. All massage and bodywork therapy establishments shall be provided
with clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity which
shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary
manner.
E. All massage tables shall be disinfected after each use.
F. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities and surfaces shall be in good repair and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms,
steam or vapor rooms or steam or vapor cabinets and shower
compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day
the business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly
cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be
kept dry, clean and sanitary.
G. All tables, tubs, shower stalls and floors, except reception and
administrative areas, shall be made of nonporous materials, which may
be readily disinfected. Closed containers shall be provided for used
towels and waste materials.
H. Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering
massage and bodywork therapies shall be kept in clean closed
containers or cabinets.
I. Animals, except for service animals, shall not be permitted in the
massage work area.
J. Each massage and bodywork therapist shall wash his or her hands in
hot running water, using proper soap or disinfectant, before
administering a massage and bodywork therapy to a patron.
K. A copy of this section shall be posted in every massage therapy
establishment in a conspicuous location visible to clients of the
establishment.
L. All employees, including massage and bodywork therapists, shall be
deemed responsible for the clean, safe, and lawful business operation
on the premises.
§ 55-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 55-6
53:318
§ 55-6. Minor patrons.
Any patron under the age of 18 years of age must be accompanied by
a parent or guardian or adult with written permission of the parent or
guardian.
§ 55-7. Alcoholic beverages or controlled dangerous substances
prohibited.
§ 55-8. Sleeping quarters.
No part of the quarters of any massage and bodywork therapy
establishment shall be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping
quarters nor shall any person sleep in such massage and bodywork therapy
establishment except for limited periods incidental to and directly related to
a massage and bodywork therapy treatment or bath. This provision shall not
preclude the location of massage and bodywork therapy establishments in
separately demised quarters of a building housing a hotel or other separate
businesses or clubs.
§ 55-9. Building requirements; inspections.
Prior to opening a massage and bodywork therapy establishment within the
Borough of Rutherford, the Health Department, Zoning/Code Enforcement
Department, and Bureau of Fire Safety shall inspect the premises for the
purpose of issuing a continued certificate of occupancy as required by
Borough Code. No massage and bodywork therapy establishment shall be
permitted to operate within the Borough of Rutherford unless an inspection
by the Health Department, the Building Department and the Bureau of Fire
Safety has been conducted and the establishment is in compliance with the
minimum requirements of the Zoning, Fire and Health Codes. The Bureau
of Fire Safety shall conduct an annual inspection to ensure compliance with
the requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70 et seq.
§ 55-10. Right to inspect.
The Borough Health Department, Bureau of Fire Safety, Borough Code
Enforcement Department, and Borough Police Department shall have the
right and authority to inspect the places of business that are regulated
under this chapter and other pertinent portions of the Borough Code to
ensure compliance with this chapter and such other laws, rules and
regulations that may apply, including the State Sanitary Code as per N.J.S.A.
A. Alcoholic beverages shall not be distributed or consumed on the
premises of any massage and bodywork therapy establishment certified
under this chapter.
B. Controlled dangerous substances, as defined by the laws of the State of
New Jersey, shall not be distributed or consumed on the premises of any
massage and bodywork therapy establishment certified pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 55-6 LITTERING § 55-10
53:319
26:1A-9, the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code N.J.A.C. 5:70, and the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code as per N.J.A.C. 5:70, and to ensure the
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Rutherford and
of the clients of and visitors to therapy establishments.
§ 55-11. Exceptions; hours of operation.
§ 55-12. Violations and penalties.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage and bodywork
therapies given:
(1) By properly registered/licensed and operated hospital, medical,
osteopathic, chiropractic, and medical-affiliated physical therapy
facilities; or
(2) By a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanatorium
having a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors
and/or physical therapists;
(3) By any licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist in the
residence of his or her patient; or
(4) By a licensed barber or cosmetologist/hairstylist limited to the
areas of the face, neck, scalp or upper part of the body as set forth
in the Cosmetology and Hairstyling Act of 1984, N.J.S.A. 45:5B-1 et
seq.
B. All massage and bodywork therapy establishments within the Borough
of Rutherford shall be prohibited from accepting customers for any
services except from Monday through Saturday from 8:00 a.m. until
10:00 p.m.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $500 and not
more than $1,000 per violation, be punished by imprisonment in the
county jail for a period not to exceed 180 days, or both. Each violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed and taken to be
a separate and distinct offense.
B. All provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable by the Police
Department of the Borough of Rutherford or, where there is a health
violation, by the Health Official, or, where there is a construction code
violation by the Construction Code Official or Code Enforcement Officer
or, where there is a fire code violation, by the Fire Marshal.
C. In addition to hearing violations in the Municipal Court, by separate
authorization by the governing body of the Borough of Rutherford,
action may be taken in the Superior Court of New Jersey or other
appropriate court seeking injunctive relief or other relief appropriate to
enforce this chapter, along with the right to seek damages and legal
fees where permitted by law.
§ 55-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 55-13
53:320
§ 55-13. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
Chapter 56
MATERIALS, DEPOSIT AND REMOVAL OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Clean environment — See Ch. 21.
Commercial property maintenance — See Ch.
21A.
Littering — See Ch. 53.
Newspaper vending machines — See Ch. 62.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 78.
§ 56-1. Deposits in public places restricted.
No person shall cause or permit any accumulation of sand, gravel, cinders,
ashes, topsoil, mud, earth, dirt, filth, waste or rubbish or other materials to
be placed, deposited, tracked or flowed upon any borough street, sidewalk
or other public place, except as provided in this chapter.
§ 56-2. Encroachments restricted. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 3126-06; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 3352-15]
A. Within the Borough, no person shall cause or permit any highway,
street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or public place to be encumbered
by any encroachment of any kind, including but not limited to
prohibition against buildings, structures, trash bins or dumpsters,
storage units and the like, except as permitted under this chapter.
B. The placement of a temporary trash bin, dumpster, storage unit, or
similar container of any kind, upon a highway, street, sidewalk, right-ofway
or public place by any person other than agents or employees of
the Borough is permitted under the following conditions:
(1) The container is properly illuminated on each of the four sides with
a reflector (SAE Class A) and a red iridescent stripe and is
conspicuously marked with the name and phone number of its
owner;
(2) The placement of the container shall not block the flow of vehicular
or pedestrian traffic;
(3) The container has no defect or faulty design which would create a
hazard to the general public;
§ 55-13 LITTERING § 56-2
53:321
§ 56-3. Permit application. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No.
3126-06]
(4) The use of the container will not create offensive odors or a health
hazard or be allowed to overflow;
(5) A canvas cover shall be placed over any open container and shall
remain continuously thereon during every night and on weekends;
(6) A permit for the placement of the container shall first be obtained
from the Borough Clerk pursuant to this chapter.
C. Within the Borough, no person shall cause or permit the placement of a
temporary or permanent trash bin, dumpster, storage unit, or similar
container of any kind, upon private residential property, except as
permitted under Subsections D and E of this section.
D. The placement of any temporary trash bin, dumpster, storage unit or
similar container of any kind, upon private residential property is
permitted under the following conditions:
(1) The container is properly illuminated on each of the four sides with
a reflector (SAE Class A) and a red iridescent stripe and is
conspicuously marked with the name and phone number of its
owner.
(2) The placement of the container shall only be permitted in the
homeowner's driveway. If the homeowner does not have a driveway,
the permit may be sought under Subsection B above.
(3) The placement of the container shall not block the flow of
pedestrian traffic on public sidewalks or public rights-of-way;
(4) The container has no defect or faulty design which would create a
hazard to the general public.
(5) The use of the container will not create offensive odors or a health
hazard or be allowed to overflow.
(6) A canvas cover shall be placed over any open container every night
and on weekends.
(7) A permit for the placement of the container is first obtained from
the Borough Clerk pursuant to this chapter.
E. Placement of permanent or temporary trash bins, dumpsters, storage
units, or similar containers of any kind, whether located on public or
private property, shall be subject to all applicable sections of the New
Jersey Administrative Code, New Jersey statutes and to all applicable
provisions located elsewhere in this Code, including building and
zoning ordinances.
§ 56-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 56-3
53:322
§ 56-4. Permit fee. [Amended 6-7-1989 by Ord. No. 2539-89]
A fee of $25 shall be paid to the Borough Clerk before any permit or
renewed permit is issued pursuant to this chapter, plus an additional charge
of $5 per day, per meter, if the container displaces any existing parking
meters.
§ 56-5. Term of permit. [Amended 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 3126-06;
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 3352-15]
A. An application for a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be made on
forms approved and made available by the Borough Clerk. The Borough
Clerk may seek review by the Borough Administrator and the Borough's
safety personnel where necessary. The application shall include but not
be limited to the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and, if applicable, the name
and address of the owner and the renter of the container.
(2) A description or diagram of the proposed location proposed for the
container.
(3) A description of the container, including type, size, identifying
serial numbers, any other identifying words or numbers for the
container, and name of manufacturer.
(4) The proposed use for the container, and a general description of the
items to be stored or discarded through use of the container.
(5) A copy of the lease or rental agreement for the container between
the applicant and the owner.
(6) Such other information as shall reasonably be required by the
permit application and review of the permit application.
A. Permits for dumpsters and temporary trash bins. Each application, if
permitted, shall be granted for an initial period of only 15 days, which
may be renewed for a maximum additional period of 15 days. No
dumpster or temporary trash bin shall be permitted under this chapter
for a period of more than 30 days. No permit will be granted for
placement on public property unless there is a clear showing that the
size of the applicant's property cannot accommodate the requested
dumpster or temporary trash bin. Placement on public property must
be authorized by the Traffic Bureau of the Rutherford Police
Department.
B. Permit for storage unit. Each application, if permitted, shall be granted
for an initial period of only 30 days, which may be renewed for a
maximum additional period of 30 days. No storage unit or bin shall be
permitted under this chapter for a period of more than 60 days. This
permit shall only be allowed in residential zones and shall be limited to
storage units that are being used to store personal property while
§ 56-3 LITTERING § 56-5
53:323
§ 56-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-7-1989 by Ord. No.
2539-89; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 3352-15; 9-28-2015 by Ord. No.
3376-15]
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine of $50 for the first offense, and $100 for the second offense, without
a mandatory court appearance, and each day's continued violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation of this chapter. All subsequent
violations of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 with a mandatory court appearance and each
day's continued violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation
of this chapter. All violations pertaining to private residential property shall
be enforced by the Building Department with the advice and consent of the
Health Department if necessary. All violations pertaining to public property
shall be enforced by the Rutherford Police Department.
Chapter 57
MERCHANTS AND RUTHERFORD BUSINESS DISTRICT
LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting in special
improvement districts — See Ch. 105,
§ 105-10B.
Special improvement districts — See Ch.
105A.
§ 57-1. Certifications of registration required. [Amended 9-12-2016
by Ord. No. 3404-1698]
construction or rehabilitation is occurring at the applicant's residential
property. This permit shall only be allowed for placement of a storage
unit on private residential property. No permit will be granted for
placement on public property unless there is a clear showing that the
size of the applicant's property cannot accommodate the requested
storage unit. Placement on public property must be authorized by the
Traffic Bureau of the Rutherford Police Department.
C. Removal. Upon the expiration of the permit, a permit holder shall
remove or cause the removal of the container from the public right-ofway
or the private residential property. Any request for an extension
beyond the limits set forth for permits respectively noted for
dumpsters/temporary trash bins or storage units set forth in
Subsections A and B may be extended by the Clerk upon a showing of
good cause with the reasons therefor set forth in writing to the Clerk.
The Clerk may seek the advice of the Borough Council for any
extraordinary requests.
§ 56-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 57-1
53:324
§ 57-2. Application procedure.
All applications for a certificate of registration shall be in writing on forms
furnished by the Borough of Rutherford signed by the applicant and
presented to the Borough Clerk. Said application shall state the correct
name under which the business is being operated, the name and address
of the applicant, the kind of business to be conducted, the location of the
place where said business is to be conducted and the square foot gross floor
area of the location of the business, exclusive of basement areas used for
storage.
§ 57-3. Issuance. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3404-16]
Upon receipt of the application and payment to the Borough Clerk of the fee
herein provided, the Borough Clerk shall issue a certificate of registration
for the business set forth in the application, and, in addition, the Clerk shall
forthwith report the issuance of the same to the governing body and the
Zoning Officer.
§ 57-4. Expiration date. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3404-16]
All certificates of registration issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire
on January 1 of each year.
§ 57-5. Fee. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3404-16]
A. No person, association of persons or corporation shall hereafter
conduct or operate any store or establishment in the Rutherford
Business District, as established and delineated by § 131-7E of the
Borough Code, for the sale or exchange of merchandise, foods, goods,
wares and chattels of any kind or description or for services or repairs
to goods, wares and chattels of any kind or description, including the
providing of professional and business services, without first having
obtained a certificate of registration; provided, however, that a
certificate of occupancy has first been secured from the Building
Department.
B. Owners of premises used to conduct or operate any store or
establishment in the Rutherford Business District are required to notify
all lessees or their successors and assigns of the requirements set forth
in Subsection A above. Failure to do so shall render every owner of
premises subject to the penalties as prescribed in § 57-10 hereof.
A. The certificate of registration fee shall be $100 per business owner.
B. No fee shall be charged to any charitable or nonprofit organization or
associations organized for religious, political or educational purposes
within the Rutherford Business District.
98.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this chapter from “Merchants and
Business Special Improvement District Licenses” to “Merchants and Rutherford Business
District Licenses.”
§ 57-1 LITTERING § 57-5
53:325
§ 57-6. Disposition of fees. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No.
3404-16]
Fees collected or received under the provisions of this chapter shall be
forwarded to the Borough Treasurer and credited to a special account.
§ 57-7. Coverage restricted.
No certificate of registration shall be issued to cover more than one place
of business.
§ 57-8. Rutherford Business Initiative Advisory Committee. [Added
9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3404-1699]
C. The certificate of registration fee will not be billed to each business
owner in 2017, but will be billed in following years on November 1. The
fee will be due on January 1.
A. There is hereby established within the Borough of Rutherford the
Mayor and Council's Rutherford Business Initiative Advisory
Committee. The Rutherford Business Initiative is a committee within
the Borough of Rutherford dedicated to marketing and promoting the
retail, professional and service businesses of Rutherford. The objective
is to create an environment where people will shop and live and for
retailers and professionals to grow and thrive by helping create a vital
community experience for all, residents and visitors alike. The
Rutherford Business Initiative Advisory Committee shall serve in an
advisory capacity to the Mayor and Council and will work closely with
the Building Department, the Zoning Department, the Economic
Development Committee, and the Streetscape Committee established
in § 131-7E of the Borough Code.
B. The marketing and promotions of the Rutherford Business Initiative
Advisory Committee will include branding, social media applications
and special events; grants, business recruiting and retention; and
safety, beautification, streetscape and storefront improvements within
the Rutherford Business District as set forth within Schedule A,100
attached to § 131-7E.
C. Composition. The Rutherford Business Initiative Advisory Committee
will consist of nine members and two alternates appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council. The Rutherford Business
Initiative Advisory Committee will assist or collaborate with the
governing body in developing necessary projects for the Rutherford
Business District, but such persons shall have no power to take other
action required of the governing body. The members of the Committee
will include:
99.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 57-8 and
57-9 as §§ 57-9 and 57-10, respectively.
100. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 57-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 57-8
53:326
(1) Four business owners from the Park Avenue Business District.
(2) One business owner from the Union/Jackson Avenue Business
District.
(3) One business owner from the Meadows Avenue Business District.
(4) Two residents of Rutherford.
(5) One at-large business owner.
(6) One alternate business owner (at-large).
(7) One alternate resident.
(8) One Council liaison (nonvoting).
D. Term. The members of the Rutherford Business Initiative Advisory
Committee will serve for periods of one, two or three years. Members
shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve for three-year terms,
except that, of the first members appointed, three members shall serve
for one year, three members shall serve for two years, and three other
members shall serve for three years. The alternate members shall serve
for two-year terms. All members may, at the expiration of their terms,
be eligible for appointment to three-year terms, except for alternate
members who are eligible for two-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled
in the same manner in which the previous incumbent was appointed
and such vacancy appointment shall be only for the balance of the
unexpired term.
E. Funding.
(1) Funding for the recommendations from the Rutherford Business
Initiative Advisory Committee will be two-fold:
(a) Business registration fees from all Rutherford business owners
with a storefront or office in a commercial building; and
(b) A Borough of Rutherford budget appropriation.
(2) This funding will be administered by the Borough and expended
based upon recommendations from the Rutherford Business
Initiative Advisory Committee to the Mayor and Council for
projects within the Rutherford Business District and to ensure that
all businesses within the District comply with the Borough's Zoning
Code, Health Code, Building Code and Fire Prevention Codes.
F. Budget. A budget will be established by the Rutherford Business
Initiative Advisory Committee members and presented to the Mayor
and Council for review and approval in October of each year.
G. Evaluation of progress of the Rutherford Business Initiative Advisory
Committee will take place in October 2017, at which time a fair
§ 57-8 LITTERING § 57-8
53:327
§ 57-9. Appeal. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3404-16]
Any person, association of persons or corporation within the Rutherford
Business District and subject to this chapter shall have the right of appeal to
the Mayor and Council of any administrative determination made pursuant
to this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Mayor and
Council, on or before January 1 of the licensing year, a written statement
setting forth fully all the facts why the administrative determination was
improper or incorrect. The Mayor and Council shall set a time and place
for hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the
appellant by certified mail at his or her last known address at least seven
days prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision and order of the
Mayor and Council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 57-10. Violations, penalties, and enforcement. [Amended
9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3404-16]
Any person, association of persons or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of $300 at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge, and each day
that said violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. This
section shall be enforced by the Rutherford Building Department and the
Zoning Department.
Chapter 59
(RESERVED)
Chapter 60
MUNICIPAL COURT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Prosecutor — See Ch. 4, Art. VII.
§ 60-1. Court established.
A Municipal Court for the Borough of Rutherford is established, as of
January 1, 1949, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of
1948, as amended and supplemented.101
assessment of the Committee will be reviewed by the Mayor and
Council.
101. Editor's Note: For current provisions, see N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 57-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 60-2
59:328
§ 60-2. Court named.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the
Borough of Rutherford."
§ 60-3. Seal designated.
The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear the impress of the
name of the Court.
§ 60-4. Municipal Court Judge; appointment, term.
There shall be a Municipal Court Judge of said Municipal Court who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council and who
shall serve for a term of three years from the date of his appointment and
until his successor is appointed and qualified; provided, however, that the
Recorder who shall be in office upon this chapter becoming effective shall
be the Municipal Court Judge and shall continue to be such Municipal Court
Judge for a term equal to the balance of the term for which he was originally
appointed.
§ 60-5. Compensation of Judge.
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall receive such annual salary as the
Mayor and Council may from time to time adopt by ordinance, to be paid
in the same manner as the salaries of other municipal officers are paid,
and which shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and any other allowances
whatsoever.102
§ 60-6. Duties, powers and jurisdiction conferred.
The Municipal Court and the Municipal Court Judge thereof shall have,
possess and exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction
conferred by the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as
amended, supplemented, or by any other law.103
§ 60-7. Municipal Court Administrator; appointment, term.
There shall be a Municipal Court Administrator who shall be appointed
by the Municipal Court Judge and who shall serve for a term of one year
from the date of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and
qualified; provided, however, that the Court Clerk who shall have been
transferred to said Municipal Court pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
264 of the Laws of 1948, as amended and supplemented, shall be the Clerk
of the Municipal Court and shall continue to be such Clerk for a term equal
to the balance of the term for which he was originally appointed.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Salary Schedules.
103. Editor's Note: For current provisions, see N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 60-2 MUNICIPAL COURT § 60-8
60:329
§ 60-8. Compensation, duties of Administrator.
The Municipal Court Administrator shall receive such annual salary as the
Mayor and Council may from time to time adopt by ordinance, to be paid in
the same manner as the salaries of other municipal officers are paid, and
which shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and other allowances whatsoever. He
shall perform such functions and duties as shall be prescribed for him by
law, by the rules applicable to Municipal Courts and by the Municipal Court
Judge.104
§ 60-9. Sessions.
The Municipal Court shall be held in the Municipal Building. The Judge shall
sit at such times as shall be designated by him and at such other times as
the business of the Court may require, subject to the rules applicable to
Municipal Courts.
§ 60-10. Public Defender. [Added 3-7-1995 by Ord. No. 2723-95105]
There is hereby created the position of Public Defender for the Borough of
Rutherford, which position shall be appointed by the Mayor with advice and
consent of the Council to represent persons in Municipal Court proceedings
as directed by the Municipal Court Judge. The term of office of the Public
Defender shall be one year, commencing January 1 of the calendar year
and concluding December 31 of that same year. The Public Defender's
compensation shall be established by the annual salary ordinance or by
contract as determined by the governing body.106
§ 60-11. Application for Public Defender representation; fee.
[Added 3-7-1995 by Ord. No. 2723-95107]
A. In order to obtain the services of the Public Defender, an application
must be filed with the Municipal Court on a form to be provided by the
Borough. The Municipal Court Judge shall make a decision as to
whether a defendant is indigent after reviewing each defendant's
application. This determination shall be based upon whether the
defendant has the present financial ability to secure competent legal
representation and to provide all other necessary expenses of
representation.
B. The Municipal Court Judge shall assess an application fee of $50 from
each defendant who makes an application for the services of the Public
Defender. This fee shall be due regardless of whether the applicant is
found to require the services of the Public Defender; however, the
Municipal Court Judge may waive this fee, in whole or in part, if the
104. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Salary Schedules.
105. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 60-10, Repeal of prior ordinances.
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Salary Schedules.
107. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 60-11, Effective date.
§ 60-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 60-11
60:330
§ 60-12. Municipal Court discovery; fees. [Added 11-23-2004 by
Ord. No. 3057-04]
Judge determines, in his or her discretion, that this application fee
represents an unreasonable burden on said defendant.
C. The defendant's inability to pay the application fee shall in no way affect
or reduce the rendering of services to him. In the case of a defendant
who is unable or unwilling to pay the application fee and for whom the
fee was not waived, then the fee shall become a lien, and the Borough
may collect the fee consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:6A-1, 2A:158A-19 or in
any manner as permitted by law.
A. All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Borough of
Rutherford Municipal Court shall be submitted through the office of the
Municipal Prosecutor.
B. The following fees shall be paid by the requester, payable to the
Borough of Rutherford, for the discovery provided:
(1) Seventy-five cents per page for each of the first 10 pages
photocopied.
(2) Fifty cents per page for each of the next 10 pages photocopied.
(3) Twenty-five cents per page for each of the pages photocopied
thereafter.
(4) Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail to the requestor.
(5) Twenty-five cents for the envelope for any discovery sent by mail to
the requestor.
(6) Photographs will be photocopied and fees charged according to the
above schedule. If requests for duplicate photographs are made,
the actual cost of making the duplicated photographs shall be
charged.
(7) Duplication of videotapes constitutes an extraordinary duplication
process and will be charged at the rage of $5 per videotape.
(8) On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Court's copy
machine or for any item not otherwise provided for in this schedule,
the actual cost incurred in making the copies shall be the fee
charged to the requestor.
C. Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Borough of Rutherford or any of its subentities (for example, from
another municipality's police department), the actual costs paid to the
other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
§ 60-11 MUNICIPAL COURT § 60-12
60:331
Chapter 61
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY AND GROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal heliport — See Ch. 45.
Library property and books — See Ch. 52.
Playgrounds and recreation areas — See Ch.
73.
D. Fees charged by the Municipal Court shall be published as part of this
section, consistent with the provisions of the New Jersey Open Public
Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 60-12 RUTHERFORD CODE § 60-12
60:332
ARTICLE I
Maintenance and Disposition of Municipal Materials
[Adopted 9-2-1958 by Ord. No. 1752]
§ 61-1. Safekeeping, careful usage required.
Each department of the municipal government shall be responsible for the
safekeeping and careful usage of the materials, supplies and equipment
provided for its use.
§ 61-2. Report of loss or damage required.
The officer or employee in charge of a department of the municipal
government shall promptly report to the governing body the loss or damage
of any materials, supplies or equipment provided for the use of said
department.
§ 61-3. Written inventory card record required. 108 [Amended
9-6-1967 by Ord. No. 1981-67]
The officer or employee in charge of a department or a municipal building
shall keep a complete and detailed card record inventory file of all
automotive equipment, office machines, furniture, fixtures and all other
equipment which the cost of acquisition exceeds $5. The card record shall
be available for examination by any member of the Mayor and Council or
Commissions.
§ 61-4. Additions and deletions.
Each officer or employee in charge shall report to the Mayor and Council, at
the second meeting in June, any additions or deletions for the year previous.
The report shall indicate building location, quantity, description of the item
and the cost.
§ 61-5. Building and area locations.
The following lists locations and officers or employees charged with the
responsibility for each area:
Location Officer or Employee in Charge
Ambulance garage building only Building Inspector
Donaldson Avenue Building only Building Inspector
Dog pound Police Chief
Firehouses: Fire Chief and
Ames Avenue No. 1 and No. 4 1st Assistant Fire Chief
Park Avenue No. 2 2nd Assistant Fire Chief
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 33, Fire Department, for specific provisions pertinent to §§ 61-2 and
61-3.
§ 61-1 MUNICIPAL COURT § 61-5
60:333
Location Officer or Employee in Charge
Union Avenue No. 3 and No. 5 3rd Assistant Fire Chief Captain of
Rescue Co. No. 5
Free Public Library Library Director
Municipal Building:
Assessor's office Senior Assistant Assessor
Board of Health office Sanitary Inspector
Boiler room Building Inspector
Borough Clerk's office Borough Clerk
Building Inspector's office Building Inspector
Fire alarm room Superintendent, Public Works
Fire Prevention Bureau Fire Chief
First aid room Police Chief
Civil Defense Headquarters Director of Civil Defense
Committee of the Whole room Building Inspector
Council Chambers Building Inspector
Mayor's office Building Inspector
Municipal Court office Magistrate
Nurses' office Sanitary Inspector
Parking meter repair room Superintendent, Public Works
Police Chief and Detective's
office
Police Chief
Police Headquarters Police Chief
Police locker room Police Chief
Police record room Police Chief
Tax Collector's office Tax Collector
Welfare office Director of Welfare
Public Works Department: Superintendent, Public Works
Main garage
Carpenter shop and garage
Locker room and garage
Storage shed
Boiler house
Gas and oil house
Recreation Commission's
buildings:
Superintendent, Recreation
Memorial Park:
§ 61-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 61-5
60:334
Location Officer or Employee in Charge
Memorial Park field house
Refreshment stand
Comfort stations
Tamblyn Field:
Locker and storage buildings
Refreshment stand
Ticket booths
Walls Field:
Garage and comfort stations
Shade Tree Commission garage Superintendent, Shade Trees
§ 61-6. Property record and inventory control report.
All reports shall be turned over to the Purchasing Agent, who will enter
the additions and deletions on the master copy of the property record
and inventory control report. The master copy shall then be sent to the
Appraiser by the Purchasing Agent for a current appraisal figure.
§ 61-6.1. Provision for disposal of surplus.109
The governing body may, from time to time, provide by resolution for the
disposal of any surplus items of materials, supplies or equipment in the
manner required by law.
§ 61-6.2. Effective date.110
This article shall take effect immediately upon publication according to law.
109. Editor's Note: Originally enacted as § 61-7 and renumbered by the editor to eliminate
duplication of numbering.
110. Editor's Note: Originally enacted as § 61-8 and renumbered by the editor to eliminate
duplication of numbering.
§ 61-5 MUNICIPAL COURT § 61-6.2
60:335

ARTICLE II
Municipal Building Parking Lot
[Adopted 10-20-1959 by part of Ord. No. 1790; amended in its
entirety 11-7-1984 by part of Ord. No. 2387-84]
§ 61-7. Rules to govern parking.
The parking of motor vehicles in the areas adjacent to the Municipal
Building and the Municipal Annex shall be in accordance with the rules and
regulations hereinafter set forth.
§ 61-7.1. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
3036-03; amended 8-24-2004 by Ord. No. 3047-04; 8-22-2006 by
Ord. No. 3118-06]
Any person or persons, firm, entity or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this Article II shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined a sum of
$50 for each offense and, in default of payment thereof, be imprisoned in
the county jail for a term not exceeding five days, or both.
§ 61-8. Lines to designate parking spaces. [Amended 11-26-2013 by
Ord. No. 3314-13]
Lines or markings shall be placed on the pavement for the purpose of
designating parking spaces for each vehicle. It shall be unlawful to park
any vehicle in areas other than those marked as parking spaces. All vehicle
traffic shall rotate in a clockwise direction.
§ 61-9. Reserved and visitors parking. [Amended 12-29-1998 by
Ord. No. 2880-98]
A. There shall be three parking spaces located next to the accessible
parking spaces on the easterly side of the Municipal Building parking
lot reserved for visitors to the Municipal Building or the Municipal
Annex. No vehicle shall be permitted to park in said reserved spaces for
a period exceeding 30 minutes between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30
p.m. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3502-19]
B. The parking of vehicles designated for Borough officials shall be
reserved for those designated Borough officials. All other areas not
designated or reserved shall be for Borough employees and visitors to
the Municipal Building or the Municipal Annex.
C. 111Other than for vehicles falling within the definitions of "electric
vehicle," "neighborhood electric vehicle," and "plug-in hybrid electric
vehicle," as defined in § 126-9.5A, parking is prohibited within parking
spaces designated as "charging stations" (per § 126-9.5A) located
111. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding parking in the public Park N’ Ride, was
repealed 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3406-16.
§ 61-7 MUNICIPAL COURT § 61-9
60:337
§ 61-10. Time limitation.
Visitor parking shall be limited to a two-hour period. All other areas shall be
deemed a driveway unless otherwise marked.
§ 61-11. Traffic flow. [Amended 11-26-2013 by Ord. No. 3314-13]
Traffic shall ingress from Municipal Building parking lot via the Donaldson
Avenue driveway located at the northwesterly side of said lot, 180 feet from
the intersection with Park Avenue. Traffic shall egress from the Municipal
Building parking lot via the Donaldson Avenue driveway located at the
southwesterly side of said lot, 124 feet from the intersection with Park
Avenue.
§ 61-12. Portion reserved for Police and Ambulance Corps,
Ambulance Squad and Fire Department. [Amended 8-4-1987 by Ord.
No. 2475-87; 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 3435-17]
within the Kip Center Parking Garage. [Added 12-11-2018 by Ord.
No. 3482-18]
D. Fifteen-minute courtesy parking of nonelectric vehicles in designated
"charging station" spaces within the Borough Hall parking lot shall be
permitted for those having business in the Municipal Building or the
Municipal Annex on Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. only.
All other times, parking for electric vehicles only while charging.
[Added 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 3482-18; amended 5-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 3502-19]
A. The parking of vehicles in the Municipal Parking Annex parking lot shall
be limited to Police Department vehicles and those sanctioned by the
Chief of Police or their designee. The parking of motor vehicles by the
general public is hereby prohibited. Areas not specifically marked as
parking spaces shall be deemed as a driveway.
B. The parking of vehicles in the Ames Avenue Firehouse and the
Ambulance Corps parking lot shall be limited to Ambulance Corps,
Ambulance Squad and Fire Department vehicles and motor vehicles
owned and/or being used by members in good standing of the
Ambulance Corps, Ambulance Squad and Fire Department. The parking
of motor vehicles by the general public is hereby prohibited. Areas not
specifically marked as parking spaces shall be deemed as a driveway.
[Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3502-19]
C. The parking of vehicles in the Mortimer Avenue Firehouse and the
Union Avenue Firehouse parking lots shall be limited to Fire
Department vehicles and motor vehicles owned and/or being used by
members in good standing of the Fire Department. The parking of
motor vehicles by the general public is hereby prohibited. Areas not
specifically marked as parking spaces shall be deemed as a driveway.
[Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3502-19]
§ 61-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 61-13
60:338
§ 61-13. Traffic flow for Municipal Annex.
The entrance to the Municipal Annex parking lot shall be located on the
westerly side of Donaldson Avenue, 163 feet from the intersection with Park
Avenue. The exit driveway from the Municipal Annex parking lot shall be
located on the northerly side of Park Avenue, 128 feet from the intersection
with Donaldson Avenue.
§ 61-13 MUNICIPAL COURT § 61-13
60:339

ARTICLE III
Memorial Field Parking Lot
[Adopted 6-7-1995 by Ord. No. 2734-95]
§ 61-14. Rules to govern parking.
The parking of motor vehicles in the areas on and adjacent to the Memorial
Field Parking Lot shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations
hereinafter set forth.
§ 61-15. Lines to designate parking spaces.
Lines or markings shall be placed on the pavement for the purpose of
designating parking spaces for each vehicle. It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle in areas other than those marked as parking spaces.
§ 61-16. Fifteen-minute courtesy parking of nonelectric vehicles.
[Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3502-19112]
Fifteen-minute courtesy parking of nonelectric vehicles in designated
"charging station" spaces at the Memorial Field parking lot for pickup and
dropoff only shall be permitted. All other times parking for electric vehicles
only while charging.
§ 61-17. Erection of signs.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
112. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 61-16 through 61-19 as §§ 61-17
through 61-20, respectively.
§ 61-14 MUNICIPAL COURT § 61-17
60:341

ARTICLE IV
Additional Provisions Applicable to Parking Lots
[Adopted 10-20-1959 by part of Ord. No. 1790; amended in its
entirety 11-7-1984 by part of Ord. No. 2387-84]
§ 61-18. Removal of vehicles; payment of costs.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked in violation of this article shall be deemed a
nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any
peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall
pay the reasonable cost of the removal and storage which may result from
the removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 61-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-1-1995 by Ord. No.
2736-95]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined a sum of $30 for each
offense and, in default of payment thereof, be imprisoned in the county jail
for a term not exceeding five days, or both.
§ 61-20. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon publication according to law.
§ 61-18 MUNICIPAL COURT § 61-20
60:343
Chapter 61A
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY, SALE OF
§ 61A-1. Open public sales at auction.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-13(a), the Borough of Rutherford may sell real
property, capital improvements or personal property owned by it, or any
interests held therein, by open public sale at auction to the highest bidder,
in accordance with the requirements of the statute, and in accordance with
any additional requirements set by the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Rutherford.
§ 61A-2. Private sales.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12-13(b) and (c), the Borough of Rutherford may
sell any real property, capital improvements, or personal property owned
by it, or any interests held therein, by private sale, in accordance with
the requirements of the statutes, and in accordance with any additional
requirements set by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford.
Chapter 62
NEWSRACKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Convenience stores — See Ch. 22A.
Obscene materials — See Ch. 64A.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 109.
§ 62-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare through the regulation of the placement, type, appearance, and
servicing of newspaper vending machines in public places so as to:
A. Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience.
B. Restrict unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, including ingress or egress from any residence or
place of business or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting
or entering parked or standing vehicles.
C. Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of poles, posts,
traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, and access to locations
used for public transportation purposes.
§ 61-20 RUTHERFORD CODE § 62-1
61A:344
§ 62-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — The person or entity responsible for placing and
maintaining a newsrack(s) in a public street. This term includes the
applicant for a permit under this chapter, the owner of a newsrack(s) under
this chapter, and any third party used by the owner for distribution and
maintenance of the newsrack(s).
HEARING OFFICER — The hearing officer, as provided for in this chapter,
shall be the Business Administrator of the Borough of Rutherford.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper or periodical.
NEWSRACK(S) — Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage
unit, or other dispenser installed, used or, maintained only for the display
and sale of newspapers.
NOTICE — Unless otherwise indicated, notice under this chapter shall be in
writing by certified mail, hand delivery, or e-mail.
PUBLIC PLACE — All areas dedicated for public use which are under
the control or possession of the Borough of Rutherford, including but not
limited to roadways, parkways, alleys, and sidewalks.
ROADWAY — that portion of a street improved, designated, or ordinarily
used for vehicle travel.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the use of pedestrians.
§ 62-3. Permit requirement.
D. Relocate and/or replace newspaper vending machines which result in
visual blight and/or excessive space allocation on the public right-ofway.
E. Maintain and preserve freedom of the press.
A. Any person or entity seeking to erect, place, maintain, or operate a
newsrack(s) in any public place in the Borough of Rutherford must first
obtain a permit from the Borough of Rutherford Clerk.
B. The application for such permit shall be in the form provided by the
Clerk and shall contain:
(1) The contact information for the distributor, including an e-mail
address.
(2) The number of newsrack(s) the distributor shall deploy in the
Borough of Rutherford, with a description of the location of each.
(3) A description of each newsrack(s), including dimensions, signage,
and whether it has a coin-operated mechanism.
§ 62-1 MUNICIPAL PROPERTY, SALE OF § 62-3
61A:345
§ 62-4. Issuance of permit; conditions; fees.
(4) The name and frequency of the publication to be placed in each
newsrack(s).
(5) A statement that the applicant indemnifies and holds the Borough
of Rutherford harmless for any liability arising from the
deployment, placement, use, and maintenance of the newsrack(s).
The statement shall contain the following language:
The applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms or
corporations on whose behalf the application is made, represent,
stipulate, contract, and agree that they do jointly and severally
defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the Borough of Rutherford
against liability for any and all claims for damage to property or
injury to or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the
issuance of the permit or the control, maintenance, or ownership
of the newsrack(s) permitted.
(6) The signature of the applicant.
C. Only one permit shall be required per distributor, which permit shall
cover all newsrack(s) deployed by the distributor in the Borough of
Rutherford.
D. An applicant whose permit is denied shall have 10 days from the denial
to cure the defect and the right to request a hearing to contest the
denial. The hearing shall occur within 10 business days of the denial.
The hearing officer shall issue a written decision within 10 business
days of the hearing. Any notices under this subsection shall be provided
by the Clerk (other than the hearing officer's decision).
A. A permit for a newsrack(s) shall be issued by the Clerk within 10 days of
the application and, whenever possible, immediately following
submission of the application. The only basis for denial of a permit shall
be failure to agree to or comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The fee for an initial permit under this chapter shall be $100; the fee for
renewal of the permit shall be $50 annually. The permit shall be valid
for a period of one year, on a calendar-year basis, commencing on
January 1 and shall be renewable on January 1 of any subsequent year.
The initial permit fee shall be prorated if the application for a permit is
submitted after February 1.
C. The permit fee is to defray the administrative costs of implementing this
chapter, which includes maintaining and indexing distributor permit
files and periodic inspection of newsrack(s) by the Department of Public
Works.
§ 62-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 62-5
61A:346
§ 62-5. Installation and maintenance standards.
Any newsrack(s) which, in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any
public sidewalk, roadway, or street, or is otherwise in any public place, shall
comply with the following standards:
A. No newsrack(s) shall exceed 60 inches in height, 24 inches in width, or
20 inches in thickness.
B. No newsrack(s) shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than those dealing with the display, sale, or purchase of the
newspapers sold therein.
C. Each newsrack(s) shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in
the event that customer is unable to receive the publication paid for.
The coin-return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.
D. Each newsrack(s) shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place, so as
to be seen by anyone using the newsrack(s), a notice setting forth the
name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a
working telephone service to report a malfunction or to secure a refund
in the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism.
E. Each newsrack(s) shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and
in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, each newsrack(s) shall be serviced and
maintained so that:
(1) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
(3) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed, are unbroken and reasonably free
of cracks, dents, blemishes, and discolorations.
(4) The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading.
(5) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain any publication
or material in newsrack(s) which exposes to public view any pictorial
material which depicts nudity, as that term is commonly understood.
G. Each newsrack(s) shall be maintained to prevent the newspapers from
being scattered about the area.
H. Each newsrack(s) shall be blue.
§ 62-5 MUNICIPAL PROPERTY, SALE OF § 62-6
61A:347
§ 62-6. Location and placement.
Any newsrack(s) which rests in whole or in part upon or on any portion of a
public street or sidewalk or projects onto, into, or over any part of a public
street or sidewalk, or is otherwise located in a public place, shall be located
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
A. No newsrack(s) shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into,
or over any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests
wholly or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any
public street.
B. No newsrack(s) shall be permitted to rest upon, in, or over any public
street or sidewalk when such installation, use, or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property;
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles;
(3) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
(4) Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals,
hydrants, or mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
C. The newsrack(s) shall be placed or otherwise secured so as to prevent
being blown down or around the public street or sidewalk but shall not
be chained or otherwise secured to any traffic or street signs, signals,
hydrants, or mailboxes.
D. No newsrack(s) shall be placed, installed, used, or maintained:
(1) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within three feet of a curb.
(3) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box, or
other emergency facility.
(4) Within five feet of any driveway.
(5) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet.
(6) Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees, or other landscaping.
(7) Within 500 feet of any other newsrack(s) on the same side of the
street in the same block containing the same issue or edition of the
same publication.
(8) Within 10 feet of any standby or sprinkler connection or related
safety or fire equipment.
§ 62-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 62-6
61A:348
§ 62-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 63
NOISE CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm equipment installation — See Ch. 6.
Noise from outdoor cafes — See Ch. 65,
§ 65-15E.
Conduct at playgrounds and recreation
areas — See Ch. 73.
§ 63-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Noise Control
Ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford."
(9) Within five feet of any building, unless written permission is
secured from the property owner and filed with the application.
A. Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to a maximum fine of
$1,000, in addition to potential seizure of the newsrack(s).
B. Upon the effective date of this chapter, all nonpermitted (distinguished
from noncompliant) newsrack(s) in the Borough of Rutherford are
subject to seizure, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
C. For nonpermitted newsrack(s) which preexist on the effective date of
this chapter, the distributors shall have 60 days from the effective date
to apply for a permit under this chapter. These applicants shall pay the
permit fee of $10 which existed under the prior version of this chapter
and shall pay the new, initial permit fee of $100 by January 1, 2013;
thereafter, these applicants shall pay the renewal fee annually as
provided for in this chapter.
D. For permitted newsrack(s) which do not comply with this chapter, the
Borough of Rutherford may seize such newsrack(s) after providing the
distributor written notice of noncompliance, 10 business days to
remedy the violation, and a right to request a hearing to contest the
seizure within 10 business days of the notice of noncompliance. The
notice of non-compliance shall state the period to remedy the violation,
the right to a hearing, and the period in which the hearing must be
requested. A hearing, if requested, must be held within 30 days of the
notice of noncompliance; the hearing officer must issue a written
decision with 10 business days of the hearing.
§ 62-6 NOISE CONTROL § 63-2
63:349
§ 63-2. Findings and purpose.
It is hereby found and declared that it is the public policy of the Borough
of Rutherford to significantly reduce the ambient noise level in Rutherford,
so as to foster and protect the public health, comfort, safety and welfare of
its citizenry. As a matter of legislative determination and public policy, the
provisions, regulations and prohibitions of this chapter are in pursuance of
and for the purpose of securing and promoting the comfort, peace and quiet
to which the residents of Rutherford are entitled.
§ 63-3. Definitions and standards.
As used in this chapter, all acoustical words and terms shall have the
meanings set forth in the publication of the American National Standards
Institute, New York, New York, entitled "Acoustical Terminology," USASI
SI.I-1960; all equipment used in making acoustical measurements shall
meet or exceed the requirements set forth in the publication of said
Institute entitled "Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters,"
USASI SI.4-1961; and all such measurements so made shall be made in full
accordance with the methods and procedures set forth in USASI SI.2-1962
entitled "Methods for the Physical Measurement of Sound."
§ 63-4. General prohibition.
No person or persons, association, firm or corporation shall make, continue
or cause to permit to be made or continued any unreasonably loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noise.
§ 63-5. General standards.
Any act in violation of the provisions of this section of this chapter is deemed
to be in violation of § 63-4 of this chapter, without in any way limiting the
generality of the provisions of said § 63-4.
A. No person shall cause to be made, directly or indirectly, by any means
whatsoever, except vehicles, whether mechanical or not, any sound that
either:
(1) Exceeds the following measurements on the A-weighting scale of
sound level meter, when measured at any point on the property of
any other person:
(a) Sixty-five decibels [dB(A)'s] between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.
(b) Fifty-five decibels [dB(A)'s] between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
(2) Exceeds the following measurements on the A-weighting scale of
the sound level meter, when measured from the center of a room
belonging to or leased to any person other than the person
responsible for the making of the noise:
§ 63-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 63-5
63:350
§ 63-6. Specific prohibitions.
(a) Fifty decibels [dB(A)'s] between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.
(b) Forty decibels [dB(A)'s] between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
B. A noise measured or registered from a vehicle within borough limits at
a distance of at least 25 feet from the noise source shall not exceed 88
decibels [dB(A)'s] on the A-weighting scale. Interstate carriers shall be
excepted from this subsection until such time that the federal
government establishes controlling noise levels for these vehicles.
A. Unless exempted under the provisions of this chapter, no person shall
cause to be made, directly or indirectly, any loud noise which disturbs,
injures or endangers the health, comfort, safety or welfare of others
within the Borough of Rutherford.
B. The following specific acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but said enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, truck or other vehicle on any street, road or public
place (except as a warning pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:3-69), or whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust;
and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any
reason held up.
(2) The use of radio or television receiving sets, musical instruments,
phonographs or any other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet
and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or, at any time, with
volume louder than is necessary for convenient hearing of the
person or persons who are in the room or vehicle in which such
machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners
thereto. The operation of any such device between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to be plainly audible at
a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in
which it is located or, in the case of such instruments operated in
the open, at a distance of 50 feet from the instrument, shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(3) The use of any radio, receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast
upon the public streets for the purposes of commercial advertising.
(4) The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or
long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of persons
residing in the vicinity.
§ 63-5 NOISE CONTROL § 63-6
63:351
(5) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any internalcombustion
engine, except through an adequate muffler or other
device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
therefrom. (See N.J.S.A. 39:3-70 for state law regarding muffler
requirements on motor vehicles.) This includes, by way of example
and not by way of limitation, internal combustion engines powering
motor vehicles.
(6) The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with
loading and unloading any vehicle or the opening or destruction of
bales, boxes, crates and containers.
(7) The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or
repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the
Building Inspector, which permit may be granted for a period not to
exceed three days while the emergency continues and which
permit may be renewed for a period of three days or less while the
emergency continues.
(8) The use of any blower, fan or pump engine or motor in connection
therewith, including, by way of example and not by way of
limitation, air-conditioning systems, compression devices and pool
filter systems, if such use creates loud, penetrating or continuous
noises that disturb the comfort or repose of persons residing in the
vicinity.
(9) The creation of any excessive noise adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, house of worship or judicial court, while the
same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably
interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or
unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous
signs are displayed on the adjacent streets indicating that the same
is a school, hospital, church or court street.
(10) The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors in and
among the public streets.
(11) The use of any drum, bell, horn, loudspeaker or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance,
show or sale, or display of merchandise by any creation of noise or
sound.
(12) The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles or
aircraft.
(13) Lawn mowers and chain saws, powered by internal-combustion
engines, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(14) The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or
repair of any building by commercial contractors on Sunday, except
§ 63-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 63-6
63:352
§ 63-7. Exceptions.
The prohibitions contained in this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 63-8. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held to be unconstitutional, the decision of the court
respecting such provision or provisions shall not affect the validity of any
other provisions which can be given effect without such invalid provision or
provisions.
§ 63-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-1-1992 by Ord. No.
2665-92]
Any person or persons, association, firm or corporation violating any of the
terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be liable to pay a
fine not exceeding $1,000 or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days, or both.
§ 63-10. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and
safety, and then only with a permit from the Building Inspector.
[Added 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 2397-85]
C. If any person who is not exempted under the provisions of this chapter
shall cause to be made any of the noises prohibited under this section
and if said noises shall be proved to be in violation of the sound levels
prescribed under Subsection A above, said proof shall be sufficient to
prove a violation under this section.
A. Persons who are engaged in the performance of any public or
governmental function such as the sounding of a church or school bell
or a police, fire, ambulance, air raid or like disaster warning, alert or
alarm, whether such alarm is for an actual emergency purpose or for
practice or drilling purposes.
B. Military or civic parades, celebrations or other public gatherings for
which a permit has been issued by the Mayor and Council.
C. Persons who are engaged in any activity specifically permitted or
required by any ordinance, resolution, statute or governmental
regulations.
D. Persons employed by public utility companies engaged in emergency
repair services between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; provided,
however, that such noise shall not exceed levels reasonably necessary
to accomplish such work.
§ 63-6 NOISE CONTROL § 63-10
63:353
Chapter 63A
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS AND LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm equipment installation — See Ch. 6.
Commercial property maintenance — See Ch.
21A.
Housing Code — See Ch. 47.
Property Maintenance Code — See Ch. 78.
§ 63A-1. Numbering required.
All dwellings, houses, stores or other buildings located within the Borough
of Rutherford shall be numbered in conformity with the street numbers
established by the Borough 911 Coordinator and filed in the office of the Tax
Assessor of the borough.
§ 63A-2. Proper display of assigned number.
The number so assigned to each building should be displayed by the owner
or occupant on the front of the building or in the front yard of the lot
on which the same stands, in accordance with the specifications set forth
herein.
§ 63A-3. Specific requirements for numbers.
A. A house or building number shall be:
(1) In Arabic numerals or letters.
(2) A minimum height of three inches. If a house or building is set back
more than 50 feet from the curbline the numbers shall have a
minimum height of six inches and be clearly legible from the street.
(3) Mounted in a secure fashion on the front of the building so as to be
clearly visible from the street.
(4) Of a contrasting color to the background and arranged in such a
manner so as to be clearly legible from the street, both day and
night.
(5) At least 36 inches above ground level and so placed that trees,
shrubs and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the
numbers from the street upon which the building fronts.
B. Each apartment dwelling unit shall be individually numbered using a
combination of numbers and/or letters and clearly visible from the
hallway leading to the apartment entrance. The use of hyphens in the
numbering combination is prohibited.
§ 63-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 63A-3
63A:354
§ 63A-4. Correction of improper numbering; notice.
The owner of any dwelling house, store or other building incorrectly or
improperly numbered shall be notified, in writing, by the Tax Assessor or
such other person so designated by the Mayor and Council to change or
replace such incorrect or improper number within 30 days after date of such
notice for residential properties and 90 days after date of such notice for
nonresidential properties. No enforcement under this chapter shall occur
unless and until proper written notice as required by this section is provided
to the property owner. No continued certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until the property owner brings said property into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 63A-5. Application for correct number.
Upon application by the owner of any property in the borough to the Tax
Assessor, the Tax Assessor, acting in conjunction with the 911 Coordinator,
shall furnish such owner with the correct number of such property. The
property owner shall submit a copy of the front sheet of the property's
telephone bill within the time periods established pursuant to § 63A-4 as
evidence of compliance with this chapter.
§ 63A-6. Assignment of numbers resulting from subdivision of land.
Upon any subdivision of land in the borough resulting in a lot or lots
other than those numbered on the Tax and Assessment Maps, the Tax
Assessor shall, within 30 days after final approval thereof, assign a number
to each lot resulting from said subdivision or resubdivision which shall be in
proper numerical sequence in relation to the numbers assigned to other lots
C. If the house or building is set back from the street in a location that the
provisions of this chapter cannot be complied with, then the owner,
occupant or lessee shall, in addition to displaying the number on the
building, provide a post, rod or other type of fixture of a substantial and
permanent nature with the number and a directional symbol affixed
thereon and so located on the premises that the number and directional
symbol shall be conspicuous and visible from the street upon which the
building property fronts. Any required sign shall comply with the
provisions of Borough Code § 131-18.
D. If the house or building has lot frontage on more than one street, then
the owner, occupant or lessee shall display the appropriate sequential
number assigned by the 911 Coordinator for said property on the side
of the building where there is lot frontage on a street.
E. If a building, in addition to its front entrance, has a rear or side
entrance door which is adjacent to and accessible from a street,
driveway, right-of-way or parking lot, then the owner, occupant or
lessee shall also display the appropriate sequential number on the side
of the building where said side or rear door is located.
§ 63A-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS AND LOTS § 63A-6
63A:355
fronting on the same street; and he shall record the same upon said map
and notify the owner of said property of the numbers so assigned.
§ 63A-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, association, firm or corporation violating any of the
terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be liable to pay a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500, and the jurisdiction as to the
enforcement of this chapter shall be in the Borough of Rutherford Municipal
Court. The continuation of the offense shall, in each case, constitute a new
offense.
Chapter 64
NUISANCE CODE
§ 64-1. Code adopted by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950.113 A copy of
said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of
the text thereof herein.
§ 64-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 64-3. Filing.
Three copies of the said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Health Officer of this local Board
of Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there
for the use and examination of the public.
§ 64-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
113. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-45 et seq.
§ 63A-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 64-4
64:356
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $2 nor more
than $100 for each violation.
§ 64-5. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts of same inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter and the code established hereunder are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 64-6. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this chapter or code
shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such declaration shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions.
§ 64-7. Effective date.
This chapter and the code herein established shall take effect 30 days after
first publication.
Chapter 64A
OBSCENE MATERIALS
§ 64A-1. Definitions.
A. Definition of obscene materials for persons over age 18. All definitions
set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2 are incorporated herein, including the
following: "Obscene materials" means any description, narrative
account, display, or depiction of sexual activity or anatomical area
contained in, or consisting of, a picture or other representation,
publication, sound recording, live performance, or film, which by means
of posing, composition, format, or animated sensual details:
(1) Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way ultimate sexual
acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, masturbation,
excretory functions, or lewd exhibition of genitals;
(2) Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value when
taken as a whole; and
(3) Is a part of a work, which to the average person applying
contemporary community standards, has a dominant theme taken
as a whole, which appeals to the prurient interest.
B. Definition of obscene materials for persons under age 18. All definitions
set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3 are incorporated herein, including but not
limited to the following: "Obscene materials" means any description,
narrative account, display, depiction of a specified anatomical area or
specified sexual activity contained in, or consisting of, a picture or other
§ 64-4 OBSCENE MATERIALS § 64A-1
64A:357
§ 64A-2. Prohibition against display of obscene materials.
Chapter 65
OUTDOOR CAFES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food establishments — See Ch.36A. Zoning — See Ch. 131.
§ 65-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure and authorize rules
and regulations thereunder for the licensing of outdoor cafes in the B-3
Zone of the Borough of Rutherford.114
§ 65-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. As used in
this chapter, the following shall have the meanings indicated:
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served upon the public right-of-way, namely the sidewalks
immediately in front of any restaurant, cafe or place of business where
food and/or other refreshments are served or a public plaza immediately
adjacent to any restaurant, cafe or place of business where food and/or
representation, publication, sound recording, live performance, or film,
which by means of posing, composition, format or animated sensual
details, emits sensuality with sufficient impact to concentrate prurient
interest on the area or activity.
C. "Retailer" means any person who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession, or similar business with unimpeded access for persons
under 18 years old, who is in the business of making sales, among other
things, of periodicals or other publications at retail containing pictures,
drawings, or photographs.
A. All retailers at any business premises in the Borough of Rutherford are
hereby prohibited from displaying or permitting to be displayed any
obscene materials at a height of less than five feet and without a blinder
or other nontransparent covering placed or printed on the front of the
material displayed.
B. The public display of any obscene material shall constitute presumptive
evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the display.
114. Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Zoning.
§ 64A-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 65-2
65:358
other refreshments are served, or where permitted on private property
pursuant to the Land Use and Zoning Ordinances. Said outdoor area shall
be considered as part of the building structure and shall be limited in use
by patrons of the eating establishment. Consumption of permitted alcoholic
beverages in an outdoor cafe by patrons shall not be considered in violation
of state regulations and/or local ordinances prohibiting the consumption of
such beverages in open containers. 115
PUBLIC PLAZA — That area of the Williams Plaza located within the former
right-of-way of Sylvan Street.
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way reserved for pedestrian
traffic from the curb to the front line of the building housing an eating
establishment, but excluding that portion of the public right-of-way
occupied by shade trees, fire hydrants, parking meters and utility poles.
§ 65-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or organization (hereinafter collectively referred to as "person")
to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged in the
business of conducting an outdoor cafe upon the sidewalks or public plazas
of the Borough of Rutherford, or on private property, unless such person
shall hold a currently valid license issued pursuant to the terms of this
chapter.
§ 65-4. General eligibility standards.
No license shall be issued hereunder unless the licensee shall demonstrate
that a minimum of four feet of unobstructed paved surface will be available
for pedestrian traffic around or through such outdoor cafe and that such
outdoor cafe be directly in front of or behind an eating establishment as
hereinabove defined. No food or drinks served at such outdoor cafe shall be
prepared or stored other than in the interior of the eating establishment.
The term "directly in front of" shall confine the cafe to the area represented
by an extension of each side of the store occupied by the eating
establishment projected directly to the curbline immediately in front
thereof.
§ 65-5. Application for licensing. [Amended 5-19-1998 by Ord. No.
2839-98]
A. Application for the license required hereunder shall be made to the
Construction Code Official and be signed by the applicant. The
application shall be in such form and shall contain the following
information:
(1) The full name, residence address and telephone number of each
individual, owner or partner, or if a domestic corporation, the
names, residence addresses and telephone numbers of the
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 7, Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 65-2 OUTDOOR CAFES § 65-5
65:359
§ 65-6. License investigations.
The Construction Code Official will review the application for completeness
and compliance with the terms of this chapter. If the application is
complete, the Construction Code Official will act upon the same within 10
business days of the submittal of the application or within 10 business days
after the application becomes complete. If the application is not complete,
the Construction Code Official will so notify the applicant within 10 business
days of the submission and specifically detail the areas in which the
application lacks compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 65-7. License issuance.
If the application complies with the chapter, the Construction Code Official
shall issue a license strictly subject to the terms and conditions of this
chapter.
§ 65-8. Restriction on transfer.
The license is personal to the applicant and any change or transfer of
ownership of the outdoor cafe shall terminate the license and shall require
a new application and new license in conformance with all of the
requirements of the this chapter.
directors and officers owning a 10% or greater interest in the
corporation and the chief operating executive of the corporation.
(2) A copy of the trade, corporate, business or fictitious name upon
which the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this chapter.
(3) The address of each place where the applicant intends to establish
or operate an outdoor cafe.
(4) The full name and address of the person owning the premises, if
other than the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the
premises to the application.
(5) Three sets of a proposed layout plan containing drawings clearly
illustrating the number and location of all tables, chairs and
umbrellas intended to be located in the outdoor cafe. The drawings
shall also illustrate the following:
(a) The location of any doors leading from the eating
establishment to the outdoor cafe. No such doors may be
obstructed in any manner.
(b) The number of feet permitting free passage of pedestrian
traffic around or through each outdoor cafe.
B. The application form, together with an application fee of $100, shall be
filed with the Borough of Rutherford Construction Code Official.
§ 65-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 65-9
65:360
§ 65-9. Consent to inspections.
Acceptance of the license by the applicant shall operate as a consent to
the health, fire, police and building officials of the borough to inspect the
outdoor cafe for continued compliance with the terms and conditions of this
chapter and any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulations
affecting the same.
§ 65-10. Indemnification agreement.
No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have filed with the
Construction Code Official a statement agreeing to indemnify and hold
harmless the Borough of Rutherford, its agent, servants, representatives or
employees, from any or all claims, damages, judgment costs or expenses,
including attorneys fees, which they or any of them may incur or be
required to pay because of any personal injury, including death, or property
damage suffered by any person or persons as a result of or related in
any way to the operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe for which
the license is issued. Said indemnification agreement shall be in a form
acceptable to the Borough Attorney.
§ 65-11. Insurance requirements.
A. No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have first filed with the
Construction Code Official a comprehensive general liability policy
issued to such person by a public liability insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey affording the
overages set forth below in the amounts specified. Such insurance
policy shall name the Borough of Rutherford, 176 Park Avenue,
Rutherford, New Jersey, 07070, its agents, officers, servants,
representatives and employees as additional insured with respect to the
operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe in the following
amounts:
Type Amount
Bodily
injury:
Each person $ 500,000
Each accident $ 1,000,000
Property:
Each person $ 500,000
Each accident $ 1,000,000
B. The insurance coverage required by this section shall at all times be
maintained for the full amount. The policy of insurance required by this
section to be filed with the Construction Code Official shall contain an
endorsement for 30 days' notice of cancellation or nonrenewal stating
§ 65-9 OUTDOOR CAFES § 65-11
65:361
§ 65-12. Revocation or suspension of license.
§ 65-13. Responsibilities of licensee.
that the borough and licensee shall receive, in writing, 30 days, notice
of cancellation or nonrenewal by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The borough shall be named as an additional insured under
the liability portion of the insurance coverage. Notice of cancellation
shall not relieve the company issuing such policy of liability for any
injury or claim arising before the cancellation becomes effective. The
cancellation of any such policy shall have the immediate effect of
suspending the license of such person to operate the outdoor cafe
covered thereby until a new policy complying with the provisions of
this section is filed with the Construction Code Official and a letter in
writing confirming the new effective date of license is issued by the
Construction Code Official.
C. Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision for
continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof,
notwithstanding any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insured
shall not be affected by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the insured
and that, until the policy is cancelled, the insurance company will not be
relieved from liability on account of nonpayment of premium or of any
act or omission by the named insured. Such policy of insurance shall be
further conditioned for the payment of any and all judgments up to the
limits of such policy.
A. Any license issued hereunder is issued solely as a revocable license,
which shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the Mayor and
Council for failure of any licensee to comply with this chapter or for
violation of any other applicable federal, state, county or municipal law,
regulation or ordinance. Any license issued hereunder is issued upon
the express understanding that the licensee obtains no property right
thereunder nor any interest in the continuation of said license. It shall
be considered a violation of this chapter for any person to operate an
outdoor cafe after the suspension or termination of the applicable
license.
B. In addition to the powers of suspension or revocation as set forth above,
the borough reserves the right to modify, suspend or revoke any license
on five days' written notice if the borough determines that pedestrian
traffic is, in fact, impeded or made unsafe because of the operation of
the outdoor cafe or because of any other safety issue which the borough
determines adversely affects the borough because of such operation.
The license may also be suspended or revoked on five days' written
notice in the event the borough determines that it is necessary to utilize
the area or any part thereof for the maintenance or installation of
underground utilities. In the event of any emergency, which emergency
is certified by the Borough Administrator, the license may be suspended
or revoked without notice.
§ 65-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 65-13
65:362
§ 65-14. Period of operation.
Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to operate from April 1 to October 31 in
any calendar year. The license, when issued, shall be valid for one season.
§ 65-15. Restrictions on use. [Amended 5-19-1998 by Ord. No.
2839-98]
A. Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor cafe
and the adjacent walks, plazas and streets free and clear of any debris
or litter occasioned by the cafe. Areas must be cleaned as needed at the
time the business is closed and at the beginning of each business day,
but not later than 9:00 a.m.
B. No vending machines of any kind are permitted on the exterior of any
building operating an outdoor cafe.
C. No signs shall be permitted in the area of the outdoor cafe except signs
on the awnings complying with the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
Rutherford Code.116
A. No tables, chairs or other equipment in the outdoor cafe shall be
attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, curb
or sidewalk or property of the Borough of Rutherford within or near the
licensed area.
B. Any umbrellas or awnings used in connection with an outdoor cafe shall
provide a minimum clearance of seven feet from its lowest point to the
sidewalk grade.
C. The licensee agrees at the end of the license period, or in the event that
the license is temporarily or permanently suspended or revoked, that
the licensee will at his own cost and expense vacate the sidewalk space
and promptly remove any property placed thereon. Failure to do so on
five days' written notice shall grant to the borough the right to remove
any property on the sidewalk and the licensee agrees to reimburse the
borough for the cost of removing and storing the same.
D. The licensee shall not direct or permit to be directed to or from the area
occupied by the outdoor cafe any bell, chime, siren, whistle,
loudspeaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier or similar
device.
E. No outdoor cafe shall open for business prior to 7:00 a.m. nor remain
open for business after 11:00 p.m. All persons occupying the outdoor
cafe shall vacate the same no later than 11:30 p.m.
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Zoning.
§ 65-13 OUTDOOR CAFES § 65-16
65:363
§ 65-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment in
the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; and each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
and each day there is a violation thereof shall be deemed and taken to be a
separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 66
PARKING AREA LIGHTING REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking yards and places — See Ch. 66A.
§ 66-1. Lighting required for multifamily dwellings.
Every parking area provided for the use of tenants of multifamily dwellings
of four families or more shall be lighted between the hours of sunset and
sunrise. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to provide
tenants of such a multifamily dwelling with an unlighted parking area.
§ 66-2. Specifications and purpose.
The lighting of a parking area provided for the use of tenants of such
multifamily dwelling shall be installed, arranged and maintained in such a
manner as to light the entire area without the presence of shadows and
to deflect the light from the public highways and residence buildings. The
purpose of the foregoing conditions are for the protection of persons using
said parking area and to eliminate the glare of lights on the public highways
and from residential buildings.
§ 66-3. Administration by Building Inspector.
This chapter shall be administered by the Building Inspector; provided,
however, that this section shall not be construed to limit or restrict the
enforcement of this chapter to the Building Inspector.
§ 66-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine not exceeding $200 for
each violation or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding
30 days, or both. Every day that a violation continues shall, for the purposes
hereof, be considered a separate violation.
§ 65-16 RUTHERFORD CODE § 66-5
66:364
§ 66-5. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 66A
PARKING YARDS AND PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Lighting of parking areas for multifamily
dwellings — See Ch. 66.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 126.
§ 66A-1. Finding of fact.
It is hereby determined that the unregulated operation and parking of
motor vehicles in parking yards and parking places which are open to
the public or to which the public is invited, including shopping centers,
hospitals, schools, public buildings, office buildings and similar uses,
constitutes a danger to the public health, safety and welfare in that such
unregulated operation and parking interferes with and impedes the
approach, operation and departure of fire equipment and other emergency
equipment. Therefore, this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority
conferred upon the municipality, by P.L. 1968, c. 433, Section 1 (N.J.S.A.
4:48-2.46).
§ 66A-2. Areas affected.
The parking yards and parking places which are open to the public or to
which the public is invited, to which this chapter applies, and upon which
the vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the parking of vehicles is regulated,
are as follows:
§ 66A-3. Site plan on file.
For each parking yard or parking place regulated by this chapter, as set
forth in § 66A-2 above, a site plan, clearly indicating the designated parking
spaces and the areas designated "No Parking," shall be attached to this
chapter and enacted herewith and incorporated herein. All such site plans
shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours in the
office of the Rutherford Borough Clerk.
A. The Meadows Office Complex, Route 17 and Veterans Boulevard,
Rutherford, New Jersey, also known as Block 219, Lots 49, 50C, 50D,
65C, 66D, 67C, 67F, 68A, 68G, 69A and 69F on the Tax Map of the
Borough of Rutherford, New Jersey.117
117. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 126, Vehicles and Traffic, § 126-72.
§ 66-5 PARKING YARDS AND PLACES § 66A-4
66A:365
§ 66A-4. Parking in designated spaces required.
In all areas regulated by this chapter, no person shall park any automobile,
truck or other vehicle except between the lines of designated parking
spaces, as indicated on the site plan or plans of the area which are attached
to this chapter.
§ 66A-5. Parking in restricted areas prohibited.
In all areas regulated by this chapter, no person shall park any automobile,
truck or other vehicle in any area designated a no-parking zone, as
indicated on the site plan or plans of the area which are attached to this
chapter.
§ 66A-6. Signs and markings.
There shall be posted at each entrance of all parking areas regulated
by this chapter a sign, "No Parking Except in Designated Spaces." All
areas designated "No Parking" pursuant to § 66A-5 of this chapter shall be
conspicuously marked by the posting of signs stating "No Parking" or by the
painting of yellow or white lines on the pavement or curb of the affected
areas, or both.
§ 66A-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties; payment of costs.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough
of Rutherford. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction therefor, be liable for a fine
of not more than $200 or imprisonment in the county jail for a period of
not more than 30 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. In addition
to the penalties provided herein, any vehicle parked in violation of the
regulations provided under this chapter may be summarily towed away at
the direction of any police officer. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs
of the removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 66A-8. Repealer.
Chapter 35 of this Code, entitled "Fire Zones," is hereby repealed, and all
parts of ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed as to
such inconsistent parts.
§ 66A-9. Public usage not implied.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed the acceptance for public use of
any of the premises in any such parking yard or parking place or in any way
create a public easement therein.
§ 66A-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 66A-10
66A:366
§ 66A-10. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 66A-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 66B
(RESERVED)
Chapter 67
PAYMENT OF PENSIONS TO DEPENDENTS OF VOLUNTEER
FIRE FIGHTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 33. Benefits for volunteer organizations — See
Ch. 127.
§ 67-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MINOR CHILDREN — Any natural children or legally adopted child of a
volunteer who shall die in the performance of his or her duties.
SPOUSE — Any person legally married to a volunteer fire fighter who shall
die in the performance of his or her duties.
§ 67-2. Persons entitled.
The surviving spouse and/or minor child or children of any volunteer fire
fighter who shall hereafter die as the result of injuries sustained in the
course of performance of duty as a member of the Volunteer Fire
Department of the Borough of Rutherford shall be paid a pension upon
passage of a resolution providing for the payment of same by the governing
body.
§ 67-3. Qualifications for pensions.
Prior to passage of the aforesaid resolution, the governing body shall
determine that such death was caused in the course of performance of duty.
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "in the course of performance of
§ 66A-10 (RESERVED) § 67-3
66B:367
duty" shall be deemed to mean actual engagement in the fighting of a fire,
rescue operations or actual participation in regular training programs of the
Volunteer Fire Department.
§ 67-4. Amount and method of payments.
§ 67-5. Termination of pensions.
§ 67-6. Initial payment.
The initial payment of such pension shall commence the first day of the first
month after the death of such fire fighter.
A. Such pension shall be in the sum of $7,200 per annum, to be
appropriated annually in the borough budget, and shall be paid in equal
monthly installments.
B. Such minor child's or children's pension shall be in the sum of $1,200
per annum per child, to be appropriated annually in the borough
budget, and shall be paid in equal monthly installments to the guardian
of said minor child or children.
C. The annual pensions entitled to be received by the surviving spouse
and/or surviving minor children of the deceased fire fighter shall be
increased for each year in proportion to which the cost of living index of
the Bureau of Labor Statistics (New York, New York - Northeastern,
New Jersey) shall increase above the index published for January 1,
1997, as against the cost of living index set forth on January 1 of each
succeeding year of eligibility to receive such pension.
A. Such spouse's pension shall be paid to the widow or widower of a
deceased volunteer fire fighter only during said surviving spouse's
widowed status. If there is no surviving spouse or if the surviving
spouse shall thereafter die, said pension shall be paid to or for the use
of the minor child or children of such fire fighter until such child or
children shall attain 18 years of age or 21 years of age should each such
child or children continue to actively pursue his or her formal education
at an undergraduate school.
B. Such minor child's or children's pension shall be paid to or for the use of
the minor child or children of such fire fighter until such child or
children shall attain 18 years of age or 21 years of age should such child
or children continue to actively pursue his or her formal education at an
undergraduate school. The pension a minor child or minor children
shall be entitled to receive pursuant to the provisions of this subsection
shall be in addition to any pension said child or children may be entitled
to receive pursuant to the provisions of § 67-5A.
§ 67-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 67-7
67:368
§ 67-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication thereof in
the manner provided by law.
Chapter 68
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 7.
Amusement games — See Ch. 8.
Curfew — See Ch. 23.
Littering — See Ch. 53.
Loitering — See Ch. 54.
Noise control — See Ch. 63.
Nuisance Code — See Ch. 64.
Feeding of pigeons — See Ch. 72.
Playgrounds and recreation areas — See Ch.
73.
Poolrooms and bowling alleys — See Ch. 77.
Public amusement structures — See Ch. 79.
Skateboards, bicycles, roller skates and
scooters — See Ch. 98.
Solicitors, peddlers and canvassers — See Ch.
105.
Tobacco products — See Ch. 116A.
§ 68-1. Purpose; statutory authority; construal of provisions.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to act as a supplement to the New Jersey
Code of Criminal Justice (N.J.S.A. 2C:1-1 et seq.) and to fill the
interstices therein, and all provisions hereof shall be construed
accordingly.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be construed so as to protect the
peace, order, health, safety, general welfare and good order of the
Borough of Rutherford and the inhabitants thereof.
C. The provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the powers
granted to the Borough of Rutherford by N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 and 40:48-2
and other statutes granting police power to the Borough of Rutherford
and shall be construed accordingly.
D. Except to the extent specifically set forth herein, neither specific intent
nor knowledge shall be construed as elements of any offense defined
under the provisions of this chapter.
E. In the event that any activity or condition proscribed herein shall be the
subject of any other regulation elsewhere in the Borough Code of the
Borough of Rutherford, the two sections shall be construed together,
and the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be in addition to
the regulations otherwise provided and as providing an additional
remedy, unless another construction is clearly indicated.
§ 67-7 PAYMENT OF PENSIONS TO DEPENDENTS § 68-2
67:369
§ 68-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
ACT OF GRAFFITI — The drawing, painting or making of any inscription
on a bridge, building, public transportation vehicle, rock, wall, sidewalk,
street or other exposed surface on public or private property without the
permission of the owner.[Added 11-15-1994 by Ord. No. 2718-94]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Rutherford.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 68-3. Disorderly persons.
§ 68-4. False public alarms.
No person shall, within the limits of the borough, willfully or maliciously
ring or cause to be rung any bell, whistle or other alarm of any fire company
or in any other manner give or cause to be given a false alarm of fire,
bombing, catastrophe or emergency.
§ 68-5. Protection of fire equipment; interference prohibited.
No person shall injure, damage or mutilate at any time or place any fire
engine, hook-and-ladder truck hose, hose, ladders, buckets or other
apparatus belonging to or under the control of the Fire Department or
interfere with the same in any manner, nor shall any person drive a vehicle
over any hose or other fire equipment.
A. Improper behavior. A person is guilty of a disorderly persons offense if,
with a purpose to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm or
recklessly creating a risk thereof, he or she:
(1) Engages in fighting or threatening, violent or tumultuous behavior;
or
(2) Creates a hazardous or physically dangerous condition by an act
which serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
B. Offensive language. A person is guilty of a disorderly persons offense if,
in a public place and with a purpose to offend the sensibilities of a
hearer or in reckless disregard of the probability of so doing, he or she
addresses unreasonably loud and offensively coarse or abusive
language, given the circumstances of the person present and the
setting of the utterance to any person present.
C. "Public" means affecting or likely to affect persons in a place to which
the public or a substantial group has access; among the places included
are highways, transport facilities, schools, apartment houses, places of
business or any neighborhood.
§ 68-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 68-6
67:370
§ 68-6. Harassment.
A person commits a disorderly persons offense if, with a purpose to harass
another, he or she:
§ 68-7. Disorderly persons offense.
A person is guilty of a disorderly persons offense when:
§ 68-8. Resisting or interfering with police officer; failure to assist
police officer.
No person shall, within the limits of the borough, hinder or obstruct any
borough officer in the performance of his or her duties, nor shall any person
willfully refuse or neglect to assist any borough officer when lawfully called
upon by said officer so to do in the execution of any process or in the
suppression of any breach of the peace or disorderly conduct or in case of
an escape or when such officer is resisted in the discharge of his or her
duty, nor shall any person knowingly resist or oppose any officer or person
authorized by law in serving or attempting to serve any writ, bill, order or
process or when making any arrest, with or without a warrant.
§ 68-9. Nudity; indecent exposure, indecent acts.
No person shall intentionally appear on any road, street, highway or other
public place in a state of nudity or make any indecent exposure of his or her
person or commit or cause to be committed or participate in the commission
of any lewd or indecent act or behavior.
A. Makes or causes to be made a communication or communications
anonymously or at extremely inconvenient hours or in offensive coarse
language or any other manner likely to cause annoyance or alarm.
B. Subjects another to striking, kicking, shoving or other offensive
touching or threatens to do so.
C. Engages in any other course of alarming conduct or of repeatedly
committed acts with a purpose to alarm or seriously annoy such other
person.
A. By conduct, either unlawful in itself or unreasonable under all
circumstances, he or she knowingly or recklessly creates or maintains a
condition which endangers the safety or health of a considerable
number of persons.
B. He or she knowingly conducts or maintains any premises, place or
resort where persons gather for purposes of engaging in unlawful
conduct.
§ 68-6 PAYMENT OF PENSIONS TO DEPENDENTS § 68-9.1
67:371
§ 68-9.1. Excretory acts. [Added 9-8-1999 by Ord. No. 2910-99]
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough of Rutherford, defecate or
urinate upon any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk, the neighborhood
of any store, restaurant, tavern or other place of business, or in any other
public place or in any other place open to and used by the public or outdoors
upon any private property except in enclosed facilities or structures
intended for the carrying out of such excretory acts.
§ 68-10. (Reserved)118
§ 68-11. Protection of public property.
No person shall destroy, injure, deface or tarnish any public building, fence,
tree, light post or standard, telephone, telegraph or electric power pole, fire
hydrant, monument, statue, flagpole or other public work or improvement
or affix thereon any signs, bills or advertisements of any kind or nature
whatsoever; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the
posting of such notices as may be required by law.
§ 68-11.1. Trespassing in Kip Avenue Parking Garage. [Added
4-6-1999 by Ord. No. 2888-99]
Trespassing in the Kip Avenue Parking Garage is hereby prohibited. A
person is guilty of trespass if, knowing that he or she is not licensed
or privileged to do so, he or she enters or remains in the Kip Avenue
Parking Garage as to which notice against said trespass is given by actual
communication to the individual or posting in a manner reasonably likely
to come to the attention of individuals. It is an affirmative defense to
prosecution under this section that the actor had license to be in the
Kip Avenue Parking Garage because of his or her permitted parking of
a motor vehicle within said structure. This affirmative defense shall also
apply to passengers of such parked vehicles. This defense shall only apply
to motorists and their passengers who park their vehicles in the parking
garage for the purpose of conducting business elsewhere.
§ 68-12. Damaging school property; disturbing children and
teachers.
No person shall within the limits of the borough enter the building or go
upon the lands of any school and break, damage or deface such building or
any part thereof or the fences or other property belonging to or connected
with such building or lands, and no person shall disturb the exercise of any
school or molest or give annoyance to the children attending such school or
any teacher therein, either while on the school property or while going to or
coming from said school.
118. Editor's Note: Former § 68-10, Public intoxication; influence of drugs, was repealed
8-26-2008 by Ord. No. 3162-08.
§ 68-9.1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 68-13
67:372
§ 68-13. Hunting and firearms; exceptions.
No person shall discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm or shoot, use or
discharge any air gun, beanshooter or slingshot or hunt for game or wild
fowl within the borough;119 provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to a police officer or other peace officer in the discharge of his duty;
and provided, further, that this section shall not apply to the discharging
of firearms in any area designated as a "police pistol range," which said
area shall be under the direction and control of the Police Department;
and provided, further, that this section shall not apply to the discharging of
firearms by a person having a permit procured prior thereto from the Chief
of Police for the purpose of destroying pests, animals and birds injurious to
public or private property.
§ 68-14. Eligibility for reward. [Added 11-15-1994 by Ord. No.
2718-94120]
A reward not exceeding $500 shall be paid for the detection and
apprehension of any person guilty of purposely or knowingly damaging
tangible property of another by an act of graffiti occurring in the borough
in violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-3. The reward is to be payable after conviction
out of those funds of the municipality made available therefor. The reward
shall be paid to any person whom the governing body, acting upon the
written recommendation of the Municipal Chief of Police, deems entitled
thereto. No reward shall be paid to any public employee whose duty it is
to investigate or to enforce the law or to the employee's spouse, child or
parent, living in the same household.
§ 68-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, association, firm or corporation violating any of the
terms or provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be liable to pay a
fine not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days, or both.
119. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 73, Playgrounds and Recreation Areas, § 73-2D.
120. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 68-14,
Violations and penalties, as § 68-15.
§ 68-13 PAYMENT OF PENSIONS TO DEPENDENTS § 68-15
67:373
Chapter 69
(RESERVED)
Chapter 70
PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PRACTICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative offices — See Ch. 4.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 31.
Purchasing — See Ch. 81.
Salary schedules — See Ch. 87.
Volunteer organizations — See Ch. 127.
§ 68-15 RUTHERFORD CODE § 68-15
69:374
ARTICLE I
Borough Personnel Policies
§ 70-1. Policies of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 70-2. Policies governing use of telephones. [Added 12-15-1959 by
Ord. No. 1798]
A. To seek and to obtain for each position to be filled, the highest type and
best qualified person available.
B. To provide for all employees the best possible leadership, supervision,
guidance, instruction and working conditions.
C. To base promotion and job security on ability, performance, experience,
character, integrity, attitude, interest and personality.
D. To make the best possible use of employee skills and abilities, in order
to have each job performed by the person best qualified to do so.
E. To first consider qualified borough personnel for promotion, whenever
there is an opportunity for advancement.
F. To treat every employee with the justice, respect, courtesy and
consideration properly due him.
G. To expect every employee to do the best work of which he is capable, to
be loyal and conscientious at all times, to conduct himself in a proper
manner and to treat all with whom he comes in contact with the same
consideration and courtesy that he expects from them.
H. To encourage all employees to offer suggestions for doing a better job in
less time, with less effort and at a lower cost.
I. To urge the self-betterment of every employee; to encourage him to
study and seek all possible means of increasing his value, both to his
community and to himself.
J. To pay fair and adequate salaries for each position and, in return, to
expect a consistently good job.
K. To impress on all employees that they are serving, and responsible to,
the taxpayers of their community.
L. To inculcate and to maintain in every employee of the Borough of
Rutherford a feeling of pride and job satisfaction because he serves,
lives in and is an important part of one of the finest residential
communities in the State of New Jersey.
A. The way you answer the telephone affects the public relations of the
borough. While on the telephone, you are an important source of good
will to the local government. To the caller, you are the government.
§ 70-1 (RESERVED) § 70-2
69:375
Answer promptly, identify yourself and the department, be courteous,
speak directly into the mouthpiece in a quiet well-modulated voice.
B. The borough telephones are for use in conducting borough business.
The use of these telephones for personal calls is discouraged. No
personal toll calls are to be made from borough telephones.
§ 70-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 70-2
69:376
ARTICLE II
Borough Employment Practices
[Amended 5-16-1995 by Ord. No. 2733-95; 8-10-1999 by Ord. No.
2904-99]
§ 70-3. Creation of new positions.
The Borough Council must, by ordinance, formally approve the creation of
any new position and authorize the filling of it prior to the initiation of action
to do so. In addition, there must be provided in the proper current budget
account specific and adequate funds to compensate the appointee.
§ 70-3.1. Filling vacancies.
The Borough Council must formally approve the filling of any vacancy which
has existed for over six months in any previously authorized or established
full time position before any action is initiated to fill the same. In addition,
there must be provided in the proper current budget account specific and
adequate funds to compensate the employee.
§ 70-4. Procedures for filling vacant positions.
A. Whenever a vacancy exists or a new position is created, all borough
employees who believe they possess the necessary qualifications may
apply for the position if they so desire. Such applications must be by
civil service forms and filed with the Civil Service Commission at
Trenton.
B. Vacancies in positions will be advertised in the local press, with an
application deadline date specified, in order that any interested
resident of Rutherford may file an application for the position.
C. Vacancies in positions will be filled by the Mayor and Council by
selection from the list of eligibles certified by the Civil Service
Commission.
D. Appointees will be notified by the Borough Clerk, and they will report to
the Clerk's office for completion of the necessary formalities such as
oath of office, civil service papers, withholding tax certificate and any
other document required.
§ 70-3 (RESERVED) § 70-4
69:377

ARTICLE III
Time and Attendance
§ 70-5. Time and attendance records required.
Accurate and complete time and attendance records shall be maintained by
each department of the Borough of Rutherford. The person in charge of the
department, office or activity shall certify as to the accuracy of the time
report or record. The person in charge of each department shall submit,
in writing, to the Borough Clerk, not later than the 10th of each month,
a statement showing any time not worked in the previous month by an
employee because of sickness.
§ 70-6. Attendance required.
All borough employees shall be at their assigned posts or point of duty at
the established starting time each working day unless on vacation, absent
or on leave of absence.
§ 70-7. Punctuality required.
Being on time is of the utmost importance, consequently any lateness and
the reason for it shall be noted on the time report and may be the basis for
disciplinary action against the offending employee.
§ 70-8. Notification of superior required.
It is the responsibility of each employee to notify his superior without
delay if he will be absent from, or delayed in reaching, his assigned post.
Failure to report is a serious offense which cannot be tolerated, as it
is the responsibility of each department head to know, at all times, the
whereabouts of every member of his group.
§ 70-9. Departmental working hours. [Amended 2-4-58 by Ord. No.
1733]
The regular working hours for each department are hereby established as
follows:
A. Board of Assessors, Building Department, Clerk's Office, Purchasing
Department and Tax Office, 37 1/2 hours per week.
B. Police Department, 40 hours per week.
C. Shade Tree Department, 40 hours per week.
D. Animal Warden. The Animal Warden shall perform his duties under the
supervision of the Chief of Police and he shall be subject to the schedule
of working hours, vacation and sick leave applying to the Department of
Public Works.
§ 70-5 (RESERVED) § 70-9
69:379
§ 70-10. Approval required for change.
Any change in the approved working hours must be authorized in advance
by the Mayor and Council.
§ 70-11. Regulations governing time clocks, timecards. [Added
5-16-1961 by Ord. No. 1831]
The following regulations are hereby established for the use of the time
clock by the employees of the Department of Public Works:
E. Relief Office, 18 hours, for such periods as may be designated by
resolution of the Mayor and Council. [Amended 6-16-1959 by Ord.
No. 1778]
F. Public Works employees assigned as street employees, Police and Fire
Signal Maintenance System employees and automotive repair
employees, 40 hours per week. Public works employees, consisting of
equipment operators and laborers, assigned to the collection of
garbage and trash, shall complete a task assigned to them by the
Superintendent of Public Works as a day's work. Such task shall consist
of an area or district of the borough delineated and described by said
Superintendent with the approval of the Mayor and Council. Said task
work shall be completed each day regardless of the number of hours
worked by any such employee without payment for overtime as
provided in Article IV of this chapter. During monthly trash collection
periods, such employees shall assist in such work after the completion
of their task. [Amended 6-19-1962 by Ord. No. 1857]
A. Each employee shall be issued a timecard to record his periods of
employment by means of said time clock.
B. Each employee shall record the beginning and termination of each
period of employment on his said timecard.
C. Each employee whose work consists of removing trash and garbage
receptacles from the rear of a building to the curb shall only be
required to record the termination of each period of employment on his
timecard.
D. An employee who is on duty as a member of the Fire Department at the
beginning or termination of his period of employment shall have such
beginning or termination of his period of employment recorded on his
timecard by his foreman who shall initial the recording.
E. These regulations shall not apply to the Superintendent of Public Works
and the foremen.
F. No employee shall record the beginning or termination of a period of
employment for another employee except as herein provided.
§ 70-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 70-12
69:380
§ 70-12. Provisions for auditing; reports required. [Added
6-19-1962 by Ord. No. 1857]
All records filed with the Borough Clerk-Comptroller for payroll purposes
shall be audited periodically by him at such times as he shall determine or at
such other times as the Mayor and Council shall direct. A full and complete
report of such audits shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council for its
study and consideration.
§ 70-13. Public Works timecards. [Added 6-19-1962 by 0rd. No.
1857]
The Superintendent of Public Works shall file the timecards required by
§ 70-11 of this article with the Borough Clerk-Comptroller at such times as
shall be designated by the Mayor and Council.
§ 70-12 (RESERVED) § 70-13
69:381

ARTICLE IV
Overtime Work
§ 70-14. Clerical employees; compensatory time.
§ 70-15. Public Works Department; compensatory time.
§ 70-16. Public Works rates for overtime work. [Amended 6-6-1961
by Ord No. 1833]
Payment for overtime work, when authorized as herein provided, shall be
made at the following rates:
A. Employees in this category shall be compensated for overtime work by
allowing time off equal in amount to the overtime worked. Such time off
shall be granted within 12 months of the time in which the overtime was
incurred at such particular time as the department head may
determine.
B. In the event that the work of the Department will not permit the
allowance of compensating time off, payment for such overwork may be
authorized by the appointing authority upon recommendation of the
department head. Payment for overtime work shall not be made in any
year for such work performed in a previous year.
C. Payment for overtime work, when authorized as herein provided, shall
be made at the following rates: straight time for the first 2 1/2 hours,
and time and one-half for all such work performed over 40 hours per
week.
A. Employees shall be compensated for overtime work by allowing time off
equal in amount to the overtime worked. Such time off shall be granted
within 12 months of the time in which the overtime was incurred at
such particular time as the department head may determine.
B. In the event that the work of the Department will not permit the
allowance of compensating time off, payment for such overtime work, to
the extent of eight hours over 40 hours per week, shall be made upon
the written order of the department head and any such overtime work
which exceeds 48 hours per week shall be authorized by the Chairman
of the Public Works Committee upon the written recommendation of the
department head. Payment for overtime work shall not be made in any
year for such work performed in a previous year.
C. Payment for overtime work shall not be made to the Superintendent of
Public Works. [Added 6-6-1961 by Ord. No. 1833]
A. Straight time for such overtime work to Street Foreman, Sanitation
Foreman, Sewer Foreman, Mechanical Repairman and Fire Signal
System Repairman.
§ 70-14 (RESERVED) § 70-16
69:383
§ 70-17. Police Department.121
§ 70-18. All departments.
Extra time spent by an employee in the discharge of duties which are a
regular function of the employee's position, such as time spent at Council
meetings, meetings of official boards and bodies or attendance before any
court, shall not be considered overtime.
B. Time and one-half for all such overtime work performed over 40 hours
per week on weekdays, except holidays, and double time for all such
overtime work performed on Sundays and holidays to all other
employees.
A. Employees shall be compensated for overtime work by allowing time off
equal in amount to the overtime worked. Such time off shall be granted
within 12 months of the time in which the overtime was incurred at
such particular time as the department head may determine.
B. In the event that the work of the Department will not permit the
allowance of compensating time off, payment for such overtime work, to
the extent of eight hours over 40 hours per week, shall be made upon
written order of the department head, and any such overtime work
which exceeds 48 hours per week shall be authorized by the Chairman
of the Police Committee upon the written recommendation of the
department head. Payment for overtime work shall not be made in any
year for such work performed in a previous year.
C. Payment for overtime work, when authorized as herein provided, shall
be made at the rate of straight time.
121. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 76, Police Department.
§ 70-16 RUTHERFORD CODE § 70-18
69:384
ARTICLE V
Vacations and Sick Leave
§ 70-19. Absences.
§ 70-20. Leave of absence procedure.
A leave of absence without pay may be requested by any employee, who
shall submit in writing all facts bearing on the request to his department
head, who shall append his recommendations and forward the request to
the Borough Council. The Borough Council shall consider each such case on
its merits and without establishing a precedent.
§ 70-21. Attendance records reviewed.
The attendance record of each employee shall be carefully reviewed in
connection with any evaluation, as well as whenever a possible promotion
is being considered.
§ 70-22. Vacation schedule. [Amended 12-15-1959 by Ord. No. 1798;
2-2-1960 by Ord. No. 1800; 2-4-1975 by Ord. No. 2167-75]
All permanent employees shall be granted the following annual leave for
vacation purposes with pay:
A. Absences from duty are classified as "sick leave" or "vacation" and are
so noted on the time report.
B. Each employee must notify his or her department of any absence from
duty. If not possible to do so in advance of the working day, the report
should be made by telephone as early as possible on the day the
employee will be absent.
A. All departments except those covered by collective bargaining
agreements. [Amended 9-1-1981 by Ord. No. 2302-81]
Years of
Service
Vacation
(working days)
0 - 1 1 for each month of service
1 - 4 13
5 - 9 15
10 - 14 17
15 - 19 19
20 or more 22
B. Departments heads.
§ 70-19 (RESERVED) § 70-22
69:385
Years of
Service
Vacation
(working days)
0 - 1 1 for each month of service
1 - 4 16
5 - 9 18
10 - 14 20
20 or more 25
C. Administrator.
Years of Service
Vacation
(working days)
0 - 1 1 for each month of service
1 or more 20
D. Police Department. [Amended 8-6-1991 by Ord. No. 2613-91;
4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3004-02]
Vacation
(working days)
Years of Service Captain Chief
1 - 4 20 22
5 - 9 22 24
10 - 14 24 26
15 - 19 26 28
20 - 24 28 30
25 or more 34 36
E. Personal leave.
(1) Permanent employees; Police Chief or Police Captain. [Amended
4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3004-02]
(a) All permanent employees with more than one year of service
shall be entitled to three personal days per year which shall be
charged against accumulated sick leave, except as stated in
§ 70-22E(1)(b). Said personal days shall not accumulate from
year to year.
(b) If the Police Chief of any Police Captain has more than 25 years
of service, the three personal days per year granted in
§ 70-22E(1)(a) shall not be charged against accumulated sick
leave. Said personal days shall not accumulate from year to
year.
§ 70-22 RUTHERFORD CODE § 70-22
69:386
§ 70-23. Accumulation of vacation time; limitation.
When in any calendar year, the vacation or any part thereof is not granted
by reason of pressure of municipal business, such vacation periods not
granted shall accumulate and shall be granted during the next succeeding
year only.
§ 70-24. Retirement leave and health benefits. [Added 12-20-1960
by Ord. No. 1819; amended 9-1-1981 by Ord. No. 2302-81;
7-24-2018 by Ord. No. 3469-18]
(2) Employees must give their department head 24 hours' notice of
their intention to take a personal day and must receive approval
from the department head to do so.
(3) An employee shall not be required to advise his superior of the
reason for the personal leave day.
(4) Personal leave time shall be granted in units of not less than four
hours for each occasion.
A. In addition to the vacation periods contained in this article, all
employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements or
individual agreements between the employee and the Borough, upon
regular retirement, disability retirement or resignation, shall be
entitled to service payout for accumulated sick days as follows:
(1) All employees performing clerical and/or administrative duties will
be governed by the collective bargaining agreement of the White
Collar Union in effect at the time of retirement or by any individual
agreement between the employee and the Borough.
(2) All employees performing departmental management duties will be
governed by the collective bargaining agreement of the
Department Head Union in effect at the time of retirement or by
any individual agreement between the employee and the Borough.
B. Health plan for retirees.
(1) All employees performing clerical and/or administrative duties will
be afforded health benefits upon retirement as set forth in the
collective bargaining agreement of the White Collar Union in effect
at the time of retirement or by any individual agreement between
the employee and the Borough.
(2) All employees performing departmental management duties will be
afforded health benefits upon retirement as set forth in the
collective bargaining agreement of the Department Head Union in
effect at the time of retirement or by any individual agreement
between the employee and the Borough.
§ 70-22 (RESERVED) § 70-24
69:387
§ 70-25. Holidays occurring during vacations.
If an official holiday occurs during an employee's authorized vacation, he
will be entitled to an additional vacation day in lieu of the holiday.
§ 70-26. Vacation credit given. [Added 5-16-1961 by Ord. No. 1831]
In calculating an employee's years of service for vacation purposes, each
employee shall be given credit for a full year of service for the current
calendar year.
§ 70-26.1. Dental plan. [Added 9-1-1981 by Ord. No. 2302-81]
All employees not covered by collective bargaining agreements shall be
entitled to a fully paid family dental plan covering employees and their
dependents effective on and after August 1, 1982. The specific plan
implemented will be at least equivalent to that given to the organized
bargaining units.
§ 70-27. Efficient scheduling encouraged.
Department heads are responsible for so allocating individual vacation
days or weeks that the activities of the borough will be carried on with a
minimum of delay or inconvenience. Insofar as is possible, the employee
with the longest continuous service shall have preference in the assignment
of vacation periods.
(3) Unless otherwise set forth in the respective collective bargaining
agreements with the White Collar and Department Head Unions or
within any individual agreement between the employee and the
Borough, coverage is restricted to the employee and the
employee's spouse.
(4) Unless otherwise set forth in the respective collective bargaining
agreements with the White Collar and Department Head Unions or
within any individual agreement between the employee and the
Borough, all such coverage to the employee and the employee's
spouse shall terminate when the employee reaches Medicare
eligibility as determined by the Social Security Administration.
(5) Unless otherwise set forth in the respective collective bargaining
agreements with the White Collar and Department Head Unions or
within any individual agreement between the employee and the
Borough, no coverage will be provided where the employee or
spouse has coverage through another health plan, and the
employee must certify annually that said employee and/or spouse
does not have coverage through another health plan.
C. The benefits provided by this section shall apply only to employees
retiring on or after November 1, 2018.
§ 70-24 RUTHERFORD CODE § 70-28
69:388
§ 70-28. Fragmented vacations discouraged.
As it is the policy of the borough that all employees receive the maximum
benefit from their vacation, not over five days of vacation can be taken on
the basis of one or two days at a time, and then only with approval by the
department head.
§ 70-29. Departmental schedules filed with Mayor. [Added
12-15-1959 by Ord. No. 1798; amended 5-16-1961 by Ord. No. 1831]
All department heads shall file in writing with the Mayor and Council, on or
before August 1 of each year, a vacation schedule, as complete as possible,
for the current year for all employees in their departments. Thereafter,
monthly reports shall be filed showing the balance of the vacations and any
necessary adjustments made in the originally filed report.
§ 70-30. Substituting of additional compensation discouraged.
Unless specifically authorized by the Borough Council in advance, extra
compensation shall not be allowed in lieu of unused vacation, as it is desired
that each employee take advantage of the annual vacation period for health,
rest, relaxation and pleasure.
§ 70-31. Regulations governing sick leave.
A. "Sick leave" is defined to mean absence from post of duty of an
employee because of illness, accident, exposure to contagious disease,
attendance upon a member of the employee's immediate family
seriously ill requiring the care or attendance of such employee or
absence caused by death in the immediate family of such employee. A
certificate of a reputable physician in attendance may be required as
sufficient proof of need of leave of absence of the employee or the need
of the employee's attendance upon a member of the employee's
immediate family. In case of leave of absence due to a contagious
disease, a certificate from the Department of Health shall be
required.122 In case of death in the family of the employee, any
reasonable proof required by the department head shall be sufficient.
B. The department head may require an examination by a physician,
selected by him from a list of physicians approved by the governing
body for that purpose, or an employee being absent from his post
because of illness with respect to the need of a leave of absence.
[Added 8-2-1960 by Ord. No. 1810]
C. Every permanent employee in the certified service of the municipality
shall, in addition to his or her annual vacation leave with pay, be
granted sick leave as hereinbefore defined, with pay of not more than
one working day for every month of service during the remainder of the
122. Editor's Note: For regulations governing control and reporting of communicable diseases,
see Ch. 80, Sanitary Code, Article VIII.
§ 70-28 (RESERVED) § 70-31
69:389
§ 70-32. Provision for additional sick leave. [Amended 5-6-1958 by
Ord. No. 1741]
In case an employee is disabled, either through injury or illness as a result
of or arising from his employment, as evidenced by the certificate of a
responsible physician, he shall be granted a period of 30 days' leave with
full pay before the sick leave hereinbefore specified shall begin. Such thirtyday
initial period shall be granted each time an employee is disabled.
Should further additional leave be necessary, because of accident or
sickness incurred in line of duty, the department head or municipal body or
commission directing the activities of such employee shall report the same
in writing to the Council, together with all pertinent facts, and the Council
may grant such additional leave up to a total of one year. Upon receipt of
such report in the Borough Clerk's office from the said department head or
municipal body or commission, the designated certifying officer under the
Public Employees Retirement System shall forthwith inform said System of
the same in the form and manner required by it.
§ 70-33. Additional regulations governing sick leave.
first calendar year of service following permanent appointment; 15
working days in any calendar year thereafter. If any such employee
required none or only a portion of such allowable sick leave for any
calendar year, the amount of such leave not taken shall accumulate to
his or her credit from year to year, and such employee shall be entitled
to such accumulated sick leave of absence with pay if and when needed.
A. Payments made to any employee while on sick leave as compensation
insurance shall be deducted from the amount to be paid the employee
by the borough during such time as he is carried on the borough
payroll.
B. In all cases of sick leave, the employee shall submit to examination by a
physician appointed by the borough and, whenever such physician shall
report in writing that the employee is fit for duty, such sick leave shall
terminate.
C. One-half of a work day shall be the smallest unit to be considered in
computing sick leave used.
D. Sick leave cannot be allowed for ordinary dental care nor for the
services of an oculist for normal eye care, as such professional services
are readily available outside of normal working hours.
E. Nothing herein contained shall be considered to be in derogation of, or
restrictive of, any statute now in effect limiting the period during which
municipal employees may be compensated for leave on account of
disability or of illness (such as N.J.S.A. 40:11-8 and 40:11-9) but these
provisions are to be construed and administered in conjunction
therewith.
§ 70-31 RUTHERFORD CODE § 70-33
69:390
ARTICLE VI
Compensation Plan
§ 70-34. Salary range.123
Each position in the borough has an established salary range. New
employees start at the bottom of the salary range and are advanced
periodically (in most cases on a yearly basis) along the steps of the range
until they have reached the top pay for the position.
§ 70-35. Payment of salaries. [Amended 6-16-1959 by Ord. No.
1778]
All employees shall be paid biweekly starting on Thursday, January 15,
1959. When a holiday falls on a Thursday which is a payday, payment will
be made on the preceding Wednesday. Paychecks will be distributed at each
department headquarters.
§ 70-36. Disposition of questions concerning wages.
Any questions concerning wages may be discussed by an employee with
his department head. The department head may in turn discuss the matter
with the Personnel Officer. If the matter is not settled satisfactorily at this
level, the employee may proceed further in accordance with the procedure
outlined under grievances.
123. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 87, Salary Schedules, Article II, Lists and Schedules.
§ 70-34 (RESERVED) § 70-36
69:391

ARTICLE VII
Grievance Procedures
§ 70-37. Mutual respect assumed.
It is the policy of the borough that every employee at all times be treated
fairly, courteously and with respect. Conversely, each employee is expected
to accord the same treatment to his associates, supervisors and to the
public.
§ 70-38. Steps in grievance procedure.
A. Whenever an employee has a grievance he should first present it
verbally to his department head. It is the responsibility of the
department head to arrange a mutually satisfactory settlement of the
grievance as quickly as possible within the discretion permitted him.
The department head must either conclude a mutually satisfactory
solution to the grievance within 48 hours of the time when it was first
presented to him or, failing in that, must within that time advise the
employee of his inability to do so.
B. When an employee is informed by his department head that he is
unable, within the discretion permitted him, to arrange a mutually
satisfactory solution to the grievance, the employee must, if he wishes
to present the grievance to higher authority, do so in writing in the
following manner.
(1) The employee will prepare the grievance in writing, in duplicate.
The grievance should be stated as completely and as clearly as
possible, in order to permit prompt handling. One copy of the
grievance shall be immediately placed the hands of the Borough
Clerk, who shall without delay forward it to the proper
councilmanic committee in order to advise it of the filing of a
grievance.
(2) The other copy of the grievance shall be presented by the employee
to his department head. The department head shall report the facts
and events which led up to its presentation, in writing, including in
his written report any verbal answer he may have previously given
to the employee concerning this grievance. Within 24 hours after
receipt of the written grievance the department head must present
it, with the information required from him to the Borough Clerk,
who shall without delay forward it to the proper councilmanic
committee.
C. The councilmanic committee shall then consider and formally act on the
complaint.
D. Since it is intended that most, if not all, grievances can and should be
settled without the necessity of reference to the Mayor and Council, no
§ 70-37 (RESERVED) § 70-38
69:393
grievance shall be heard or considered by the Mayor and Council which
has not first passed through the above-described steps.
E. All papers and documents relating to a grievance and its disposition
shall be placed in the employee's personal history file.
§ 70-38 RUTHERFORD CODE § 70-38
69:394
ARTICLE VIII
Disciplinary Actions
§ 70-39. Intradepartmental disciplinary procedures.
§ 70-40. Hearings before Borough Administrator and Mayor and
Council. [Amended 6-16-1959 by Ord. No. 1778; 12-5-1978 by Ord.
No. 2244-78]
Should the department head consider the offense sufficiently serious to
warrant its consideration by the Borough Administrator, he or she shall
have prepared a sworn written specification of charges which shall be
served upon the employee and referred to the Borough Administrator, who
shall investigate the matter, hold an informal hearing with the parties
and prepare a written report. Following this hearing, if the Borough
Administrator concludes that further disciplinary action shall be taken,
written disciplinary charges shall be prepared with recommended
disciplinary action, and a copy of same shall be served upon the employee,
together with a notice that a formal hearing on said charges shall be held
before the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council shall then hold a
formal hearing on said charges and shall dispose of the matter in a manner
agreeable with the provisions of Title 11A, Civil Service, of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes.
A. When a department head believes that an employee is not conforming
to the letter or spirit of the borough policies and rules, or to the specific
instructions given him, or has acted improperly, the department head
shall first discuss the matter privately with the employee concerned in
order to obtain the employee's view of the matter. The department head
shall, if possible, then obtain assurance from the employee that there
will not be a repetition of the incident.
B. If the matter is not serious and the department head is satisfied, the
matter may then be dropped.
§ 70-39 (RESERVED) § 70-40
69:395

ARTICLE IX
Meritorious Actions and Suggestions
§ 70-41. Policy of recognition.
It is the desire of the Mayor and Borough Council to recognize suitably all
outstandingly commendatory actions or suggestions of borough employees.
§ 70-42. Procedures for commendation, recognition.
§ 70-43. Suggestions for work improvement encouraged. [Amended
5-16-1961 by Ord. No. 1831]
All employees are urged to seek ways and means of effecting work
improvement and to submit to their superior or to the Municipal Suggestion
Committee any well-thought-out suggestion for doing a better job, in less
time, with less effort and at a lower cost.
§ 70-44. Evaluation of suggestions; recognition.
A. When a letter is received commending the work or action of an
employee on duty, it shall first be referred to the Borough Council,
which will endorse thereon or attach thereto suitable comment. The
letter shall then be returned to the Borough Clerk and placed in the
employee's personal history file.
B. If an employee shall perform a meritorious action beyond the call of
duty, appropriate formal recognition of that fact shall be made.
C. The immediate supervisor or his superior will investigate the incident,
obtain all facts relating thereto and prepare a written report to the
Borough Council.
D. The Borough Council will consider the matter and take such action as is
proper to commend the employee for the meritorious action. All papers
in connection therewith shall be placed in the employee's personal
history file.
A. Supervisors shall encourage and shall carefully investigate such
suggestions. They will work wholeheartedly with the employee to
correct any apparent defects, to develop the suggestion or to improve
on the original idea.
B. Supervisors shall report to their superiors each worthwhile suggestion
or idea submitted by an employee which is accepted and used.
C. If the specific suggestion or idea results in a saving or effects a
substantial improvement, a written report shall be prepared and
referred to the Borough Council.
D. The Borough Council shall carefully study such memoranda, as it is
desired to give credit whenever and wherever it is due, and to suitably
§ 70-41 (RESERVED) § 70-44
69:397
§ 70-45. Letters of recognition. [Added 6-16-1959 by Ord. No. 1778]
Department heads shall present letters of recognition to employees who
have completed 10 years of service and 20 years of service. The Mayor and
Council shall adopt resolutions recognizing 25 years, 30 years and 35 years
of service to the borough and suitable copies of the same shall be presented
to the employees.
recognize the employees who make a superior contribution to the work
of the borough.
E. All memoranda relating to the suggestion, and the action of the
Borough Council in connection therewith, shall be placed in the
employee's personal history file.
§ 70-44 RUTHERFORD CODE § 70-45
69:398
ARTICLE X
Award Program
[Added 6-19-1962 by Ord. No. 1857]
§ 70-46. Award Authority constituted.
The Mayor and Council shall constitute the Award Authority.
§ 70-47. Award Program.
The Award Program shall include the following:
§ 70-48. Types of awards.
The kind of awards for the classifications contained in § 70-47 of this article
shall be as follows:
A. An award for suggestions that will promote the public interest.
B. Awards for service.
C. Awards for heroism.
A. Cash ranging from $10 to $50 under the classification contained in
§ 70-47A.
B. Awards for service under the classification contained in § 70-47B for the
following years of service: [Amended 10-5-1976 by Ord. No.
2195-76; 11-17-1981 by Ord. No. 2306-81]
(1) Fifteen years: pin or thirty-dollar gift booklet.
(2) Twenty years.
(a) Men: tie tac and emblem.
(b) Women: Necklace or forty-dollar gift booklet.
(3) Twenty-five years: fifty-dollar gift booklet.
(4) Thirty years and up: seventy-five dollar gift booklet.
(5) Retirement: one-hundred dollar gift booklet after twenty-five years
of service.
C. The award under the classification contained in § 70-47C shall be
determined by the Mayor and Council upon fully documented facts
concerning the occasion.
§ 70-46 (RESERVED) § 70-48
69:399

ARTICLE XI
Merit Evaluation Plan
[Added 6-19-1962 by Ord. No. 1857]
§ 70-49. Annual merit evaluation; purpose.
An annual merit evaluation or appraisal will be made of borough employees
in order to measure the progress made by the individual during the past
year and to help him to self-improvement. This evaluation also serves as one
factor in determining the present and potential future value to the borough
of the employee. It is a major factor in considering him for promotion as
well as for higher pay.
§ 70-50. Merit evaluation procedures.124
A. Each department head will evaluate the employee under his direction
and submit merit evaluations to the Mayor and Council. In departments
where there are subordinate supervisors or foremen under the
department head, the initial rating of nonsupervisory employees will be
made by the subordinate supervisor and recommended to the
department head.
B. Merit evaluation forms will be submitted by department heads to the
governing body on or before November 15 each year (also May 31 in
1962 only). They may also be requested for submission at such other
times as the Mayor and Council may direct. At the same time that
evaluation forms are submitted, department heads are also to submit to
the governing body a list of employees recommended for merit step
increases. This list will comprise those eligible employees who have
been evaluated among the higher group of personnel in the
department.
C. All merit evaluation forms will be reviewed by the Borough Council
before being turned over to the Personnel Officer to become a part of
the employee's personal history file. The Mayor and Council will review
the evaluation forms and the recommendations for merit step
increases. Based upon these written documents it will make a final
decision as to which employees will receive merit step raises on January
l each year (July 1 in 1962 only). All such merit step increases shall be
made pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Department Civil
Service.
D. Department heads, together with the appropriate subordinate
supervisor (or foreman sitting in if the department head wishes), are
required to review merit evaluations and progress with each employee
individually during January each year. This personal interview with the
employee is to be done in a friendly, constructive manner aimed at
helping the employee to better performance in the year ahead.
124. Editor's Note: For merit step increments see Ch. 87, Salary Schedules, § 87-6.
§ 70-49 (RESERVED) § 70-51
69:401
§ 70-51. Value to employee.
The annual merit evaluation plan will prove of value to the employee for the
following reasons.
§ 70-52. Value to supervisor.
The evaluation is of value to the supervisor or department head for the
following reasons.
§ 70-53. Value to governing body.
The evaluation is also of value to the governing body for the following
reasons.
A. It recognizes in a fair and impartial way those who have performed well
in the past year and also recognizes additional duties performed, how
well handled and any instruction received and understood.
B. It gives credit for additional skills learned which are of value to the
borough.
C. It provides a friendly constructive review of each employee's work
habits and attitudes, with special emphasis on improvements made
during the year, and thus provides an incentive to continue them.
D. It enables the employee to know where he stands, to discuss any weak
points with the supervisor and to strengthen them, thus bettering
himself and his chances for merit step increases and/or promotion.
A. It provides a uniform method of impartially rating his subordinates and
recording their achievements and progress.
B. It serves as a guide for him to plan on-the-job instruction programs and
otherwise train each employee.
C. It makes him more conscious of his responsibilities both to the borough
and to his subordinates.
D. It enables him to follow up on any weaker points of each subordinate
and to help in strengthening them.
A. It provides an annual, formal review of each employee, using the same
basis for each, so that the progress and development of each individual
is recorded and can be compared from year to year.
B. It fixes the responsibility of the supervisor to evaluate his subordinates
fairly, impartially and constructively.
C. It indicates the competency of the supervisor and is a measure of his
value to the borough.
D. It provides a sound, uniform basis for considering each employee for
salary increases or promotions.
§ 70-51 RUTHERFORD CODE § 70-53
69:402
§ 70-54. Value to borough.
For the borough and its taxpayers, it puts local government on a more
businesslike basis, with employees insured of fair treatment and fair pay for
a job well done.
§ 70-55. Guide and standards for plan.
E. It provides a permanent, written, just and factual record on which to
base action, instead of on verbal, unsupported statements which are
easily forgotten or subsequently repudiated.
A. Effective July 1, 1962, one step (to be called merit step No. 1) is added
over and above the top of each present salary rate or range set in the
Salary Ordinance amendment adopted December 19, 1961.125 This
merit step No. 1 is not to be confused with what have customarily been
called "normal increments." A merit step increase is to be awarded only
on the basis of meritorious performance as determined by evaluation of
each employee's work by his supervisors and after review by the Mayor
and Council.
B. Merit step No. 1 is added on July l, 1962, to all current ranges in the
borough with the exception of the following positions:
(1) Department heads and deputy department heads whose merit
increases are considered individually by the entire Mayor and
Council at the start of each year.
(2) Positions with no present incumbents.
(3) Positions staffed with part-time employees.
(4) Positions within any board or commission where the responsibility
for the determination of individual salaries lies within that board or
commission.
(5) Employees not at the top of their present range (i.e., those who
have already received normal increments this year).
C. The general intent of the governing body for the future is that once a
merit increase is earned, it will not be taken away. However, if an
employee's performance deteriorates in the future, increases that
become available through additional merit steps that might be
authorized in the years ahead can always be withheld.
D. The general intent for the future is to add additional merit steps in the
future on January 1, when deemed desirable. Increases would depend
on each employee's individual performance on his job. "Across the
board" general salary increases would not be given except for
significant increases in the cost of living. Exclusions as outlined in
125. Editor's Note: This ordinance, adopted by Ord. No. 1842, has been superseded by Ord. No.
1950-65. See Ch. 87, Salary Schedules.
§ 70-53 (RESERVED) § 70-55
69:403
§ 70-55B(2) through § 70-55B(5) above would continue to apply.
Department heads and deputy department heads would continue to be
considered individually by the Mayor and Council.
§ 70-55 RUTHERFORD CODE § 70-55
69:404
ARTICLE XII
Promotion and Transfers
§ 70-56. Preference to borough employees.
Whenever it is practical to do so, promotions shall be made from within the
ranks of the borough staff, provided that there are employees available who
possess the qualifications necessary to perform the required duties in an
outstanding manner.
§ 70-57. Transfers.
Transfers from one position or department to another will usually be made
when it would be advantageous to the borough and the employee to make
such transfer.
§ 70-58. Report of skills requested.
Employees are requested to file with their supervisors a list of their skills
and special training in order that the borough may make the best possible
use of all the capabilities and potentialities of its personnel.
§ 70-59. Self-improvement; on-the-job training.
§ 70-60. Basis for promotion.
Promotions from within the ranks shall be based on merit, character,
qualifications and work habits, as determined by an impartial review of all
available facts.
§ 70-61. Requests for transfers nonprejudicial to seniority.
Employees may make written request to the Mayor and Council for transfer
to another department without prejudice or loss of any seniority rights.
Such requests shall be considered on their merits, and any action taken
shall be without establishing a precedent in any case.
A. The value of each employee, both to the borough and to himself, will be
greatly increased by self-improvement through on-the-job training as
well as by outside study and instruction. It is the policy of the borough
to encourage the self-improvement of every employee, in order that he
may qualify for a better position, if and when one suitable is available.
B. Supervisors shall be responsible for on-the-job instructions, as well as
for providing guidance for all persons under their leadership.
§ 70-56 (RESERVED) § 70-61
69:405

ARTICLE XIII
Separation
[Amended 4-29-2008 by Ord. No. 3153-08]
§ 70-62. Regulations governing termination of employment.
[Amended 4-29-2008 by Ord. No. 3153-08]
A. Procedure for separation.
(1) Separation from the employment of the Borough may result from
voluntary resignation of the employee or by termination of the
employee's services by the Mayor and Council.
(2) Employees who resign shall tender their resignation, in writing, to
the Borough Clerk, with a copy to the department head, at least 30
days prior to the effective date of the resignation in order to
provide sufficient time for appointing and training the successor.
(3) Upon receipt of the employee's resignation by the Borough Clerk,
both the department head and Borough Administrator will
separately interview the employee to determine, if possible,
whether there is a reason other than that stated for the employee
leaving the employ of the Borough. Any pertinent data related to
the interview shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk before the
effective date of the resignation.
(4) Termination of a permanent employee's services shall be in
accordance with civil service procedure.
B. Accumulated leave.
(1) Any accumulated leave properly due an employee in the form of
payment may be issued to the separated employee only after:
(a) A letter of resignation has been received by the Borough Clerk;
(b) The Mayor and Council have accepted the employee's
resignation by resolution;
(c) The amount due the employee has been certified to by the
Borough Chief Financial Officer, approved by the Chair of the
Council Finance Committee and adopted by a separate
resolution of the Mayor and Council, which includes a
calculation of the accumulated leave payment.
(2) The amount due the employee shall not be issued until at least 30
days after the employee has left the employ of the Borough, and
every attempt has made to issue such payment over two or more
years.
§ 70-62 (RESERVED) § 70-62
69:407

ARTICLE XIV
Retirement
§ 70-63. Employees' Retirement System.
A. All borough employees enrolled in an Employees' Retirement System
are subject to the requirements and provisions of the System.
B. The employee's contribution to the plan shall be deducted from the
salary paid to such full-time employee and remitted to the System as
prescribed by law.
C. The borough contribution for such employee is determined by and
subsequently remitted to the System in accordance with the provisions
of the law.
D. Borough employees having completed the required number of years of
service and having attained the specific age may apply for retirement as
provided for by the System.
E. Information regarding the Retirement System may be obtained from
the offices of the Borough Clerk or the Tax Collector.
§ 70-63 (RESERVED) § 70-63
69:409

ARTICLE XV
Administration and Records
§ 70-64. Conformance with borough policies expected.
Each present full-time employee will receive a copy of the Personnel Policies
and Practices of the Borough of Rutherford which he will study and retain
for future reference. After a careful study of the policies, practices and rules
set forth therein, he is expected to conform with them.
§ 70-65. Provisions for amendments to policies.
§ 70-66. Employee personal history files established.
A separate personal history file shall be established and maintained for each
employee of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 70-67. Regulations governing personal history files.
A. The Borough Council reserves the right to add, to change, to interpret
or to eliminate personnel policies, practices and rules whenever it
appears to be in the best interest of the borough to do so.
B. All changes, additions or deletions will be made by means of
amendments hereof, copies of which will be issued to each employee for
filing with his copy of the Personnel Policies and Practices of the
Borough of Rutherford.
A. Personal history files are confidential records and shall be maintained
in the office of the Borough Clerk.
B. Only the Mayor, Council, Borough Clerk and Personnel Officer may have
access to any or all of the personal history files; a department head may,
in the office of the Borough Clerk, and there only, examine the files of
his subordinates. Any employee may, at reasonable times, and in the
office of the Borough Clerk, examine his personal history file.
C. All personal history files will be carefully maintained and safeguarded
permanently. Nothing placed in any file shall be removed therefrom.
§ 70-64 (RESERVED) § 70-67
69:411

ARTICLE XVI
Accident Reports
[Added 7-7-1965 by Ord. No. 1944]
§ 70-68. Immediate reports required.
It shall be the duty of every borough employee to immediately report to
his department head the happening of an accident coming to his attention
which occurred to a member of the public in a public building, a public park,
a public recreation area or on a sidewalk adjoining the aforesaid public
places.
§ 70-69. Reports regarding equipment required.
It shall also be the duty of every borough employee to report to his
department head of the occurrence of any accident involving borough
equipment.
§ 70-70. Report information.
The report shall give full details of the accident, including the date, time,
location, weather condition, nature of the injury or damage, the name and
address, if known, of the injured person and a full description of any vehicle
involved.
§ 70-71. Form and disposition of report.
§ 70-72. Reports by department head.
Accidents coming to the attention of the department head, not known to any
of his employees, shall be reported by him in the same manner and form.
§ 70-73. Notification of insurance company required.
The Borough Clerk, or the employee assigned thereto, shall promptly notify
the public liability insurance company for the borough of the reported
accident in such manner and form as may be required by said insurance
company.
A. The report shall be made in duplicate on forms to be supplied by the
Borough Clerk with the assistance of the department head when
required.
B. The department head, upon receiving said report, shall forthwith
deliver a copy thereof to the Borough Clerk, keeping the second copy in
his department file.
§ 70-68 (RESERVED) § 70-74
69:413
§ 70-74. Cooperation with insurance company expected.
All employees and department heads shall promptly cooperate with the
insurance company of the borough in the investigation and disposition of
accidents reported as herein required.
§ 70-75. Employee's notification of department head.
Every borough employee incurring an accident or illness requiring absence
from duty shall promptly notify his department head of the same, giving the
nature thereof, name and address of the physician in attendance, the name
and address of any hospital where confinement is required and the probable
length of time for such absence.126
126. Editor's Note: See also § 70-8.
§ 70-74 RUTHERFORD CODE § 70-75
69:414
ARTICLE XVII
Safety Precautions
[Added 7-7-1965 by Ord. No. 1944]
§ 70-76. Safety procedures emphasized.
It shall be the duty of every department head to impress upon the borough
employees under their control and supervision of the importance and of
their responsibility in performing their duties in a safe and careful manner
and to cooperate with the borough insurance carriers in the promotion of
safety programs.
§ 70-77. Annual safety conference.
A safety conference shall be held annually on the second Tuesday of June,
or at such other time as the Mayor and Council shall designate, with
representatives of the interested insurance companies, which shall be
attended by all department heads.
§ 70-78. Instruction of School Guards. [Amended 5-6-1997 by Ord.
No. 2799-97]
The Chief of Police shall provide for the holding of courses at least one time
during a school year for instructing School Guards in the performance of
their duties, which courses shall be attended by all School Guards.
§ 70-79. Disciplinary procedures, sources.
Any borough employee violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to the disciplinary proceedings contained in this chapter, the
Civil Service Act or the Police and Firemen's Act.
§ 70-76 (RESERVED) § 70-79
69:415

ARTICLE XVIII
Construction
§ 70-80. Applicability.
The personnel policies and practices contained herein shall be deemed to be
separate and apart and not to be in conflict with the Rules and Regulations
of the Police Department heretofore or hereafter adopted and not to the
exclusion thereof but they shall be construed to be of equal application with
such Rules and Regulations for the purposes herein stated.
§ 70-80 (RESERVED) § 70-80
69:417

ARTICLE XIX
Effective Date
§ 70-81. Determination of effective dates.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law, with the exception of Article V, Vacations and Sick Leave, which shall
take effect on January 1, 1958.
§ 70-81 (RESERVED) § 70-81
69:419
Chapter 72
(RESERVED)
Chapter 73
PLAYGROUNDS, PARKS, OPEN SPACES AND RECREATION
AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 7.
Clean environment — See Ch. 21.
Littering — See Ch. 53.
Municipal property and grounds — See Ch.
61.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 68.
Recreation department — See Ch. 83.
Solicitations for charitable purposes — See
Ch. 104.
Solicitors, peddlers and canvassers — See Ch.
105.
§ 73-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
BOARD OF EDUCATION — The Board of Education of the Borough of
Rutherford.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Rutherford.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY — A nonprofit school that serves grade K or
higher that has a physical location that is geographically located within the
Borough of Rutherford.
OPEN SPACES — Those public lands owned by the Borough, devoted to
the general public of the Borough of Rutherford, known as Williams Center
Plaza, Lincoln Park (including the Bandshell), Sunset Park, Van Winkle
Park, Firefighter's Memorial (located at Mortimer and Pierrepont Avenues),
Waterfront Park (located on Riverside Avenue, next to Nereid Boat House),
and Lincoln Woods (on West Pierrepont Avenue).
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
RECREATION AREAS — Those public lands owned by the Borough, devoted
to active or passive recreation, known as Memorial Park, Tamblyn Field,
Tryon Field and Harold Wall Field and the playgrounds, picnic areas, fields,
courts, buildings and parking lots adjacent to or part of these designated
places.
RECREATION DEPARTMENT — The Recreation Department of the Borough
of Rutherford.
§ 70-81 RUTHERFORD CODE § 73-1
72:420
RESIDENT COMPANY — The company has a physical location within the
Borough of Rutherford.
RESIDENT GROUP, ENTITY, OR ORGANIZATION - SPORTS TEAMS —
Seventy-five percent majority of its members are Rutherford residents (see
§ 73-7).
RESIDENT ORGANIZATION, GROUP OR ENTITY — Has a physical location
within the Borough of Rutherford, and the physical location is used for
the purpose for which the organization, group or entity was created (see
§ 73-7).
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn.
§ 73-2. Policy for use of open spaces or recreation areas.
§ 73-3. General regulations.
A. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford recognize that:
(1) Borough facilities are public property and, as such, should be made
available for public use when it is determined that such use would
not subject facilities or participants to any harm or injury;
(2) The use of Borough facilities should be programmed and regulated
for the convenience of their users in order to ensure availability
and safety;
(3) Proper maintenance and care is required in order to maintain these
facilities and keep them in proper condition for their users.
B. The Council adopts the following regulations as a means of improving
accessibility to the Borough's facilities and, at the same time, providing
for their safe, constructive and prolonged use.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to perform or permit to be
performed any of the following acts within any open space or recreation
area of the Borough of Rutherford. The provisions herein shall not apply
to any authorized official of the Borough in pursuit of any official duty.
(1) Mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove
any Borough property.
(2) Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed any
substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, likely to result in
pollution or environmental damage, in the waters of any fountain,
pond, lake, stream, river or other body of water in or adjacent to
any open space or recreation area or in any tributary, stream, storm
sewer or drain flowing into such waters.
(3) Dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper,
boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other trash
in any open space or recreation area, or anywhere on the grounds
§ 73-1 (RESERVED) § 73-3
72:421
thereof, or in any waters in or contiguous to any open space or
recreation area. Such waste shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where these are provided; and where receptacles are
not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from
the open space or recreation area by the person(s) responsible for
its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
(4) Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act, including
disturbing the peace or committing any assault, battery or fighting.
(5) Carry, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in any open
space or recreation area without first obtaining a permit in
accordance with this chapter.
(6) Carry, possess or consume any illegal or illicit narcotics or drugs in
any open space or recreation area of the Borough.
(7) Hold, possess or use any firearm, weapon, explosive, bb-gun, air
rifle, slingshot, high-powered water gun, paint gun or any other
device with a projectile which might cause injury or death, in or
within three hundred yards of any open space or recreation area.
(8) Smoke in violation of any state or local law, rule or regulation or
smoke in violation of any Board of Education rule or regulation.
(9) Molest, trap, capture or hunt, remove, injure or kill any animal, fish
or other wildlife or disturb its habitat, except in portions of any
open space or recreation area so designated.
(10) Swim in any pond, lake, stream or any other body of water, except
areas designated and posted as approved for swimming.
(11) Run a gas-operated watercraft in any pond, lake stream, or any
other body of water, except where designated.
(12) Disturb or interfere with any improvements under construction or
about to be constructed.
(13) Enter any area in disregard of signs or posted notices forbidding
the same or to disobey posted signs or notices of any kind.
(14) Prevent any person from using Borough facilities or interfere with
such use in compliance with these regulations.
(15) Operate, drive or park any vehicle, except on a street, driveway or
parking lot, in any open space or recreation area or park or leave
any such vehicle in any place other than the areas designated for
public parking. No vehicle shall be permitted in any open space or
recreation area except in specific locations provided for parking
use, if any.
(16) Occupy any open space or recreation area between one hour after
sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise, without first obtaining a permit
§ 73-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 73-3
72:422
in accordance with this chapter, except in an emergency and after
notifying the Police Department. However, the closing hours of
Lincoln Park when persons and vehicles are prohibited shall be
between 11:00 p.m. and 1/2 hour before sunrise, unless otherwise
permitted in accordance with this chapter.
(17) Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post or hang any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatsoever in any open space or
recreation area or in or on any public lands, highways or roads
adjacent to the open space or recreation area unless given prior
written permission by the Borough.
(18) Use or cause to be used any loudspeakers, bullhorns, publicaddress
systems, amplified musical instruments or amplifiers
without first obtaining a permit in accordance with this chapter.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to employees or
officials of the Recreation Department or the Board of Education or
to other educational facility during scheduled sports practices or
games.
(19) Practice or play the game of golf or any portion thereof.
(20) Allow any animal or pet in any park, recreation area or open space.
(21) Give entertainment of any kind or transact business of any kind or
hold public gatherings, meetings or assemblies of any kind without
first obtaining a permit in accordance with this chapter.
(22) Occupy any open space or recreation area for picnic parties,
assemblages, business or entertainment without first obtaining a
permit in accordance with this chapter.
(23) Sell, vend, distribute or give away any article, merchandise, food or
services of any kind in any open space or recreation area without
first obtaining a permit in accordance with this chapter.
(24) Solicit funds for any purpose in any open space or recreation area,
other than persons having prior written permission from the
Borough, persons or entities given permission through the
Borough's solicitation ordinance, employees or officials of the
Recreation Department, the Borough Board of Education or other
Borough-located educational facilities or charitable organizations.
(25) In addition to the prohibitions found in this Chapter 73, it shall be
unlawful to commit any of the following acts in Tryon Field: [Added
11-23-2004 by Ord. No. 3058-04]
(a) Smoke in any part of Tryon Field, including all parts of the
playing field, track, bleachers, appurtenances and any other
part of Tryon Field.
§ 73-3 (RESERVED) § 73-3
72:423
(b) Use chewing tobacco in any part of Tryon Field, including all
parts of the playing field, track, bleachers, appurtenances and
any other part of Tryon Field.
(c) Use metal spikes on any part of the playing field.
(d) Use spikes or cleats of any kind on any part of the track.
(e) Discard garbage or waste of any kind, including containers,
wrappers, drinks, food, candy or gum of any kind on any part of
the playing field or track.
(f) Use or discard confetti of any kind in any part of Tryon Field,
including all parts of the playing field, track, bleachers,
appurtenances and any other part of Tryon Field.
(g) Allow pets or animals of any kind in any part of Tryon Field,
including all parts of the playing field, track, bleachers,
appurtenances and any other part of Tryon Field. Assistance
animals used by disabled persons are exempted from this
provision.
(h) Use wheeled vehicles or things of any kind, including golf
carts, bicycles, tricycles, skateboards, roller blades, carts,
shopping carts or any kind of wheeled or motorized
transportation item in any part of Tryon Field, including all
parts of the playing field, track, bleachers, appurtenances and
any other part of Tryon Field. Authorized use by Borough
employees or BOE or school employees are exempted from this
provision. Infant strollers are exempted from this provision.
Assistance wheelchairs used by disabled persons are exempted
from this provision.
B. Borough open spaces or recreation areas cannot be used for any
purpose prohibited by law.
C. Open fires are prohibited, except when approved by the Borough and
any and all government agencies having jurisdiction therein. However,
charcoal grills are permitted in designated picnic areas.
D. All indoor activities must terminate by midnight unless prior written
approval is obtained. All unlighted outdoor activities must terminate by
sunset. Activities at lighted facilities, designated for evening use, must
terminate by 11:00 p.m. unless otherwise approved by the Borough.
E. Events that are likely to draw spectators or participants that exceed the
proper occupancy rate per square foot of an open space or recreation
area are prohibited.
F. Events that seek to utilize open space or recreation areas for the
purpose of commercial profit or are a commercial activity for the
benefit of a commercial entity or operation are prohibited. Events
§ 73-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 73-3
72:424
§ 73-4. Supervision.
§ 73-5. Maintenance and use of area.
sponsored by or through the Borough or Borough entities are exempt
from this provision.
A. Applicants who are granted use of open spaces or recreation areas are
responsible for the proper supervision of all participants and
spectators. Those participants under the age of 18 years shall not to be
left unattended at any time.
B. Applicants who are granted use of open spaces or recreation areas shall
be held responsible for any personal injury or property damage
resulting from the lack of supervision or poor supervision of
participants or spectators.
A. Permittee must report any problems encountered with the open space
or recreation area to the Recreation Department within 24 hours of the
conclusion of the activity.
B. Proper use of open spaces and recreation areas is of the utmost
importance. Organizations or groups failing to abide by the provisions
of this chapter and by the rules and regulations imposed in a permit or
by the Recreation Department will be asked to curtail their event(s) and
may be denied further use of Borough open spaces or recreation areas.
C. Open spaces and recreation areas must be left clean and orderly and all
debris must be properly discarded by the permittee and his or her
group. Chairs and tables shall be returned to their original positions
and lights, air conditioning and heating should be turned off or adjusted
as directed or posted at the facility.
D. Permittee shall be held responsible for any property damage resulting
from the use of the area under a permit issued in accordance with this
chapter.
E. Users of open spaces or recreation areas automatically assume
responsibility and liability for all damages and loss to Borough property
that occurs while using the open space or recreation areas.
F. Permittee shall be responsible for insuring that all participants and
spectators adhere to Recreation Department rules and all applicable
state and local laws and regulations and ordinances.
G. Permittee shall be responsible for insuring that the area is in a safe
condition before allowing the event to proceed. If there is any problem
noted, the permittee shall not proceed with the event and shall notify
the Police Department of the deficiency. The permittee shall not
perform any repair or reconstruction to any field, park, recreation area
or open space.
§ 73-3 (RESERVED) § 73-5
72:425
§ 73-6. Application procedures.
H. Permittee shall be responsible for insuring that all attendees,
spectators and participants comply with any special conditions or
limitations imposed upon the issuance of the permit.
A. The following shall be followed:
(1) Permits for the use of Borough open spaces or recreation areas are
required for organized games, contests, picnics, sports activities,
ceremonies, events and any other organized gathering involving
more than ten attendees, participants or spectators.
(2) Applications for movie or other filming shall be exempt from this
chapter (see Borough Code, Chapter 34).
(3) Applicants must be 18 years of age or older.
(4) Applications for the use of any Borough open space or recreation
area available for use can be obtained in person at or requested by
mail from the Recreation Department. The applicant shall be
required to state his name and address, that he or she is over the
age of 18, the name and address of the sponsor, the days and hours
desired, the open space or recreation area desired, the type of
event, a reasonable estimate of the anticipated attendance, the
anticipated age group of the attendees and such other information
as may be reasonably required.
(5) A minimum refundable deposit of $50.00 (check or money order
payable to the Borough of Rutherford) is required with all
applications. The Recreation Superintendent or Borough
Administrator may require a greater refundable deposit if the
approved event warrants same. This deposit will be used to cover
any damage to Borough property or cleaning required due to the
use of site under the permit. Users will be notified in writing by the
Recreation Department if any such charge will be assessed.
(6) Nonrefundable fees are required with certain applications. These
fees are set forth in a Schedule of Fees set forth in this chapter.127
(7) Proof of insurance is required for certain applications and/or events
as set forth in this chapter.
(8) An original, signed indemnification and waiver is required for
certain applications and/or events as set forth in this chapter.
(9) A team roster or membership list is required with all applications
for sporting activities. This roster/listing must include the name
and home address of all participants who intend to use the open
space or recreation area.
127. Editor's Note: See § 73-8, Schedule of fees.
§ 73-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 73-6
72:426
B. Review procedures.
(1) Completed applications should be returned to the Recreation
Department at Borough Hall. No application shall be considered
until all requested information, payments and documents are
supplied by the applicant.
(2) All multi-day athletic-related applications must be submitted to the
Recreation Department in writing no more than six months before
the start of a specific sporting event nor less than 30 business days
before the event. The Recreation Department may issue a seasonal
permit where applicable.
(3) All other applications should be submitted at least thirty days
before the scheduled event. Applications submitted after this
deadline cannot be assured of scheduling. Applications are
considered on a first-come-first-serve basis and are given priority
as stated elsewhere in this chapter. All applicable payments,
deposits, insurance requirements, roster memberships and other
documents must accompany the application.
(4) The Recreation Superintendent shall review each application for
completeness. When necessary due to the nature of the requested
event or the number of participants, attendees and/or spectators,
or for any other reasonable basis, the Recreation Superintendent
shall refer the application to the Borough Administrator, who shall
submit same for review to the Police Department, Fire Official and
any other Borough department or official whose review is deemed
necessary by the Borough Administrator, including the Health
Department if the application involves service of food or other
health-related issues. The review shall include concerns, findings
and recommendations for safety and other precautions and a
recommendation for issuance or denial of the permit.
(5) The Recreation Superintendent shall be responsible for issuing or
denying the application for permit. Whenever the Recreation
Superintendent deems it necessary, due to the nature of the
requested event or the number of participants, attendees and/or
spectators, or for any other reasonable basis, he shall refer same to
the Mayor and Council for approval of the issuance or denial of the
permit. The Recreation Superintendent shall refer same to the
Mayor and Council if the Police Department or Fire Official has
recommended denial of the application.
(6) Applications for the use of any Borough open space or recreation
area can be denied at the discretion of the Recreation
Superintendent or the Mayor and Council, particularly in
consideration of the following:
(a) Safety concerns, including police, fire and medical concerns;
§ 73-6 (RESERVED) § 73-6
72:427
(b) Physical condition of the fields either due to past or expected
weather or the likelihood of untoward damage from the
proposed event;
(c) Other scheduled activities or permitted uses in the open spaces
or recreation areas or occurring in the Borough in general,
either on the day sought in the permit or on the day before or
the day after the day sought in the event;
(d) If the applicant has violated the conditions of a permit issued
on a previous occasion;
(e) If the applicant has made a material misrepresentation of fact
on the application or other documents;
(f) Such other reasonable basis as may be articulated by the
Borough.
(7) No permit shall be issued for any event that is likely to draw
spectators or participants that exceed the proper occupancy rate
per square foot of an open space or recreation area. This shall be
determined through consultation with the Police Department and
with the Fire Official when he has jurisdiction.
(8) The Borough of Rutherford articulates and directs that no permit
shall be approved for any organized event that seeks to utilize open
space or recreation areas for the purpose of commercial profit, or
for a commercial activity for the benefit of a commercial entity or
operation. Events sponsored by or through the Borough or Borough
entities are exempt from this provision.
(9) The Borough of Rutherford directs and articulates that all alcoholic
beverages shall be prohibited at all times in any open space or
recreation area. The Borough may suspend this prohibition for
alcoholic beverages only under the following circumstances: upon
application for an event sponsored by the Rutherford Volunteer
Fire Department, the Rutherford Volunteer Ambulance Corps and
any other Borough civic or Borough service organization. The
service of alcohol shall be limited to a specified geographical
location, and no service of minors shall be allowed. Such approved
permit shall only allow service of beer and wine. This type of
application must be submitted to the Recreation Department and
then referred for approval or denial to the Mayor and Council.
[Amended 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 3434-17]
(10) Any permit issued to allow live performance or music shall be
limited to 65 decibels at the street side of the sidewalk around the
open space or recreation area, and the decibel level shall be
monitored by sound level measurement devices. Failure to comply
with the limitation after being notified of a violation shall result in
immediate suspension of the event.
§ 73-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 73-6
72:428
(11) If the application is correctly completed and the open space or
recreation area is available and all reviews are satisfactorily
completed and approved, confirmation of scheduling dates will
usually occur within 15 days of the initial submittal. An executed
permit will be issued and will be either mailed or made available for
pickup at Borough Hall, per the applicant's request. The executed
permit must be present with the user group's representative at all
scheduled activities to occur at the open space or recreation area.
(12) All permits are nontransferable.
(13) The Borough reserves the right to change or revoke a permit issued
for use of open spaces or recreation areas, regardless of prior
approval or permit for use. Whenever practical, reasonable notice
will be provided.
C. Special conditions to issued permit.
(1) The permit shall specify any special conditions, limitations or
approvals, including but not limited to the following applicable to
the event:
(a) Designate the area for which the permit is issued;
(b) Hours for use under the permit;
(c) Special parking considerations;
(d) Alcoholic beverages prohibited or approved;
(e) Area where alcoholic beverages are allowed, if approved;
(f) Placement of signs, placards, advertisements or inscriptions;
(g) Use of barbecue grills, if approved;
(h) Use of loudspeakers, bullhorns, public-address systems or
amplifiers;
(i) Vending or distribution of any article, merchandise, food or
services, if approved;
(j) Such other conditions, limitations or approvals as are
applicable to the permitted event.
(2) The Police Department may require that an approved permittee be
required to hire and pay for off-duty Borough police officers for
crowd control, traffic control and/or pedestrian and citizen safety
and may impose such other reasonable restrictions as are deemed
necessary for safety purposes.
(3) The Fire Official may require such reasonable restrictions as are
deemed necessary for safety purposes.
§ 73-6 (RESERVED) § 73-6
72:429
§ 73-7. Imposition of fees.
§ 73-8. Schedule of fees.128 [Amended 12-14-2004 by Ord. No.
3066-04; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 3159-08]
(4) The Health Officer may require such reasonable restrictions as are
deemed necessary for compliance with applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations.
A. A nonprofit group must produce the proper documentation from the IRS
setting forth that the group or organization is a nonprofit organization
as defined under the Internal Revenue Code.
B. In determining if the membership of a nonprofit group contains 75%
majority of Borough residents, all team players will be counted. For
travel and/or tournament teams or one-time event, only home team
players will be counted; the visiting team will not be included in this
calculation. A team roster, which shall be submitted with all
applications, must include the name and home address of each
participant.
C. A resident company shall be determined to apply if the company has a
physical location that is geographically located in the Borough of
Rutherford.
D. A resident nonprofit organization, group or educational facility shall be
determined to apply if the organization or group or educational facility
has a physical location that is geographically located within the
Borough of Rutherford and the physical location is used for the purpose
for which the organization, group or educational facility was created.
E. The Borough and Borough entities shall be exempt from payment of
fees.
A. Picnic, bandshell or park permits. [Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No.
3288-13]
Fee
Resident group or individual event $50
Resident company event, employees of company $75
Nonprofit resident group, organization or
educational facility
No fee
Nonresident event, 1 to 25 participants $100
Nonresident event, 26 to 50 participants $150
Nonresident event, 51 to 100 participants $200
128. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 3202-10, adopted 4-27-2010, provided that the fees
established by Ord. No. 3159-08 or any amendments thereto, as described in § 73-8, would
remain in full force and effect but could be changed by resolution of the Mayor and
Council at any time in the future.
§ 73-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 73-8
72:430
Fee
Nonresident event, 101 to 200 participants $300
Nonresident event, 200 participants and above $400
Nonresident roster or event participant $75
Nonprofit resident group, organization or
educational facility, with the exception of Tryon
Field
$50
B. Field or court permits. [Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 3288-13]
Fee per use
Resident profit youth group, field permit, per hour $50
Resident nonprofit youth group, field permit No fee
Resident nonprofit youth group, field permit with
lights
No fee
Resident nonprofit adult group, field permit $50
Resident nonprofit adult group, field permit with
lights
$200
Nonresident nonprofit group, field permit $150
Nonresident nonprofit group, field permit with
lights
$400
C. Tennis badges. [Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 3288-13]
Fee
Youth resident (12 years and under) No fee
Senior citizen resident (age 62 and above) No fee
Student (ages 12 years to 18 years) $5
Adult resident $20
Guest: nonresident accompanied by resident $30
D. Summer sports camps. [Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 3288-13]
Fee per week
per participant
1 to 50 participants $10
51 participants and above $15
E. Individual pavilion permit fees: $25 per hour per pavilion up to four
hours or until dusk. [Added 4-13-2015 by Ord. No. 3357-15129]
129. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E as Subsection F.
§ 73-8 (RESERVED) § 73-8
72:431
§ 73-9. Priorities of use; Tryon Field fees. [Amended 6-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 3159-08]
F. Rutherford Farmer's Market. [Added 5-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3422-17130]
(1) Rutherford Farmer's Market, located between Spring Dell and Glen
Road, will run annually on Wednesdays and Saturdays from June
through October.
Fee
Registration (all vendors) $50
Wednesdays, for the season $450
Saturdays, for the season $375
Weekly vendors, per week $25
(2) Participants are also required to pay established fees for health
inspections as required under the Borough Code.
G. Rutherford Downhill Derby. [Added 5-22-2018 by Ord. No.
3462-18131]
Registration Fee
Individual $50
Each additional family member $25
H. Arbor Day Tree Fest registration fee: $50 per vendor. [Added
2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 3492-19132]
I. Special fees. When an application seeks a permit to use Tryon Field and
spectators are involved, the Borough Administrator and/or his designee
shall negotiate a price for providing a staff person to be present during
and after the event. [Amended 2-25-2019 by Ord. No. 3492-19]
A. The Borough of Rutherford reserves the right for use of all fields, parks,
recreation areas and open spaces.
B. Applications for the use of open spaces and recreation areas will be
scheduled on a first-come-first-served basis, as much as practicable,
keeping in mind that there are recurring and seasonal permits and
events.
C. When more than one complete application is received for the same
date(s), the following priority order will apply.
130. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection F as Subsection G.
131. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection G as Subsection H.
132. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection H as Subsection I.
§ 73-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 73-9
72:432
§ 73-10. Insurance.
(1) Events sponsored by or through the Borough of Rutherford or its
entities.
(2) Events sponsored by the Borough Board of Education or other
nonprofit educational facilities serving grades K or higher located
within the Borough of Rutherford.
(3) Rutherford resident nonprofit youth recreational activities or
service organizations.
(4) Rutherford resident adult organizations.
(5) Events sponsored by or through the Borough Downtown
Partnership.
(6) Nonresident youth or adult nonprofit organizations.
D. Tryon Field fees. [Amended 5-14-2013 by Ord. No. 3288-13]
Fee per hour
Resident nonprofit adult group field permit $25
Resident nonprofit adult group field permit with
lights
$50
Nonresident nonprofit adult group field permit $50
Nonresident nonprofit adult field permit with lights $100
NOTES:
The permits are assumed for a time frame of three hours, and for
less than five hours an additional $25 for residents and $50 for
nonresidents will be charged.
A. Formal organizations (i.e., Boy Scouts, athletic leagues) that wish to use
Borough facilities must maintain adequate insurance coverage and
provide proof of coverage with their application. An original executed
certificate of insurance is required at the time of application. Informal
groups, however, are free to use facilities without insurance coverage,
contingent upon the execution of an indemnification and waiver, which
is described in this chapter. Insurance requirements may also be waived
for Borough-sponsored meetings or events.
B. Determination as to whether a group is formal or informal will be made
by the Borough Administrator and the Recreation Superintendent.
Factors that will be considered include, but are not limited to,
incorporation status, size of membership, frequency of gatherings and
existing insurance.
C. Those users required to have insurance must present satisfactory
evidence (original executed certificate of insurance) of insurance
§ 73-9 (RESERVED) § 73-10
72:433
§ 73-11. Indemnification and waiver.
§ 73-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $200 and, in default of
payment thereof, may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 74
PLUMBING CODE
§ 74-1. Adoption of standards; deletions, substitutions.
A code regulating the installation, maintenance, repair and control of the
plumbing of buildings and the connection thereof with outside sewers,
cesspools and other receptacles, regulating the practice of plumbing and
the issuance of licenses to practice plumbing, is hereby established
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 275, P.L. 1948. A copy of said code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof
protection for participants, spectators, coaches and the public within
the following terms and conditions. The applicant must maintain
commercial general liability insurance with limits of liability not less
than $1,000,000 ($1 million) per occurrence and aggregate. The policy
will provide coverage for the user's activity, and shall state such
activities on the certificate of insurance. The certificate shall name the
Borough of Rutherford as the certificate holder and as an additional
insured for the full duration of the use of the open space or recreation
area.
A. Users must sign a waiver in which they agree to waive and relinquish all
claims and causes of action of every kind which they have or may have
against the Borough of Rutherford arising out of the use of the facility
resulting in personal injury and/or property damage. The users must
recognize and acknowledge that they assume all risks in connection
with the use of the facility.
B. Users must indemnify the Borough of Rutherford of any and all liability
of loss and against all claims or actions based upon or arising out of
damage or injury (including both) to persons or property caused by or
sustained in connection with the applicant s use of the facility and the
defense of any such claims or action, whether the liability, loss or
damage is caused by or arises out of negligence of the Borough of
Rutherford, or any of the agents, employees or otherwise. The user
must further agree to reimburse the Borough of Rutherford for any and
all expenses, attorney's fees, or costs incurred in the enforcement of
this waiver and indemnification.
§ 73-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 74-1
74:434
herein, with the exception of the following items which are hereby deleted
therefrom.
§ 74-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964)."
§ 74-3. Filing.
Three copies of the said Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964),
similarly marked, have been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Borough of Rutherford upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain
on file in such office for the use and examination of the public.
§ 74-4. Fees.133
In connection with the provisions of this chapter and the code hereby
established and adopted as a part hereof, the following fees shall be
charged and received:
A. The third schedule of specifications and standards entitled "Type M- For
General Plumbing Use" of Paragraph B of Section 3.4.
B. The words "type M copper" in Section 9.1.1, and the words "type L
copper" shall be and they are hereby inserted in their place and stead.
C. The words "vitrified clay sewer pipe, concrete sewer pipe, bituminized
fiber sewer pipe, asbestos cement sewer, dependent upon the approval
of each of these materials by the Administrative Authority" in Section
9.1.3(a), and a period shall be and it is hereby inserted after the word
"iron" therein.
D. The words "iron or copper" in Section 9.1.4.
A. For the examination of any applicant for license as master plumber,
$50.134
B. For the issuance and annual renewal of a license as master plumber,
$10. For failure to renew license as master plumber within 30 days after
expiration date, a fine of $1 per month.
C. The filing of plans for proposed plumbing work, $2.
D. For the issuance of a permit for proposed plumbing construction or
alteration, $5; provided, however, an additional fee of $1 per fixture is
hereby established for each fixture above one proposed in the approved
plan for construction or alteration.
133. Editor's Note: For current Uniform Construction Code fees, see Ch. 22, Construction
Codes, Uniform.
134. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 16, Board of Health, § 16-4C.
§ 74-1 PLUMBING CODE § 74-4
74:435
§ 74-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter or of the Plumbing Code of New Jersey (Revised 1964) made a
part hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $2
nor more than $100 for each offense.
§ 74-6. Disposition of revenue.
All fees, penalties and moneys collected under any provision of this chapter
or the code established herein shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Borough
of Rutherford.
§ 74-7. Repealer.
An ordinance entitled, "An Ordinance Establishing a Code Regulating the
Installation, Maintenance, Repair and Control of Plumbing and the
Connection Thereof With Outside Sewers, Cesspools, or Other Receptacles;
Regulating the Practice of Plumbing and the Issuance of Licenses to
Practice Plumbing and Providing Penalties for Violation Thereof," adopted
on October 10, 1955, and amendments thereto adopted on October 28,
1963, and on December 28, 1964, together with all ordinances and parts of
ordinances inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter and the
code established hereunder are hereby repealed.
§ 74-8. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this chapter or code
shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such declaration shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions.
§ 74-9. Effective date.
This chapter and the code established herein shall take effect 30 days after
the first publication of the chapter in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.
Chapter 76
E. For the issuance of a permit for the replacement of a plumbing fixture,
$3.
F. For each reinspection, after the first inspection, of plumbing work
caused by the failure of the licensee to comply with the provisions of the
code or permit issued, $10.
G. Inspection of installation of water heater, water-conditioning
equipment, water-cooled air-conditioning equipment, water-cooled
refrigeration equipment, heating equipment connected to a water
distribution system, $3.
§ 74-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 74-9
74:436
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fingerprint identification and criminal
history record checks — See Ch. 32.
Fire Department — See Ch. 33.
Personnel policies and practices — See Ch.
70.
Salary schedules — See Ch. 87.
§ 74-9 PLUMBING CODE § 74-9
74:437

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 10-5-1948 by Ord. No. 1532, effective 10-5-1948]
§ 76-1. Composition. [Amended 1-20-1959 by Ord. No. 1763;
5-7-1968 by Ord. No. 2001-68; 3-19-1974 by Ord. No. 2141-74;
11-19-1974 by Ord. No. 2158-74; 3-6-1979 by Ord. No. 2252-79;
5-18-1982 by Ord. No. 2318-82; 5-17-1983 by Ord. No. 2340-83;
6-5-1986 by Ord. No. 2440-86; 5-2-1995 by Ord. No. 2732-95;
10-29-1996 by Ord. No. 2777-96; 10-5-1999 by Ord. No. 2913-99;
5-1-2001 by Ord. No. 2964-01; 12-18-2001 by Ord. No. 2992-01;
3-26-2002 by Ord. No. 3002-02; 8-27-2002 by Ord. No. 3013-02;
8-25-2009 by Ord. No. 3187-09; 7-10-2012 by Ord. No. 3264-12;
9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 3271-12]
§ 76-2. Nominations and appointments. [Amended 5-7-1968 by Ord.
No. 2001-68; 5-1-2001 by Ord. No. 2964-01; 7-10-2012 by Ord. No.
3264-12; 9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 3271-12]
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council,
appoint the Chief of Police, the Captains of Police, the Lieutenants of Police,
the Sergeants of Police, Detectives of the Police, and all patrolmen and
other employees of the Police Department.
A. The authorized strength of the Police Department of the Borough of
Rutherford for all sworn officers shall be a maximum of 49 officers,
exclusive of special officers and other employees.
B. The Police Department of the Borough of Rutherford shall consist of the
following:
(1) A maximum of one Chief.
(a) A minimum and maximum of one Captain.
(b) A maximum of six Lieutenants and a minimum of four.
(c) A maximum of eight Sergeants and a minimum of six.
(d) A maximum of five detectives and a minimum of three.
(e) A minimum of 24 patrolmen.
(f) Such special officers and other employees as determined by
the Mayor and Council as necessary to properly preserve the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Borough.
§ 76-1 PLUMBING CODE § 76-2.1
74:439
§ 76-2.1. Nominations and appointments of special law enforcement
officers. [Added 3-18-1997 by Ord. No. 2789-97135; amended
2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 3412-17]
Special law enforcement officers may be appointed in the Borough of
Rutherford in accordance with the provisions of this section and the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8, Special Law Enforcement Officers Act,
and all amendments thereto. The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice
and consent of the Council, appoint Class 1 special law enforcement officers
for terms not exceeding one year upon the written recommendation of the
Chief of Police or his/her designee. There may be appointed such number of
said special law enforcement officers as may be required. Such special law
enforcement officers shall not be members of the Police Department of the
Borough.
§ 76-3. Membership requirements. [Amended 6-6-1967 by Ord. No.
1974; 12-27-1990 by Ord. No. 2593-90; 8-2-1994 by Ord. No.
2707-94]
Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall be appointed as a
member of the Police Department unless he or she meets the following
general qualifications:
A. Classification of applicants; veterans.
(1) Before any person shall be appointed as a member of the
Rutherford Police Department, the borough shall classify all the
duly qualified applicants for the position or positions to be filled in
the following classes:
I Residents of the Borough of Rutherford
II Other residents of Bergen County
III Other residents of the State of New Jersey
IV All other qualified applicants
(2) Duly qualified applicants who are veterans shall be accorded all
such veterans' preference as are provided by law.
B. The Mayor and Council shall first appoint all those in Class I, then those
in each succeeding class in the order above listed; and shall appoint a
person or persons in any such class only to a vacancy or vacancies
remaining after all qualified applicants in the preceding class or classes
have been appointed or have declined an offer of appointment as police
officer.
C. Resident appointees to police officer must be residents of Rutherford at
the time of their appointment.
135. Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor but was approved 3-18-1997 by
vote of the Council overriding the veto of the Mayor.
§ 76-2.1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 76-3
74:440
§ 76-3.1. Classes and membership requirements for special law
enforcement officers. [Added 3-18-1997 by Ord. No. 2789-97136;
amended 2-27-2017 by Ord. No. 3412-17]
D. Resident candidates for the open competitive examinations for police
officer must be residents of Rutherford as of the announced closing
date of the examination.
E. Resident candidates for appointment as police officer must maintain
continuous residency in Rutherford from the announced closing date of
the Department of Personal examination up to and including the date of
appointment.
F. Should a resident candidate for police officer discontinue his or her
residency prior to appointment, he/she will be subject to removal from
the resident portion of the eligibility list and said candidate or
candidates shall be placed in the nonresident portion of the list.
G. Meet the general qualifications set forth in and provided for by N.J.S.A.
40A:14-122.
A. Classes of special law enforcement officers: There shall be one class of
special law enforcement officers based upon the duties to be performed
as follows:
(1) Class 1. Officers of this class shall be authorized to perform routine
traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties. Said officers
shall have the power to issue summonses for disorderly persons
and petty disorderly persons, offenses, violations of municipal
ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. The
use of firearms by an officer of this class is expressly and strictly
prohibited. No Class 1 officer shall be assigned duties which
require or may require the carrying or use of a firearm. Each Class
1 special law enforcement officer shall have satisfactorily
completed a Class 1 training program with a certificate stating the
category of certification from the Police Training Commission
having completed the mandatory training.
B. Term. Special law enforcement officers shall be appointed for terms not
to exceed one year; provided, however, that the appointment may be
revoked by the Mayor and Council for cause at the hearing, unless the
appointment is for four months or less, in which event the appointment
may be revoked without cause or hearing, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.14 et seq. Nothing herein shall be construed to require
reappointment upon the expiration of a term. The special law
enforcement officers so appointed shall not be members of the police
force of the Borough of Rutherford, and their powers and duties as
determined pursuant to this section and New Jersey Statutes shall
136. Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor but was approved 3-18-1997 by
vote of the Council overriding the veto of the Mayor.
§ 76-3 PLUMBING CODE § 76-3.1
74:441
cease at the expiration of the term for which the special law
enforcement officer was appointed.
C. Qualifications. No person shall be appointed as a special law
enforcement officer unless the person is:
(1) A resident of the Borough of Rutherford at the time of appointment.
(a) If not a resident of the Borough of Rutherford, possesses a
specific ability beneficial to the daily operation of the
Rutherford Police Department, determined by the Chief of
Police or his designee.
(2) Able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent.
(3) Of sound body and good health.
(4) Of good moral character.
(5) Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or
which would make him/her unfit to perform the duties of his/her
office.
(6) Has successfully undergone psychological testing, which is
required of all full-time police officers of the Borough.
(7) Shall have had fingerprints taken, which shall be filed with the
Division of the State Police and Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(8) Not serving as a regularly appointed full-time police officer of any
municipality or a public official with responsibility for selecting law
enforcement policy or exercising authority over the budget of the
Borough or supervision of the Police Department of the Borough.
D. Applications. Every applicant for appointment as a special law
enforcement officer shall submit a written application, verified under
oath, setting forth his qualifications for the position and other data in
the form and manner as hereafter may be prescribed by the governing
body.
E. Approval by Chief of Police. Before any special law enforcement officer
is appointed pursuant to this chapter and applicable New Jersey
Statutes, the Chief of Police or, in the absence of the Chief, his designee
shall ascertain the eligibility and qualifications of the applicant and
shall report these determinations, in writing, to the Mayor and Council
of the Borough of Rutherford.
F. Hours of employment. Special law enforcement officers may be
employed to serve no more than the number of hours prescribed by the
applicable provisions of the Special Law Enforcement Officers Act,
together with any additional hours permitted by law, to provide public
§ 76-3.1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 76-3.1
74:442
§ 76-4. State statutes applicable.
No person shall be appointed, reinstated, promoted, reduced or dismissed
as a member of the Police Department in any other manner or by any
means other than those prescribed by Subtitle 3 of Title 11137 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey (Civil Service) and the rules and regulations
prescribed thereunder.
§ 76-5. Police Surgeon; appointment, duties. [Amended 9-25-2012
by Ord. No. 3271-12]
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council,
appoint a Police Surgeon, who shall be a licensed physician of the State of
New Jersey and a resident of the Borough of Rutherford, whose duty it shall
be to examine any member of the Police Department at the request of the
Chief of Police; examine and report to the Chief of Police on all cases of
sickness or disability of any member of the Police Department for which he
claims exemption from duty, and no member of the Police Department shall
be relieved from the performance of duty because of sickness or disability
unless upon the certification of the Police Surgeon that he is physically
unable to perform the same; examine candidates for appointment to the
Police Department as to their physical fitness to perform the duties of a
police officer; and to perform such other duties as may be assigned to him
from time to time by the Mayor and Council.
§ 76-6. Probationary appointments.
Appointments to the Police Department shall be for a probationary period
of three months. If at the expiration of such period the conduct or capacity
of the probationer has not been satisfactory to the Mayor and Council, the
probationer shall be notified, in writing, that he will not receive absolute
appointment; otherwise his retention in the service will be equivalent to his
final and absolute appointment.
safety and law enforcement services to the Borough of Rutherford and
other public entities.
G. All appointed special law enforcement officers shall fall under the
direction of the Chief of Police of the Rutherford Police Department and
be directed by all pertinent department standard operating procedures
(SOP), rules and regulations, and other written and oral directives.
H. Uniforms shall be prescribed by the Rutherford Police Department and
maintained by the appointed special law enforcement officer. Initial
uniforms and necessary equipment/body armor prescribed in
department directives shall be provided to the special law enforcement
officer at time of appointment.
137. Editor's Note: Title 11 was repealed by L. 1986, c. 112. See now Title 11A, Civil Service.
§ 76-3.1 PLUMBING CODE § 76-7
74:443
§ 76-7. Department oath.
Each member of the Police Department shall, before entering upon the
performance of his duties, take and subscribe an oath or affirmation to bear
true faith and allegiance to the government established in this state under
the authority of the people, to support the Constitution of the United States
and the Constitution of the State of New Jersey, and to faithfully, impartially
and justly discharge and perform all the duties of his office, which oath or
affirmation shall be filed with the Borough Clerk, and he shall also sign the
police register.
§ 76-8. Responsibilities and duties of members. [Amended
9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 3271-12]
The members of the Police Department shall be held responsible for the
proper enforcement of all the ordinances of the Borough of Rutherford and
the laws of the State of New Jersey. Each member shall arrest, without
warrant, any person or persons who, in his presence, shall violate any
ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford, or be guilty of disorderly conduct
or commit any crime against the laws of the State of New Jersey, and shall
promptly execute all warrants and serve all court orders issued to him and
such other papers as required of him to be served within the limits of the
Borough of Rutherford or elsewhere when directed by the Chief of Police.
They shall patrol the streets of the Borough of Rutherford at such times
and on such routes and perform such other duties and services as may be
assigned to them by the Chief of Police.
§ 76-9. Detective Bureau. [Amended 11-19-1974 by Ord. No.
2158-74; 3-15-1983 by Ord. No. 2337-83; 5-17-1983 by Ord. No.
2340-83; 6-5-1986 by Ord. No. 2440-86; 9-4-1996 by Ord. No.
2770-96; 10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 3211-10]
There is hereby established a Detective Bureau within the Police
Department which shall operate under the following rules and regulations:
§ 76-10. Chief of Police; powers and duties. [Added 7-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 3264-12138]
A. The Bureau shall consist of not more than five detectives. At least one of
those detectives shall be a Senior Officer: a Lieutenant or a Sergeant.
B. One detective shall be assigned as Municipal Court Officer to perform
said court duties in addition to other regular assignments.
C. Not more than two detectives shall be assigned as Juvenile Officers to
perform said duties in addition to other regular assignments.
D. All positions shall be filled by police personnel assigned to those
positions by the Chief of Police, all of whom shall be subject at all times
to the orders of the Chief of Police. [Amended 9-25-2012 by Ord. No.
3271-12]
§ 76-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 76-10
74:444
A. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of
the Council from the members of the Police Department. The Chief of
Police shall be directly responsible to the Mayor and Council for the
Department's efficiency and day-to-day operations, unless another
appropriate authority is properly designated by the Mayor and Council.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Chief of Police shall be the head of
the Police Department and shall have the following duties:
(1) Be in full control of the Police Department and the Officers thereof,
shall arrange and determine the hours of service, assign tours,
beats and special details and have complete control of traffic
regulations, subject, however, to the control of the governing body.
(2) Determine policy and direction for the Police Department.
(3) Be held responsible for the conduct, appearance and efficiency of
the Police Department of the Borough of Rutherford, and all
members of said Department, whether superior officers or
patrolmen, shall obey his orders and directions.
(4) Be held strictly responsible for the preservation of the public peace
in the Borough of Rutherford and, to ensure good order, shall post
the members of the Department in such parts of the Borough as he
may deem expedient.
(5) Conduct an educational program for the members of the Police
Department, instruct them in the proper manner of the
enforcement of local ordinances, and train and develop the
individual members of the Police Department in their various
specific duties.
(6) With the assistance of such officers as may be detailed by him for
that purpose, keep the police blotter and such other books and
records as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the Police
Department of the Borough of Rutherford.
(7) Audit all bills for supplies, repairs and other items required for the
proper conduct of the Police Department of the Borough of
Rutherford and shall certify the weekly payroll.
(8) Furnish to the governing body, during the first week of each month,
a detailed statement of the operations of the Police Department of
the Borough of Rutherford for the preceding month, together with
a statement showing the sources from which all moneys were
received by the Department from fines, fees, licenses, etc., during
said month, together with a check or cash covering the same.
(9) Enforce in the Borough of Rutherford the laws of the State,
ordinances of the Borough and such rules and regulations relating
138. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 76-10, Police Director appointment,
duties, responsibilities and salary, as amended.
§ 76-10 PLUMBING CODE § 76-10
74:445
§ 76-11. Suspensions. [Amended 9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 3271-12]
The Chief of Police may suspend any member or employee of the Police
Department for incapacity, misconduct, nonresidence or disobedience of the
rules and regulations of the Police Department for a reasonable period not
exceeding 30 days, except on a charge for a criminal offense, in which case
the suspension may exceed such period. Successive suspensions shall not
be allowed without special permission of the Civil Service Commission.
§ 76-12. Compensation.
The compensation of the members of the Police Department shall be
determined by the Mayor and Council and shall be paid at such times as the
Mayor and Council may designate.139
to the Police Department as may be adopted from time to time by
the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford.
(10) Be held responsible for the discipline of the Police Department and
shall hear all charges (or delegate such hearing in the Chief's
discretion) against members thereof subject to the grievance
procedures set forth elsewhere in this Code of the Borough of
Rutherford by applicable New Jersey statute or by collective
bargaining agreement, whichever shall be applicable.
(11) Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directive for the
disposition and discipline of the Department and its members and
officers.
(12) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Department.
(13) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers.
(14) Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the
efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised under
the Chief's direction and control.
(15) Report at least monthly to the governing body in such form as shall
be prescribed on the operation of the Police Department during the
preceding month and make such other reports as may be requested
by the governing body.
C. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-179, the starting base salary of the
Chief of Police shall be set at a rate that is higher than the highest base
salary of the ranking police officer next in command below the Chief of
Police. The current salary range of the Chief of Police can be located at
§ 87-1 of the Code of the Borough of Rutherford. [Added 3-26-2013 by
Ord. No. 3283-13]
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Salary Schedules.
§ 76-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 76-13
74:446
§ 76-13. Rules and regulations. [Amended 8-27-2002 by Ord. No.
3013-02; 2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 3019-03]
§ 76-13.1. (Reserved)140
§ 76-14. Repealer.
All prior ordinances or parts of ordinances concerning the Police
Department are hereby repealed.
§ 76-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
A. The Council may, by ordinance, adopt such rules and regulations as
necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of the Police
Department, provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to make such rules and regulations a part of this chapter. The
Council shall seek the review and recommendation of the Chief of Police
in adopting such rules and regulations. The rules and regulations so
adopted shall be maintained in the Police Department and in the office
of the Borough Clerk. [Amended 9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 3271-12]
B. The Council makes an initial comprehensive adoption of rules and
regulations contained in Volume 1, Chapter 1, Articles 1 through XII,
entitled "Borough of Rutherford Police Department, Rules and
Regulations."
140. Editor's Note: Former § 76-13.1, Juvenile Bureau, added 5-17-1983 by Ord. No. 2340-83,
was repealed 6-5-1986 by Ord. No. 2440-86.
§ 76-13 PLUMBING CODE § 76-15
74:447

ARTICLE II
Dress and Uniforms
[Adopted 5-19-1959 by Ord. No. 1776]
§ 76-16. Amount and conditions of uniform allowance. [Amended
4-15-1969 by Ord. No. 2019; 3-17-70 by Ord. No. 2041; 4-4-1972 by
Ord. No. 2088-72; 7-3-1973 by Ord. No. 2124-73; 7-6-1983 by Ord.
No. 2346-83; 5-1-2001 by Ord. No. 2964-01; 9-25-2012 by Ord. No.
3271-12; 4-8-2014 by Ord. No. 3323-14]
§ 76-17. Items provided.
The items of uniform for which such allowance is made are as follows:
§ 76-18. Names of eligible members submitted. [Amended
9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 3271-12]
The Chief of Police shall certify to the Mayor and Council not later than
the first day of April of each year the names of the members of the Police
Department who are entitled to receive payment of such uniform allowance.
§ 76-19. Payments authorized by resolution.
All payments of the uniform allowance as herein set forth shall be
authorized by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
A. The Borough of Rutherford shall pay an annual allowance toward the
purchase of uniforms as hereinafter itemized to all uniformed members
of the Police Department in the amount of 3/4 of 1% of the top paid
patrolman’s base salary, payable on the first day of May of each year;
provided, however, that a newly appointed patrolman shall receive a full
uniform at the time of his appointment and he shall not be entitled to
any further allowance for the calendar year of his appointment.
B. The Borough of Rutherford shall pay an annual allowance toward the
purchase of uniforms as hereinafter itemized to the Chief of Police and
Captain of the Police Department in the amount of ¾ of 1% of the top
paid patrolman’s base salary, payable on the first day of May of each
year.
A. Winter: overcoat, trousers, cap, shirt and tie.
B. Other seasons: blouse, trousers, cap, shirt and tie.
C. Rain clothing, boots and shoes.
D. Insignia.
§ 76-16 PLUMBING CODE § 76-20
74:449
§ 76-20. Purchase procedure. [Amended 4-4-1972 by Ord. No.
2088-72; 4-3-1973 by Ord. No. 2114-73; 9-25-2012 by Ord. No.
3271-12]
Upon the written authorization of the Chief of Police and with the approval
of the Mayor and Council, the Purchasing Agent of the Borough of
Rutherford is hereby authorized to purchase for a uniformed member of the
Police Department those items of uniform above set forth in the following
manner:
§ 76-21. Procedure for replacement of damaged clothing. [Amended
9-25-2012 by Ord. No. 3271-12]
Any member of the Police Department whose clothing shall be damaged in
the performance of duty to the extent that it will require cleaning, repairing
or replacing may be entitled to have such clothing cleaned, repaired or
replaced at the cost of the Borough of Rutherford upon the written
certification of the same by the Chief of Police and with approval of the
Mayor and Council.
§ 76-22. Payment.
The payment of the uniform allowance for the year of 1959 shall be made
upon the adoption of this chapter.
§ 76-23. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon publication according to law.
A. All patrolmen who have not attained the maximum upper pay range
may purchase those items of uniform above set forth and to arrange
with that member of the Police Department for whom they were
purchased a method of payment of the cost of such uniform, which shall
be not less than $10 per month.
B. Any other member of the Police Department may make a single
purchase of those items of uniform above set forth during the period
commencing January 1 of each year to the first day of May each year, to
be paid for by the Borough of Rutherford and to be deducted from the
amount of clothing allowance which is payable on the first day of May of
each year.
C. The Collector-Treasurer of the Borough of Rutherford shall maintain
proper bookkeeping records of such transactions.
§ 76-20 RUTHERFORD CODE § 76-24
74:450
§ 76-24. Detective Bureau clothing allowance. [Added 2-15-1966 by
Ord. No. 1954; amended 4-15-1969 by Ord. No. 2019; 3-17-1970 by
Ord. No. 2041; 4-4-1972 by Ord. No. 2088-72; 7-3-1973 by Ord. No.
2124-73; 7-6-1983 by Ord. No. 2346-83; 4-8-2014 by Ord. No.
3323-14]
The Borough of Rutherford shall pay an annual uniform and clothing
allowance in the amount of ¾ of 1% of the top paid patrolman’s base salary
to each of the superior officers and patrolman assigned to the Detective
Bureau, payable on the first day of May of each year.
§ 76-25. (Reserved)141
§ 76-26. Clothing allowance of Animal Warden. [Amended
3-15-1966 by Ord. No. 1955; 4-15-1969 by Ord. No. 2019; 4-4-1972
by Ord. No. 2088-72; 7-3-1973 by Ord. No. 2124-73]
The Borough of Rutherford shall pay an annual clothing allowance of $150
to the Animal Warden, payable on the first day of May of each year.142
141. Editor's Note: Former § 76-25, Names of eligible members submitted, added 2-15-1966 by
Ord. No. 1954, was repealed 5-1-2001 by Ord. No. 2964-01. See § 76-18, Names of eligible
members submitted.
142. Editor's Note: For provision for appointment and summary of duties of the Animal
Warden, see Ch. 26, Dogs and Kennels, §§ 26-7 through 26-12.
§ 76-24 PLUMBING CODE § 76-26
74:451

ARTICLE III
Fees for Services
[Adopted 12-20-1960 by Ord. No. 1818]
§ 76-27. Establishment of fees. [Amended 12-18-1962 by Ord. No.
1874; 12-26-1968 by Ord. No. 2011; 4-3-1973 by Ord. No. 2115-73;
6-15-1976 by Ord. No. 2191-76; 4-17-1979 by Ord. No. 2254-79;
10-7-1980 by Ord. No. 2290-80; 9-5-1985 by Ord. No. 2412-85;
12-3-1991 by Ord. No. 2629-91; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 3062-04]
The following fees are hereby established for certain services extended and
material distributed by the Police Department, to be paid by the applicant
or requestor at the time each request is made:
A. Request in person at the Police Department for copies of all reports,
including accident reports, computer entry reports, data logs,
continuation reports and any other document provided by the Police
Department (per N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2):
(1) Seventy-five cents per page for the first to the 10th page.
(2) Fifty cents per page for the 11th to the 20th page.
(3) Twenty-five cents per page for each page thereafter.
B. Request by mail for copies of motor vehicle accident reports (per
N.J.S.A. 39:4-131):
(1) Five dollars per page for the first, second and third page.
(2) One dollar per page thereafter.
C. Request by mail for copies of officer reports, computer entry reports,
data logs, continuation, investigation or operation reports and any
other document provided by the Police Department (per N.J.S.A.
47:1A-2):
(1) Seventy-five cents per page for the first to the 10th page.
(2) Fifty cents per page for the 11th to the 20th page.
(3) Twenty-five cents per page for each page thereafter.
(4) Plus cost of actual postage and $00.25 per mailing or stationary
expenses.
D. Request for copies of video or audio tapes: $5 per tape, plus any actual
postage charges incurred, plus $2 per mailing for stationary expenses.
E. Requests for photographs:
(1) Actual reproduction of photograph: $5 per photograph.
(2) Digital reproduction of photograph: $3 per photograph.
§ 76-27 PLUMBING CODE § 76-27
74:453
(3) Black and white copies of photographs: As set forth in the per page
itemizations found in Subsections A and B above.
(4) Plus cost of actual postage and $00.25 per mailing for stationary
expenses, if mailing is requested.
F. Firearms permits (per N.J.S.A. 2C:58-3):
(1) Permit to purchase handgun and form of register: $2 per permit.
(2) Firearms purchaser's identification card: $5 per card.
G. Letter for citizens regarding local name search: $5 per letter.
H. Identification services:
(1) State or federal fingerprint search: $25 per request.143
(2) State or federal name search: $25 per request.
(3) State or federal criminal history search: $25 per request.
(4) In addition to the fees stated above, each applicant shall be
charged such additional fees at the rates permitted for processing
of such requests through the State Bureau of Identification, and
may be required to issue separate payment payable to the State of
New Jersey.
(5) In addition to the fees stated above, all requests required to be
processed through the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall
include a cashier's check or money order payable to the Federal
Bureau of Investigation in the amounts established by the Federal
Bureau of Identification for any services to be provided by that
agency.
(6) Initial background investigations: $50 per request shall be
submitted to the Rutherford Police Department for all initial
background investigation requests. Annual license renewal
background checks shall not be required to pay a fee. [Added
5-28-2013 by Ord. No. 3290-13]
I. Providing an escort for the delivery of money or other valuable items of
personal property within the confines of the Borough: $25, except that
such escort services provided to Rutherford houses of worship shall be
without charge.144
143. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 32, Fingerprint Identification and Criminal History Record
Checks.
144. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J, regarding extra-duty police services, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 3132-07.
§ 76-27 RUTHERFORD CODE § 76-28
74:454
§ 76-28. Fees payable to Borough. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No.
3062-04]
The foregoing fees shall be payable to the Borough of Rutherford. A receipt
shall be issued by the Police Department for all moneys received pursuant
to this chapter.
§ 76-29. Issuance of receipts required.
A receipt shall be issued by the Police Department for all moneys received
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 76-30. Additional fingerprint application fee. [Added 8-3-1982 by
Ord. No. 2324-82; amended 9-5-1985 by Ord. No. 2412-85]
All fingerprint applications required to be processed by the Federal Bureau
of Investigation shall include a cashier's check or money order payable
to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the amount established by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation at the time of the submission of the
applications in addition to other authorized borough fees. This fee shall be
paid by the applicant.
§ 76-31. Fees for use of police and police vehicles by private entities
or persons. [Added 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 3132-07]
A. The Borough of Rutherford's Police Department may render extra-duty
services to private entities or persons, when necessary or required,
upon payment by such private entity or person for all wages and
administrative fees as set forth herein. Such extra-duty services may be
necessary or required at construction sites, development areas,
recreational or athletic events, and other activities that require police
security.
B. The following fees shall be charged to and prepaid by private entities or
persons who request or require the services of the Rutherford Police
Department:
(1) Hourly extra-duty rate for police officers: $100 per hour.
(2) Daily rate for a police car: $200 per day.
C. Upon a request for police services, the Police Department and the
Finance Department shall consult and provide an estimate of the total
fees in advance of the services being rendered and shall provide a
written itemized estimate to the private entity or person.
D. Such private entity or person shall thereafter issue payment to the
Borough of Rutherford for the estimated amount which shall be
maintained in an escrow trust account by the Borough Finance
Department.
§ 76-28 PLUMBING CODE § 76-31
74:455
E. The Borough Finance Department shall make all proper deductions
from the escrow account for actual fees and costs incurred as set forth
above, as the services or fees are incurred, and shall keep an accurate
accounting of all deductions from the escrow account, and shall provide
an itemized expenditure report to the private entity or person upon
request.
F. The Finance Department shall return any balance in the escrow
account to the private entity or person within 30 days of the completion
of services and payment for same.
§ 76-31 RUTHERFORD CODE § 76-31
74:456
Chapter 77
POOLROOMS, BILLIARD PARLORS AND BOWLING ALLEYS
§ 77-1. Prohibited use. [Amended 9-16-1969 by Ord. No. 2028]
No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall own or
operate a public poolroom, billiard parlor or bowling alley within the
Borough of Rutherford.
§ 77-2. (Reserved)145
§ 77-3. (Reserved)146
§ 77-4. (Reserved)147
§ 77-5. (Reserved)148
§ 77-6. (Reserved)149
§ 77-7. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held to be unconstitutional, the decision of the court
respecting such provision or provisions shall not affect the validity of any
other provisions which can be given effect without such invalid provision or
provisions.
§ 77-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a fine of not exceeding $100, and in default of the payment thereof, may
be sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding
30 days. Every day on which such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
145. Editor's Note: Former § 77-2, Application procedure; information, was repealed 9-16-1969
by Ord. No. 2028.
146. Editor's Note: Former § 77-3, Referral to Mayor and Council, was repealed 9-16-1969 by
Ord. No. 2028.
147. Editor's Note: Former § 77-4, Issuance, was repealed 9-16-1969 by Ord. No. 2028.
148. Editor's Note: Former § 77-5, Expiration date, was repealed 9-16-1969 by Ord. No. 2028.
149. Editor's Note: Former § 77-6, Fee, was repealed 9-16-69 by Ord. No. 2028.
§ 76-31 POOLROOMS, BILLIARD PARLORS AND § 77-8
77:457
Chapter 77A
PRECIOUS METALS AND SECONDHAND GOODS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 105. Special sales — See Ch. 106.
§ 77A-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 77A-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — A current valid New Jersey driver's
license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license issued
by another United States state, a valid United States passport, or other
verifiable United States government-issued photo identification.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or operates any
of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes of resale
of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand goods as defined herein;
pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as defined herein. For
the purposes of this chapter, transient buyers, as defined herein, are subject
to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any other dealers.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — A dealer who conducts business intermittently
within the municipality or at varying locations.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — The duly appointed clerk of the Borough of
Rutherford whose duties are defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation:
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than choses
A. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to assist law enforcement
officials and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals and
other secondhand goods by requiring minimum identification,
reporting, maintenance and distribution criteria for licensed dealers in
these goods.
B. No person shall use, exercise, or carry on the business, trade, or
occupation of the buying, selling, or pawning of precious metals or
other secondhand goods without complying with the requirements of
this chapter in the exact manner described herein.
C. This chapter shall not apply to participants of garage sales, street fairs,
or other similar events scheduled within the Borough from time to time.
This chapter also does not pertain to personal transactions, whether in
person or by means of the internet or other ad type.
§ 77-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 77A-2
77:458
in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness; purchasing
personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; or
doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending money on
goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and their alloys as
defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted between a
dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals, jewelry, or any
other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or pawned.
SECONDHAND JEWELRY GOODS — Any pawned or purchase transaction
conducted between a dealer and a member of the public of any type of
jewelry goods.
SELLER — A member of the public who sells or pawns used goods such as
precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer, as defined herein, who has not been in
a registered retail business continuously for at least six months at any
address in the municipality where the dealer is required to register or who
intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six months.
§ 77A-3. License requirement for dealers.
No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of precious
metals or other secondhand goods, as defined above, within the jurisdiction
of the municipality without having first obtained a license therefor from
the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a number issued by the
Municipal Clerk. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk shall
set forth the name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or
not he or she is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or
she has ever been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s),
or municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof. Advertising
in any print or electronic media or by sign that any of those articles or
secondhand goods referred to in § 77A-2 above are being bought in any
location within the municipality shall constitute engaging in business as
a dealer of secondhand goods for purposes of this chapter. No person,
partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity shall
place or cause to be placed any advertisement for purchase of such articles
or goods without stating in the advertising the license number issued to a
person or entity by the municipality. In any print advertisement, the license
number shall appear in type no smaller than eight point in the lower righthand
corner of the advertisement. In any advertisement in electronic media,
the license number shall be visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or
indicate the license number shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to the penalties established in § 77A-9.
§ 77A-2 POOLROOMS, BILLIARD PARLORS AND § 77A-4
77:459
§ 77A-4. Application process for dealers; approval or denial.
A. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this chapter, the
Municipal Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who
shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee, pursuant to this
chapter, for the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant
for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to,
the following:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in § 77A-2 above,
although nothing in this section shall be construed to warrant
denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience;
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
(3) Any criminal record of the applicant including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police may, as part of the application process, require a
fingerprint criminal background check through the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services Division,
which may require an additional fee from the applicant.
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
section shall not be construed to require denial of any license solely
on the grounds that the business is not from a fixed location or that
the applicant is a transient buyer or itinerant business; however,
applicants who fall under the category of a transient buyer or
itinerant business must state with specificity on the license
application the business address where transaction records
required by § 77A-6D of this chapter will be stored, as well as the
location where purchased goods will be retained during the
mandatory inspection period required under § 77A-6A.
B. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
chapter within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not been
received by the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief of Police
may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
C. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend grant or denial of the license to the Municipal Clerk, who
§ 77A-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 77A-4
77:460
§ 77A-5. Identification of seller; recordkeeping requirements for
dealers.
For every transaction between a dealer and the public, the dealer shall be
required to do as follows:
shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief
of Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation
of denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. If the Municipal Clerk accepts the recommendation
of the Chief of Police to deny any license, the applicant shall be notified
in writing within 10 days of such denial and the Clerk shall forward to
the applicant a statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
D. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any
prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in § 77A-5, the retention and inspection requirements of
§ 77A-6, or any other portion of this chapter. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Municipal Clerk shall issue
or deny the license accordingly, contingent upon the receipt of a bond
as required by § 77A-7 of this chapter.
E. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel appointed by the Chief
of Police, at which time the applicant shall be permitted to introduce
such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such denial. Any applicant
exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of appeal within
10 days of receiving written notice of denial of a license to act as a
dealer of secondhand goods.
F. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
A. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in
§ 77A-2.
B. Require each seller to execute a declaration of ownership, which shall
contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I am the
sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods being
§ 77A-4 POOLROOMS, BILLIARD PARLORS AND § 77A-5
77:461
sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not possess
the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age of 18
years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
C. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
(2) The name, address, date of birth, employment, and telephone
number of the seller or sellers;
(3) A photographed recording at the time of the transaction of the
seller in a format acceptable to the Chief of Police, along with a
physical description of the seller, including height and weight
(approximate), hair color, eye color, facial hair, if any, etc.;
(4) A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in § 77A-2, in a format acceptable by the
Chief of Police;
(5) A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable.
(6) The receipt number;
(7) A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers or any
owner-applied markings engraved thereon, serial numbers, series
numbers, or any other information, which sets apart the particular
object from others of like kind;
(8) The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
(9) If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds Troy,
pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats
for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1, N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.;
(10) The time and date of the transaction.
D. The information outlined in Subsection C above must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this chapter,
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
§ 77A-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 77A-5
77:462
§ 77A-6. Retention; revocation; other restrictions.
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to
the inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of their duty as set forth
in Subsection F below. Through the use of applicably required computer
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Chief of
Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into the
electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same date
as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment. The
information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined in
Subsection C above.
E. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the
date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in Subsection
C above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this chapter and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so, including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
§ 77A-6.
F. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the police department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as well as
the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in § 77A-6. Itinerant businesses
and transient buyers will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police
of the address where these records and articles will be stored.
A. All secondhand goods purchased, received for pawn, or received for
consignment as described above are to be made available for inspection
by the Chief of Police or designee thereof at the designated business
address for a period of at least 15 calendar days from the date the
transaction information is actually reported to the Chief of Police in the
approved manner described above in § 77A-5 except for precious
metals and jewelry, which must be maintained for at least 10 business
days or for the statutory period provided in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36(d). The
business, all precious metal or other secondhand goods purchased, and
transaction data are subject to inspection and must remain in the same
condition as when purchased or received for pawn and shall not be sold,
disposed of, changed, modified, or melted by the dealer until the
retention period has expired. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers
§ 77A-5 POOLROOMS, BILLIARD PARLORS AND § 77A-6
77:463
will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the location where
the purchased item(s) are being held.
B. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
§ 77A-5B upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement officer with
jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception under
N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered the
victim of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The officer
shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue a
criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
C. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years a written record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand goods in the form prescribed in
§ 77A-5C.
D. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this chapter from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
E. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate thereunder. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to § 77A-9 of this
chapter.
(1) Grounds for suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this chapter, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
(2) Procedure for suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to
Subsection G. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately,
pending the outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must
immediately cease engaging in the business of purchasing for
§ 77A-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 77A-6
77:464
resale, receiving for pawn, and/or selling of precious metals and/or
other secondhand goods in the municipality until reinstatement.
(3) Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, been cured, corrected,
or appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed
appropriate by the three-person panel appointed by the Chief of
Police, upon the timely filing of an appeal as provided in Subsection
G.
F. Revocation. A license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this chapter. This penalty
shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur
under § 77A-9.
(1) Grounds for revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this chapter; a second violation
under this chapter less than one year after an earlier violation
under this chapter; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
(2) Procedure for revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Chief of Police, shall review the stated grounds for revocation and
the panel shall issue an appropriate disposition of either
suspension, revocation, or reinstatement. If the panel determines
that revocation is the appropriate disposition, it shall set forth the
grounds for the same in writing in the form of a notice of
revocation, which shall be provided to the dealer. The notice shall
advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If the panel determines that
suspension is the appropriate disposition, it shall provide the
dealer with a notice of suspension that shall advise the dealer of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating as a dealer of precious metals or other secondhand goods
within the municipality.
G. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel,
appointed by the Chief of Police, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such suspension or revocation. Any applicant exercising the right to
§ 77A-6 POOLROOMS, BILLIARD PARLORS AND § 77A-6
77:465
§ 77A-7. Bond.
Each dealer covered under this chapter shall deliver a bond to the
Municipal Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by a
surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of
New Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by
the municipal attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, and shall be in the
penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance of
and compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of
the municipality in force or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of
this business and conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the
benefit of any person or persons who shall have received judgment against
the dealer licensed under this chapter, which damage shall be established
by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain the
following language: "The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to the
Borough of Rutherford, be and remain for the benefit of any person who
shall obtain a judgment against obligor as a result of damage sustained in
operation pursuant to any license granted under this chapter." Said bond
shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license
and must be renewed annually along with the license.
§ 77A-8. Fees; period of license validity.
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for a pawnbroker or a
dealer in precious metals or other secondhand goods, as covered under this
chapter, is $100. The annual renewal fee for a license is $100. These fees
are separate from and in addition to any fees the dealer must pay in relation
to the mandatory electronic database system designated by the Chief of
Police, as provided by § 77A-5D of this chapter. Payments are to be made in
the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a one-year
period from the date of its issuance.
§ 77A-9. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any dealer shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $500 for a first offense, $1,000
for a second offense, and $2,000 for a third offense, or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days. Each and every violation shall be considered a
separate violation. Every day that a violation continues shall be a separate
violation. Each violation shall result in an additional ten-day suspension.
Any person who is found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter
within one year of the date of a previous violation and who was fined for the
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving
written notice of revocation or suspension of license.
H. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business within the municipality, provided that he or she notifies the
Municipal Clerk, in writing, of the street address of said new location.
§ 77A-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 77A-9
77:466
previous violation may be sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a
repeat offender and, in addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings
as provided in § 77A-6F. The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided
herein, and same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for
the violation of this chapter.
§ 77A-10. Time limit for conformance; repealer; severability.
Chapter 78
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 21 and Ch. 54.
Commercial property maintenance — See Ch.
21A.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 40.
Housing Code — See Ch. 47.
Deposit and removal of materials — See Ch.
56.
Noise control — See Ch. 63.
Numbering of buildings and lots — See Ch.
63A.
Lighting of parking areas — See Ch. 66.
Snow removal — See Ch. 100.
Tent caterpillar control — See Ch. 116.
Trees and shrubbery — See Ch. 120.
Unfit dwellings — See Ch. 123.
Abandoned vehicles and junk — See Ch. 125.
§ 78-1. Purpose.
A. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity engaging in the business of a pawnbroker, or a dealer in precious
metals or other secondhand goods shall conform to the provisions of
this chapter within 90 days following the effective date of this chapter.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
C. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to replace any preexisting
statutory requirements governing pawnbrokers as in N.J.S.A.
45:22-1 et seq., the sale of precious metals as in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq.,
the sale of secondhand jewelry as in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 et seq., or any
other statutory provision regarding any subject matter discussed
herein.
D. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 77A-9 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 78-1
78:467
§ 78-2. Applicability.
A. It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the Borough of
Rutherford structures used for residential and nonresidential use which
are or may be in the future substandard with respect to structure,
equipment or maintenance; or, further, that such conditions, including
but not limited to structural deterioration, lack of maintenance of the
appearance of the exterior of the premises, infestation, lack of essential
heating, plumbing, storage space or refrigeration equipment, lack of
maintenance or upkeep of essential utilities and facilities, existence of
fire hazards, inadequate provisions for light and air, unsanitary
conditions and overcrowding, constitute a menace to the health, safety,
morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants
of the Borough of Rutherford, New Jersey. It is further found and
declared that by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive
deterioration, certain properties have the further effect of creating
blighted conditions and initiating slums and that, if the same are not
curtailed and removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and spread
and will necessitate, in time, the expenditure of large amounts of public
funds to correct and eliminate the same and that by reason of timely
regulations and restrictions as herein contained, the growth of slums
and blight may be prevented and the neighborhood and property values
thereby maintained, the desirability and amenities of residential and
nonresidential uses and neighborhoods enhanced and the public health,
safety and welfare protected and fostered.
B. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
morals and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance, conditions and occupancy of residential and
nonresidential premises; to establish minimum standards governing
utilities, facilities and other physical components and conditions
essential to make the aforesaid facilities fit for human habitation,
occupancy and use; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon
owners, operators and occupants; to authorize and establish
procedures for the inspection of residential and nonresidential
premises; to fix penalties for violations of this chapter; to provide for
the right of access across adjoining premises to permit repairs; and to
provide for the repair, demolition or vacation of premises unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use. This chapter is hereby declared
to be remedial, preventive and essential for the public interest, and it is
intended that this chapter be liberally construed to effectuate the
purposes as stated herein.
A. Every residential and nonresidential building, and the premises on
which it is situated in the borough, used or intended to be used for a
dwelling or for commercial, business or industrial occupancy shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter, whether or not such
buildings shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or
after the enactment of this chapter and irrespective of any permits or
licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the
§ 78-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 78-2
78:468
§ 78-3. Adoption of standards. [Amended 11-23-1993 by Ord. No.
2693-93]
A code regulating the establishment of minimum maintenance standards
for all structures and premises within the borough is hereby established
pursuant to P.L. 1946, c. 21, as amended, (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et seq.). A copy
of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of
the text thereof herein, with additions, deletions and changes as hereinafter
set forth.
§ 78-4. Title. [Amended 11-23-1993 by Ord. No. 2693-93]
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
designated as the "BOCA National Property Maintenance Code/1993,
Fourth Edition," as published by the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc.
§ 78-5. Filing of copies. [Amended 11-23-1993 by Ord. No. 2693-93]
Three copies of said BOCA National Property Maintenance Code/1993,
Fourth Edition, similarly marked, have been placed on file in the office of
the Clerk of the Borough of Rutherford upon the introduction of this chapter
and will remain on file there for use and examination by the public until final
action is taken on said chapter.
building or premises, for the construction or repair of the building
or for the installation or repair of equipment and/or facilities prior to
the effective date of this chapter. This chapter establishes minimum
standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all such
buildings and does not replace or modify standards otherwise
established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building
or the equipment or facilities contained therein, except as provided in
the following subsection. Where there is mixed occupancy, residential
or nonresidential use therein shall be, nevertheless, regulated by and
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
B. In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a standard
higher than is set forth in any other ordinances of the borough or under
the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth
herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this chapter impose a lower
standard than any other ordinances of the borough or of the laws of the
State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in any such
other ordinance or law shall prevail.
C. No certification of compliance with this chapter shall constitute a
defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the borough
applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein
relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any such
other provision or any official of the borough from enforcing any such
other provision.
§ 78-2 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 78-6
78:469
§ 78-6. Revisions. [Amended 11-23-1993 by Ord. No. 2693-93;150
2-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2698-94]
The following sections of the code adopted under § 78-4 of this chapter are
hereby revised or amended as hereafter set forth:
A. Section PM-101.1 shall include the "Borough of Rutherford" as the
name of the jurisdiction applicable.
B. Section PM-106.2, Penalty, shall read as follows: "Any person who shall
violate a provision of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment
for term not to exceed 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court.
Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense."
C. Section PM-304.12, Insect screens, shall read as follows: "During the
period from April l to November l, every door, window and other outside
opening utilized or required for ventilation purposes serving any
structure containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in
food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged
or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not
less than 16 mesh per inch, and every swinging door shall have a selfclosing
device in good working condition. Screen doors shall not be
required for out-swinging doors or other types of openings which make
screening impractical, provided that other approved means, such as air
curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed."
D. Section PM-602.2, Residential buildings, shall read as follows: "Every
dwelling shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining
a room temperature of 70º F. (20º C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms
and toilet rooms when heat is required to be provided as outlined in
Section PM-602.2.1."
E. Section PM-602.2.1, Heat supply, shall read as follows: "Every owner
and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more
dwelling units, rooming units, dormitories or guest rooms on terms,
either expressed or implied, to furnish heat shall supply sufficient heat
during the period from October 1 of each year to the next succeeding
May 1 to maintain the room temperature specified in Section PM-602.2,
during the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. of each day and not
less than 65º F. (18º C.) during other hours."
F. Section PM-602-2.2, Room temperature exception, is hereby deleted.
G. Section PM-602.3, Nonresidential structures, shall read as follows:
"Every enclosed occupied work space shall be supplied with sufficient
150. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 78-7, Deletions, and § 78-11,
Violations and penalties, and provided for the renumbering of former §§ 78-8, 78-9 and
78-10 to become §§ 78-7, 78-8 and 78-9, respectively.
§ 78-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 78-6
78:470
§ 78-7. Disposition of penalties.
All penalties and money collected under any provision of this chapter or the
code established herein shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Borough of
Rutherford.
§ 78-8. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with any of the provisions
of this chapter and the code established herein are hereby repealed to the
extent of such inconsistency.
§ 78-9. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this chapter or the
code established herein shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not in any manner prejudice
the enforcement of the remaining provisions.
Chapter 79
PUBLIC AMUSEMENT STRUCTURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm equipment installation — See Ch. 6.
Commercial property maintenance — See Ch.
21A.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 22.
Fire safety — See Ch. 34A.
§ 79-1. Safety devices required.
The owner or person in charge of any place of public amusement shall
provide such means of protecting all lights used therein and of
communicating alarms of fire, accident or danger to the Fire and Police
Departments, respectively, and such means of preventing and extinguishing
fires as the Mayor and Council shall prescribe.
heat during the period from October 1 of each year to the next
succeeding May 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65º F. (18º
C.) during all working hours.
"Exceptions:
"1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
"2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in physical
activities."
§ 78-6 PUBLIC AMUSEMENT STRUCTURES § 79-2
79:471
§ 79-2. Inspection for fire prevention purposes.
The Chief Inspector of the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Rutherford Fire
Department may detail as many members of the Fire Prevention Bureau as
may be necessary at each place of public amusement where machinery and
scenery are used, while such place is open to the public. The persons so
detailed shall inspect every portion of said place for the purpose of guarding
the occupants against fire and panic, and shall have charge of the means
provided for extinguishing fires, and control of the employees of such place
for that purpose when a fire occurs therein.
§ 79-3. Obstructions prohibited.
No obstruction or thing shall be placed nor shall any person stand in any
aisle or passageway in any such place of public amusement.
§ 79-4. Smoking prohibited.
The smoking or carrying of lighted cigarettes, cigars or pipes in the
auditorium of a place of public amusement, theater or moving-picture
theater is hereby prohibited.
§ 79-5. Display of safety diagram required; penalty.
The proprietor of every place of public amusement, theater and movingpicture
theater wherein printed programs of the performance are either
furnished or sold shall have conspicuously printed thereon, prior in position
to the program of each performance, a diagram of the seating arrangement,
showing plainly the location of each fire escape and other exit. Underneath
each diagram, there shall be printed the following statement: "The laws of
New Jersey require that this diagram be printed in every program of all
theaters and other places of public amusement. Penalty for nonobservance,
$100."
§ 79-6. Screening of safety diagram required; penalty.
The proprietor of every moving-picture house must show on the screen
at least once during each performance, and for at least 1/2 minute each
time, a diagram of the seating arrangement, showing plainly the location of
each exit. Every such diagram shall have the following statement printed
underneath in letters sufficiently large that they may be easily read from
any portion of the auditorium: "The laws of New Jersey require that this
diagram be shown in all moving-picture houses at least once every
performance and kept on the screen for at least 1/2 minute. Penalty for
nonobservance, $100."
§ 79-7. Regulations governing film and booths.
No machine or apparatus for exhibiting moving pictures shall be used
or set up for use in any place of public amusement, theater or movingpicture
theater when such machine or apparatus uses films of a combustible
§ 79-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 79-7
79:472
material more than 10 inches in length, unless such machine or apparatus
be enclosed in a booth of the following description.
A. The booth shall be at least seven feet in height, inside dimensions. If the
booth is for the use of one such machine or apparatus, the area
occupied by such booth shall be not less than 48 square feet. If more
than one such machine or apparatus is to be operated therein, an
additional 24 square feet shall be provided.
B. Such booth shall be constructed with a framework of iron angles not
less than 1 1/4 by 1 1/4 inches by 3/16 of an inch thick. The adjacent
iron members shall be firmly joined with angle plates of iron, and the
iron members of the framework shall be spaced not more than four feet
apart.
C. Such booth shall be covered or lined with asbestos or other strong and
fire-resisting material that will withstand, on a twelve-inch-square
sample, a center load of at least 250 pounds and which shall be
sufficient to resist a temperature of at least 1,500º F. for at least 30
minutes, and after which, being immersed in water, will not lose more
than 50% of its initial strength. Such material shall completely cover
the sides and top of the booth, shall be at least 1/4 inch in thickness and
shall be securely attached to the iron framework by means of iron bolts
and rivets. The floor shall be covered with such fire-resisting material
not less than 3/8 inch in thickness.
D. All joints of any such booth and its framework shall be pointed up with
asbestos retort cement.
E. Every such booth shall have a door not less than two feet in width and
six feet in height, consisting of an angle iron frame, covered with sheets
of the aforesaid fire-resisting material and attached to the framework of
such booth by hinges in such manner that the door shall be kept closed
automatically at all times when not used for ingress or egress.
F. The windows in such booth used in connection with the machines and
apparatus and by the operators thereof shall not be larger than is
reasonably necessary to secure the desired service. The said fireresisting
material shall be provided for each window and shall be so
suspended and arranged that it will automatically close the window
upon the operation of either a fusable or mechanical releasing device
with a fusable link attached.
G. Each booth shall have an opening for ventilation. This opening shall
have an automatically closing door or a riveted conductor pipe to the
outside of the building or into a chimney.
H. All shelves, furniture and fixtures within the booth shall be constructed
of incombustible material, and no combustible material of any sort
whatever shall be permitted or allowed to be within such booth, except
the films used in the operation of the machine and film cement.
§ 79-7 PUBLIC AMUSEMENT STRUCTURES § 79-7
79:473
§ 79-8. Approval by Building Inspector required.
No booth shall be constructed until plans and specifications therefor have
been submitted to and approved by the Building Inspector. No plans or
specifications shall be approved which do not conform to the minimum
requirements set forth in § 78-7 hereof.
§ 79-9. Issuance, expiration.
Every certificate of approval issued under § 78-8 hereof shall expire in 60
days after its date, and thereafter no booth shall be erected under such
certificate.
§ 79-10. Inspection of booth, display of certificate required.
Within five days after the completion of the construction of any such booth,
the owner or the lessee of the premises wherein it is to be located or the
person for whom such booth is being constructed shall notify the Building
Inspector of such completion. Thereupon such officer shall cause such booth
to be inspected. If it is found to have been constructed in accordance
with the plans and specifications and with the requirements of this chapter
and in such manner as to render safe the operation of the apparatus or
machines intended to be used therein for the purpose of projecting moving
pictures, such officer shall issue to the owner, lessee or other person above
mentioned a certificate to that effect. This certificate shall be posted in a
public part of said booth so as to enable it to be distinctly seen from any
place in said building at five feet distant from said booth.
§ 79-11. Exceptions.
Sections 78-7 through 78-10 of this chapter shall not apply to movingpicture
machines using only cellulose acetate films not more than 100 feet
in length nor more than one inch in width and not requiring more than 500
watts of electric current to operate the arc, except when such machines
are used or exhibited in theaters or public place of entertainment, regularly
used as such, to which admission fees are charged.
§ 79-12. Regulations governing licensing; fees. [Amended 5-7-1968
by Ord. No. 2003-68]
There shall be charged an annual license fee of $50 for places of public
amusement, theaters and moving-picture theaters with a seating capacity of
less than 500; and for a seating capacity over 500 and not exceeding 750,
the fee shall be $75; and for a seating capacity over 750, the fee shall be
I. Film cabinets of capacity equal to the normal daily use of film shall be
provided in projection booths. All film not in a projection machine or
being rewound shall be kept in the cabinet, provided that film in transit
and film for only one day's showing and not exceeding 200 pounds total
may be kept in Interstate Commerce Commission shipping containers,
but not more than one such container may be open at any time.
§ 79-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 79-12
79:474
$350. Application for said license shall be made to the Mayor and Council,
in writing, stating the name and address of the applicant, the building
or premises to be occupied and such other information as will indicate
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The license herein provided
for shall be apart from and in addition to the certificate of approval required
by § 78-10 hereof; provided, however, that the fees herein established shall
include both the said license and the said certificate of approval. The said
license shall be for a period of one year from the date of the issuance
thereof, subject to the right of the Mayor and Council to revoke the same
for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 79-13. Fees.
Any person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation violating the
following sections of this chapter shall be subject to the following fines:
§§ 78-1, 78-2, 78-3, 78-4 and 78-12, not exceeding $200; §§ 78-5 and 78-6,
not exceeding $100, which said fine shall be paid into the treasury of the
Firemen's Relief Fund of the Borough of Rutherford; and §§ 78-7, 78-8, 78-9,
78-10 and 78-11, not exceeding $50, which such penalty shall be inflicted
for each day such violation thereafter continues, and such penalties may be
exacted against the owner or lessee of the premises wherein such violation
occurs, or both; or in default of payment thereof may be committed to the
county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 79-14. Repealer.
An ordinance entitled "An Ordinance Regulating Theatres and Moving
Picture Shows," No. 729, shall be and it hereby is repealed.
§ 79-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 80
(RESERVED)
Chapter 81
PURCHASING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative offices — See Ch. 4.
Length of service award program — See Ch.
51A.
Cooperative purchasing — See Ch. 82.
§ 79-12 (RESERVED) § 81-1
80:475
§ 81-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Purchasing Ordinance
of the Borough of Rutherford."
§ 81-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Rutherford.
BOROUGH PURCHASING AGENT — The Purchasing Agent of the Borough
of Rutherford.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES — Includes all telephone, gas, water, electric
light and power service, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery
and other Borough-owned personal property. The term shall not include
professional and other contractual services that are by their nature unique
and not subject to competition.
COUNCILMANIC CHAIRMAN — The Chairman of the Finance Committee.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Rutherford.
SUPPLIES — Include all supplies, materials and equipment.
USING AGENCY — Any department, agency, commission, bureau or other
unit in the Borough government using supplies or procuring contractual
services as provided for in this chapter.
§ 81-3. Department of Purchasing.
There is hereby established in the administrative and executive service of
the Borough the Purchasing Department, and in said Department the office
of Borough Purchasing Agent.
§ 81-4. Powers and duties.
The Borough Purchasing Agent shall be the head and have general
supervision of the Purchasing Department. The Agent shall perform all
duties required of a department head by law and shall have the powers and
duties prescribed by this chapter.
A. The Agent shall:
(1) Be appointed according to the New Jersey State Civil Service Rules
and Regulations and in accordance with the personnel regulations
of the Borough of Rutherford.
(2) Have considerable experience as a buyer or in responsible
purchasing work involving the procurement of a variety of supplies,
materials and equipment; graduation from a four-year college with
specialization in business and public administration or an
§ 81-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 81-4
80:476
equivalent combination of experience and training as required by
the New Jersey Department of Personnel.
B. The Agent shall have the power and it shall be his or her duty:
(1) To purchase or contract for all supplies and contractual services
needed by any using agency of the Borough in accordance with
purchasing procedures as prescribed by this chapter and such
procedures as the Agent shall adopt for the internal management
and operation of the Purchasing Department.
(a) The authority of the Agent, at this time, shall not include
construction of buildings, street improvements, parks and
other related projects that require professional engineering or
architectural services.
(b) Except as herein provided, no Borough officer or employee
shall order or purchase any supplies or make any contract
within the purview of this chapter, other than through the
Purchasing Department, and any purchase ordered or contract
made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved
by the Borough Purchasing Agent and the Borough shall not be
bound thereby.
C. In addition to the purchasing authority conferred in Subsection B above
and in addition to any other powers and duties conferred by this
chapter, the Agent shall:
(1) Act to procure for the Borough the highest quality of supplies and
contractual services at the least expense to the Borough.
(2) Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain full and open
competition insofar as possible on all purchases and sales.
(3) Establish and amend, when necessary, all procedures, rules and
regulations authorized by this chapter and any other necessary to
its operation.
(4) Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing,
prices, market conditions and new products and secure for the
Borough the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by
other governmental jurisdictions, national technical societies,
trade business and organizations.
(5) Prescribe and maintain such forms as he or she shall find
reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter.
(6) Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendor's catalog file. Said catalogs
shall be filed according to materials and shall contain descriptions
of vendor's commodities.
(7) Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to take full
advantage of discounts.
§ 81-4 (RESERVED) § 81-4
80:477
§ 81-5. Using agencies.
§ 81-6. Voidable contracts.
§ 81-7. Competitive bids.
All purchases of and contracts for supplies and contractual services and all
sales of obsolete equipment or other personalty shall, except as specifically
provided herein, be based wherever possible on competitive bids.
(8) Act, in conjunction with the Borough's Chief Financial Officer, so as
to procure for the Borough all federal and state tax exemptions to
which it is entitled.
(9) Have the authority to declare as irresponsible bidders those
vendors who default on their quotations and to disqualify them
from receiving any business from the Borough for a stated period of
time, as recommended by the Purchasing Agent and approved by
the Mayor and Council.
(10) When necessary, prepare and adopt a standard purchasing
nomenclature for using agencies and suppliers and for the
Purchasing Department, with reference to state statutes.
A. All using agencies, either by or with the authorization of the head of the
department under which the using agency operates, shall file with the
Agent detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in
supplies and the contractual services in such manner at such times and
for such future periods as the Agent shall prescribe.
B. The Agent shall examine each requisition or estimate and shall have the
authority to revise it as to quantity, quality or estimated cost; but
revision as to quality shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications established pursuant to this chapter and the needs of the
using agency.
A. Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this chapter in
which any officer or employee of the Borough is financially interested,
directly or indirectly, shall be void, except that, before the execution of
a purchase order or contract, the Council shall have the authority to
waive by resolution compliance with this section when it finds such
action to be in the best interests of the Borough.
B. The Agent and every officer and employee of the Borough are expressly
prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person,
company, firm or corporation to which any purchase order or contract is
or might be awarded any rebate, gift, money or anything of value
whatsoever, except where given for the use and benefit of the Borough.
§ 81-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 81-8
80:478
§ 81-8. Purchases by contract subject to bidding.
Except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost of supplies
or contractual services shall exceed the bid threshold amount as provided
under state statute, they shall be purchased by formal, written contract
from the lowest responsible bidder after due notice inviting proposals as
required by the Statutes of New Jersey.151
A. When deemed necessary by the Agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed
in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be
entitled to return of surety where the Agent has required such. A
successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required by the Agent upon
failure on his part to enter a contract within 10 days after the award.
B. Bid opening procedure.
(1) Sealed bids shall be presented to the Agent or the Mayor and
Council and shall be identified as bids on the envelope.
(2) Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the
public notice.
C. The Mayor and Council shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts
of all bids or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual
services included in the proposed contract when the public interest will
be served thereby.
D. Award of contract.
(1) The Agent shall not award the bid of a contractor or supplier who is
in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or other moneys due
the Borough.
(2) Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In
determining the lowest responsible bidder, in addition to price, the
Agent shall consider:
(a) The ability, capability and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required.
(b) Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly or within the time specified without delay or
interference.
(c) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder.
(d) The quality of performance of previous contracts or services.
(e) The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances relating to the contract or service.
151. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 81-8 (RESERVED) § 81-8
80:479
§ 81-9. Purchases not subject to bidding procedure. [Amended
6-26-2018 by Ord. No. 3465-18]
(f) The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service.
(g) The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required.
(h) The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract.
(i) Such other factors as are required under applicable state
statutes.
(3) When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and
complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere
shall be prepared by the Agent and filed with the other papers
relating to the transaction.
(4) Tie bids.
(a) If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price,
quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded
to a local bidder.
(b) Where Subsection (4)(a) is not in effect, the Agent shall award
the contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public.
(5) The Agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond
before entering a contract in such amount as he shall find
reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the Borough.
A. All requisitions, regardless of amount, are to be signed by the
department head of the requesting department, shall be presented to
the CFO (to ensure the availability of funds, and that the proper
budgetary account is charged), and to the Borough Administrator, or in
the absence of a Borough Administrator by anyone the Council
designates by resolution.
B. All requisitions under the current bid threshold ($40,000 at the time of
the most recent amendment to this section) shall be signed by the
department head of the requesting department, the Chief Financial
Officer, and the Borough Administrator, or in the absence of a Borough
Administrator by anyone the Council designates by resolution.
C. In addition to the department head of the requesting department, the
CFO, and the Borough Administrator, all requisitions having an
estimated dollar value in excess of the current bid threshold ($40,000 at
the time of the most recent amendment to this section) shall be
presented for approval to the appropriate Councilperson and are
subject to Council approval. However, a Councilperson's signature is
not required for any requisitions that are statutory and contractually
§ 81-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 81-9
80:480
§ 81-10. Emergency purchases.
Emergency purchases shall be made as follows:
§ 81-11. Inspection of purchases.
negotiated, including but not limited to requisitions for health benefit
payments, insurance payments, distribution of tax levies, sewer
utilities, pension payments and debt payments.
A. By the Agent.
(1) In case of an apparent emergency that requires immediate
purchase of supplies or contractual services, the Agent shall secure
by open market procedure, as herein set forth, at the lowest
obtainable price, any supplies or contractual services, the amount
of the expenditure not to exceed $500.
(2) A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall
be filed by the Agent with the Mayor and Council and shall be
entered in the minutes of the Council.
B. By the department head.
(1) In case of actual emergency and with the prior consent of the
Agent, the head of any using agency may purchase directly any
supplies or services whose immediate procurement is essential to
prevent delays in the work of the using agency which may vitally
affect the life, health, safety or welfare of citizens, so long as the
emergency purchase does not exceed the bid threshold amount as
provided under state statute.
(2) When the emergency purchase may exceed the bid threshold
amount, such purchase shall not be made unless it meets the
criteria provided under state statutes dealing with emergency
purchases. The Purchasing Agent and the Borough Administrator
must preapprove same, after consultation with the Borough
Attorney.
(3) All emergency purchases shall be made, wherever possible, after
quotes have been obtained on the open market, as herein set forth.
(4) The head of such using agency shall send to the Agent a requisition
and a copy of the delivery record, together with a full report of the
circumstances of the emergency. The report shall be filed with the
Mayor and Council.
A. The head of the using agency shall inspect or supervise the inspection
of all deliveries of supplies or contractual services to determine their
conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract.
B. The Agent shall have the authority to require chemical and physical
tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which
§ 81-9 (RESERVED) § 81-11
80:481
§ 81-12. Inventory procedure.
§ 81-13. Cooperative purchasing.
The Agent shall have the authority to join with other units of government in
cooperative purchasing plans as stated in the Statutes of the State of New
Jersey when the best interests of the Borough could be served thereby.152
§ 81-14. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, resolutions or parts of bylaws
inconsistent with this chapter be and the same are hereby repealed.
Chapter 82
PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Purchasing - See Ch. 81.
are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the
specifications. In the performance of such tests, the Agent shall have
the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any outside
laboratory. The cost of such tests shall be charged to the using agency
in the same manner as described in § 81-9 regarding the approval of
requisitions.
A. All using agencies shall submit to the Agent, at such times and in such
form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which
are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or
scrapped.
B. The Agent shall submit to all departments, prior to the sale of surplus
materials as described below, a list of items no longer required to
determine if they can use any of the equipment, parts and supplies
listed.
(1) The Agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to
other using agencies.
(2) The Agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies which have
become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for, or
trade in the same on, new supplies. Sales under this section shall
be made to the highest responsible bidder. A record of each sale
shall be made and placed on file.
152. Editor's Note: See Ch. 82, Purchasing, Cooperative.
§ 81-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 82-1
82:482
§ 82-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Cooperative
Purchasing Ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford."
§ 82-2. Authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-10 to 40A:11-12, the Borough
of Rutherford is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement with the
County of Bergen or any other contracting unit within the County of Bergen
or adjoining counties for the purchase of work, materials and supplies.
§ 82-3. Powers of Purchasing Agent.
The Purchasing Agent of the Borough of Rutherford is hereby authorized
and empowered to execute on behalf of the Borough of Rutherford all such
agreements as may be required to administer this chapter as per Chapter
81, § 81-13, of the Borough Code, and approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 82-4. Contracting unit.
The contracting unit entering into the contracts on behalf of the Borough
of Rutherford shall be responsible for complying with N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 to
40A:11-39 and all other provisions of the Revised Statutes of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 82-5. Limitation.
Nothing contained in this chapter or any agreement shall require the
borough to make any purchase or obligation, nor prevent any party from
awarding contracts of purchase on its own behalf, for the same work,
materials and supplies as provided in the Joint Purchasing Agreement.
§ 82-6. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 82-7. Cooperative pricing agreement. [Added 9-3-1980 by Ord. No.
2288-80]
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Mayor and
Borough Clerk are hereby authorized to enter into a cooperative pricing
agreement with the County of Bergen as the lead agency for the
purchase of work, materials and supplies.
B. The lead agency entering into contracts on behalf of the Borough of
Rutherford shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the
Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other
provisions of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 82-1 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 82-7
82:483
Chapter 82A
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Chs. 21 and 53.
Garbage rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 40.
Recycling areas in multifamily housing
developments — See Ch. 50, § 50-11S.
Garbage storage bins — See Ch. 56.
§ 82A-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Recycling Ordinance
of the Borough of Rutherford."
§ 82A-2. Findings; purpose.
It is hereby found and declared that it is the public policy of the Borough
of Rutherford to significantly reduce the volume of solid waste generated
within the community through the implementation of a program of source
separation and collection of recyclable materials. The purpose of this
chapter is to establish a program in compliance with the New Jersey
Mandatory Recycling Act of 1987153), (the "Act"), as amended, to provide
environmental benefits through the reduction of the solid waste volume and
the effective reuse of recyclable materials and to limit the municipal cost for
the disposal of solid waste.
§ 82A-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM — All beverage and other containers made of aluminum,
commonly known as "aluminum cans."
BIODEGRADABLE PACKAGING — All packaging with cellulose-based or
other substances that are capable of being readily attacked, decomposed,
assimilated and otherwise completely oxidized or broken down by bacteria
or other natural biological organisms into carbonaceous solid material or
water and carbon dioxide.
CFC-PROCESS TAKE-OUT PACKAGING — Take-out food packaging which
uses chlorofluorocarbons as blowing agents in its manufacture. The family
of substances containing carbon, fluoride and chlorine, having no hydrogen
atoms and no double bonds.
COMINGLED — A combining of nonputrescible source-separated recyclable
materials for the purpose of recycling.
153. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 13:1E-92 to 13:1E-94 were repealed by L. 2002, c. 128, § 12,
effective 12-20-2002. See now N.J.S.A. 13:1E-213 et seq.
§ 82-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 82A-3
82:484
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
CORRUGATED — Structural material shaped in parallel furrows and ridges
for rigidity, used to make packing and shipping containers.
COVERED PROJECT — A construction, renovation, or demolition project for
which a building permit or a demolition permit is required, and for which a
dumpster or rolloff container shall be placed on premises for the purpose of
placement of solid waste materials.
CURBSIDE — Placement in a street directly at the side of the curb, no closer
than 10 feet to any storm drain inlet, stormwater control, catch basin, or
sanitary sewer exposure.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Borough of Rutherford, County District Solid Waste Management
Plan, to be source separated for the purpose of recycling. These materials
include: (list and define, as necessary, those designated recyclable materials
from the county recycling plan for the residential, commercial and
institutional sectors).
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central processing unit and associated
hardware including keyboards, modems, printers scanners and fax
machines; a cathode-ray tube, a cathode-ray tube device, a flat panel display
or similar video display device with a screen that is greater than four inches
measured diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards, including
a television, and cell phones.
GLASS — All containers made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone,
the product being transparent or translucent and being used for packaging
or bottling of various matter, and all other material commonly known as
"glass," excluding, however, blue glass, plate glass and glass commonly
known as "window glass."
GRASS CLIPPINGS — Those materials that are generated from the mowing
or thatching of lawns.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Includes the following products: computer
printout and tabular cards, ledger paper, white letterhead and nonglossy
copier paper.
LEAVES — Those materials naturally formed from trees and bushes that are
suitable for composting and mulching purposes.
MAGAZINES — Includes all magazines or periodicals printed on glossy
stock or paper of heavier quality than that commonly recognized as
"newsprint."
METAL — All products made of metal, exclusive of aluminum, including
washers, dryers, refrigerators, stoves, hot-water heaters, tire rims, springs,
bicycles, bimetal cans (tin cans) or scrap metal.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
§ 82A-3 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 82A-3
82:485
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes
(See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a.) and shall include hotels, motels, or other guest
houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined
under Subsection (j) of § 3 of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, P.L.
1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the municipality of the Borough.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest. Magazines and periodicals, as well as all other
paper products of any nature, are not considered "newspaper."
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products; excludes any form of yard waste.
RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons appointed by the
Mayor and Council in accordance with the Act and who shall be authorized
to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and any rules and regulations
which may be promulgated hereunder.
REGULATIONS — Includes such rules, implementation dates, schedules
and other requirements promulgated by the Recycling Coordinator and
approved by the Borough Council as may be necessary to carry out the
purposes and objectives of this chapter.
SOLID WASTE — Includes all garbage and rubbish normally placed at the
curb or in containers for regular collection by the municipality or private
companies.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, that may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
TAKE-OUT FOOD — Prepared food or beverages requiring no further
preparation to be consumed, which are normally consumed within 90
§ 82A-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 82A-3
82:486
minutes of purchase and which are purchased in order to be consumed off
vendors' premises.
TAKE-OUT FOOD PACKAGING — All bags, sacks, wrapping, containers,
bowls, plates, trays, cartons, cups and lids on which or in which food
or beverages are placed or packages used on the take-out food vendor's
premises which are not intended for reuse. "Take-out food packaging" does
not include forks, knives, straws or single-service condiment packages.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 82A-4. Designation of recyclable materials.
The following materials are designated as recyclable under the mandatory
program established by this chapter:
§ 82A-5. General requirements.
A. Newspapers and magazines.
B. Glass.
C. Aluminum.
D. Metal.
E. Corrugated cardboard.
F. Leaves.
G. High-grade office paper.
H. Grass clippings.
I. Electronic waste.
A. All persons, except those physically disabled, who are owners, lessees
or occupants of property in the Borough shall separate newspapers,
magazines, aluminum, glass and metal from any other solid waste
produced by any such residences and shall place them in blue Boroughissued
automated cans for pickup, collection and recycling in
accordance with applicable regulations. [Amended 12-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 3514-19]
B. The owner, lessee or occupant of every property within the Borough
shall source separate leaves and vegetative waste from solid waste
generated at that property. Leaves and vegetative waste that are placed
curbside for collection shall be in either garbage cans or biodegradable
paper bags. Leaves must not be placed in the street. Leaves may not be
placed in plastic bags or in the Borough-issued automated cans.
[Amended 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 3514-19]
C. The owner, lessee or occupant of every property within the Borough
shall source separate grass clippings from solid waste generated at that
§ 82A-3 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 82A-5
82:487
§ 82A-6. Pickup and collection.
§ 82A-7. Recyclables to be property of Borough.
From the time of placement at the curb for pickup, collection and recycling,
recyclables shall be the property of the Borough of Rutherford or its duly
authorized agent. No person unauthorized by the Borough of Rutherford
property. Grass clippings shall be placed at curbside for collection on
scheduled days in either garbage cans or biodegradable paper bags.
[Amended 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 3514-19]
D. All persons who are owners, lessees or occupants of property in the
Borough operated or used for commercial, industrial or governmental
purposes shall, in addition to the requirements otherwise applicable
under this chapter, separate corrugated material and high-grade office
paper from any other solid waste produced by any such property and
shall separately bundle the same for pickup, collection and recycling in
accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 40, Garbage,
Rubbish and Refuse, of the Code of the Borough of Rutherford.
E. Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is prohibited. [Amended
12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 3514-19]
F. Yard waste shall not be placed closer than 10 feet to any storm drain
inlet, stormwater control, catch basin, or sanitary sewer.
A. The Recycling Coordinator shall promulgate reasonable regulations
establishing the commencement dates for mandatory separation of
recyclables and the manner, dates and times for collection of the same
in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Any such regulations
promulgated by the Recycling Coordinator shall be approved by the
Borough Council and may be changed, modified, repealed or amended
in whole or in part by majority vote of the Borough Council.
B. All separated recyclables shall be placed at curbside for pickup,
collection and recycling in strict conformity with the following:
(1) Newspapers and magazines shall be separated and secured in
individual bundles, not exceeding 12 inches in height, using twine
or paper bags. Bundles shall not be contained in plastic bags.
(2) Aluminum shall be separated and secured in suitable, reusable
containers or boxes and not in bags.
(3) Glass shall be separated by color (clear, brown and green) and
contained in suitable, reusable containers or boxes and not in bags.
C. Recyclable materials shall not be placed at curbside for pickup,
collection and recycling earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the previous day
established for pickup.
§ 82A-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 82A-7
82:488
shall collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such
recyclables. Each collection or pickup of recyclables in violation thereof
from any one or more residences shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 82A-8. Private disposal.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit any owner, lessee or
occupant from disposing of recyclable materials privately through a sale
or gift, provided that in no event shall such recyclable materials be left at
curbside; and provided, further, that, if recyclable materials are disposed of
by sale or gift, the owner, lessee or occupant shall provide the Recycling
Coordinator with documentation on the recycled weight.
§ 82A-9. Notification of public.
The Recycling Coordinator shall, no later than December 15 of each year,
notify property owners and residents within the Borough of the succeeding
year's recycling collection schedule and regulations relating to the recycling
program.
§ 82A-10. Source separation; exemption from source separation
requirements.
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the Borough to separate designated
recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated recyclable
materials shall be deposited separate and apart from other solid waste
generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants of such premises and
shall be placed separately at the curb in a manner and on such days and
times as may be hereinafter established by regulations promulgated by
the Borough.
B. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16d, the governing body of a
municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or institutional
premises within its municipal boundaries from the source separation
requirements of the ordinance which requires persons generating
municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to source
separate from the municipal solid waste stream the specified recyclable
materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the recycling of
all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an exemption
pursuant to this chapter, a commercial or institutional generator of
solid waste shall file an application for exemption with the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator on forms to be provided for this purpose. The
form shall include, at a minimum, the following information: the name
of the commercial or institutional entity; the street address location and
lot and block designation; the name, official title and phone number of
§ 82A-7 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 82A-10
82:489
§ 82A-11. Collection of recyclable materials.
The collection of recyclable material shall be in the manner prescribed as
follows:
§ 82A-12. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the appropriate municipal office. Violations and penalty
notices will be directed to the owner or management in those instances
where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every
six months during their occupancy.
§ 82A-13. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
the person making application on behalf of the commercial or
institutional entity; the name, address, official contact person and
telephone number of the facility which provides the service of recycling
those designated recyclable materials, and a certification that the
designated recyclable materials will be recycled, and that, at least
on an annual basis, said recycling service provider or commercial/
institutional generator shall provide written documentation to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator of the total number of tons collected
and recycled for each designated material.
A. All containers and brown paper bags containing recyclable materials
shall be placed, prior to collection, between the curb and the sidewalk,
or in the absence of curb and sidewalk, as near to the street as not to
constitute a danger, where such receptacles shall be readily accessible
to the collector without providing obstruction to pedestrians. The
owner or occupant of the premises shall keep all receptacles clean and
in safe handling condition. Receptacles or other items to be disposed of
shall be placed as noted above any time after 5:00 p.m. of the day
immediately preceding the day of collection, but no later than 6:00 a.m.
of the day of collection. After collection, any containers shall be
removed from the curbside by no later than 7:00 p.m. of the day of
collection.
B. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be maintained in accordance with
the Borough Health Code.
A. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder
shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial
property owner or his or her designee, unless the municipality provides
§ 82A-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 82A-13
82:490
§ 82A-14. New developments of multifamily residential units or
commercial, institutional or industrial properties (pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and 13:1E-99.16c).
for the collection of designated recyclable materials. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoor litter
receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide
receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials
commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall
provide for separate recycling service for their contents.
C. Every business, institution, or industrial facility shall report on an
annual basis to the Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be
prescribed, on recycling activities at its premises, including the amount
of recycled material, by material type, collected and recycled and the
vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
D. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be
prescribed, for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
A. Any application to the Borough Planning Board for subdivision or site
plan approval for the construction of multifamily dwellings of three or
more units, single-family developments of 50 or more units or any
commercial, institutional, or industrial development for the utilization
of 1,000 square feet or more of land must include a recycling plan. This
plan must contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Borough, the
owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial, institutional, or
industrial development must supply a copy of a duly executed contract
with a hauling company for the purposes of collection and recycling of
source-separated recyclable materials, in those instances where the
municipality does not otherwise provide this service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 82A-13 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 82A-15
82:491
§ 82A-15. Collection of solid waste mixed with recyclable materials.
§ 82A-16. Construction, renovation and demolition debris recovery
plan.
Whenever practicable a debris recovery plan shall be filed with the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator prior to the commencement of any activity
for which municipal approval is required, as further identified above. The
debris recovery plan shall identify the types and estimated quantities of
construction and demolition debris to be generated from the project, how
each material will be managed, and the name of each facility or service
provider that the entity will use to manage each material. The plan shall
further detail how the applicant shall ensure that a minimum of 50% of the
materials to be generated will be separated and recycled.
§ 82A-17. Review of debris recovery plan.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this chapter and the local sanitary
code.
C. Once placed in the location identified by this chapter, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, no person, other than
those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove,
or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
A. Approval. Whenever practicable, a debris recovery plan shall be
reviewed by the Municipal Recycling Coordinator, and approved if it
provides for all of the information required by this chapter. An approved
debris recovery plan shall be marked "approved" and returned to the
owner of the entity which submitted the plan.
B. Denial. Whenever practicable, a debris recovery plan shall not be
approved if it does not provide all of the information required by this
chapter. If a debris recovery plan is not approved, the owner of the
entity which submitted the plan shall be notified in writing that the plan
has been rejected, including the reasons for the rejection. In order to
obtain the building or demolition permit sought, the owner of the entity
which will carry out the construction, renovation, or demolition project
shall make the required changes and resubmit the debris recovery plan
to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
§ 82A-15 RUTHERFORD CODE § 82A-18
82:492
§ 82A-18. Diversion requirement adjustment.
§ 82A-19. Debris recover plan reporting requirements.
Documentation. Whenever practicable, upon completion of the covered
project, but before the final inspection, the owner of the entity carrying out
a covered project shall submit in person or by certified mail to the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator the documentation required to demonstrate that the
applicant has met the diversion requirement. The required documentation
shall include the following:
A. Application. If the owner of an entity carrying out a covered project
experiences circumstances that makes it infeasible to comply with the
diversion requirement cited in this chapter, the owner of the entity may
apply for an adjustment. The owner shall indicate in writing why it is
infeasible to divert 50% of the materials being generated from the
covered project and specify what percentage of diversion could be
achieved. Increased costs to the owner of the entity carrying out the
covered project will not be an acceptable justification for an
adjustment.
B. Review. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the
information supplied by the owner. If warranted the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator shall attempt to contact the owner to discuss
possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement.
C. Granting of an adjustment. If the Municipal Recycling Coordinator
determines that it is infeasible for the entity carrying out a covered
project to divert 50% of the generated C&D debris from the covered
project, the percent of diversion required shall be adjusted. The owner
shall be notified in writing of the adjusted diversion requirement. The
owner of the entity carrying out the covered project shall be required to
divert the percent of C&D debris required by the adjustment.
D. Denial of adjustment. If the Municipal Recycling Coordinator
determines that it is feasible for the owner of an entity carrying out a
covered project to meet the diversion requirement cited in this chapter,
the owner shall be notified in writing of the denial of the diversion
requirement adjustment.
A. A completed debris recovery report, signed by the owner of the entity
carrying out a covered project, indicating the quantity of each material
generated during the covered project diverted or disposed;
B. Receipts from all facilities or service providers utilized to divert and
dispose materials generated during the covered project; and
C. Any additional information that the owner of the entity carrying out the
covered project believes is relevant to determining compliance with the
diversion requirement.
§ 82A-18 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 82A-20
82:493
§ 82A-20. Compliance with diversion requirement.
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the information
submitted pursuant to this chapter and determine whether the owner of the
entity carrying out the covered project has complied, or failed to comply,
with the diversion requirement. The determination regarding compliance
will be provided to the owner of the entity carrying out the covered project
in writing.
§ 82A-21. Appeal.
An owner of the entity carrying out the covered project may appeal a
determination of failure to comply under this chapter to the municipality
within 30 days of the decision or determination. The appeal shall be in
writing and shall state the facts and basis for the appeal. A decision by the
department where the appeal is to be filed shall be final.
§ 82A-22. Enforcement.
The Recycling Coordinator and Superintendent of Public Works or their
duly authorized designees are hereby designated and authorized as the
enforcement officers of this chapter. They are hereby authorized and
directed to establish reasonable regulations providing for a prenotification
and warnings for the improper disposal of recyclable materials, including
the noncollection of solid waste. Any such regulations shall be first
approved by the Borough Council.
§ 82A-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this chapter or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by
a fine not less than $250, nor more than $1,000. Each day for which a
violation of this chapter occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
(NOTE: Municipalities are empowered to incorporate the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 into their Ordinance. This provision may be viewed at the
New Jersey legislative website.)
§ 82A-24. Municipal Recycling Fund .
Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be immediately deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund (or
equivalent). Monies in the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund shall be used for
the expenses of the municipal recycling program.
§ 82A-25. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 82A-20 RUTHERFORD CODE § 82A-26
82:494
§ 82A-26. Separability.
If any part, sections, provisions, or the total of any of the above-mentioned
publications are held to be invalid or unenforceable by any court, the
findings or judgments of which court are applicable in the State of New
Jersey, the balance and remainder of such publication shall remain in full
force and effect as an ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 82A-27. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective after adoption and publication
according to law.
Chapter 82B
REGISTRATION OF LANDSCAPERS AND LANDSCAPING
SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycling, yard waste and food
packaging — See Ch. 82A.
State stormwater management control — See
Ch. 107A.
Borough stormwater management
control — See Ch. 107B.
§ 82B-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for the registration
of landscapers and landscaping services operating within the Borough of
Rutherford and to assist the Borough with its compliance with requirements
of the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit NJPDES. The Borough
Council of the Borough of Rutherford finds that the registration of
landscapers and landscaping services provides a means for the timely
notification of critical information regarding the collection of yard waste,
including leaves, in the Borough to such services and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply with these requirements.
§ 82B-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LANDSCAPER — Any individual person, partnership, firm, association,
business or legal entity which undertakes any of the following services as
a commercial undertaking for consideration: mowing of grass or lawns;
trimming or cutting of trees, bushes or shrubbery; restoration or installation
of lawns, grass, foliage, leaves or trees from a given property; any and all
services relating to the placing, installation, care or cultivation of lawns,
shrubbery, trees, foliage or other plant life. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
§ 82A-26 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 82B-2
82:495
"commercial enterprise" shall not be interpreted to include any resident of
Rutherford who performs only lawn-mowing services by virtue of a handoperated
mower on properties within 10 blocks of his/her residence.
§ 82B-3. Registration and proof of insurance required.
No person, partnership, firm, association, business or legal entity shall
engage in the business of landscaping without registering and providing the
Borough Clerk with proof of business liability, motor vehicle and workers'
compensation insurance, as applicable, in the amount to be determined by
the Borough.
§ 82B-4. Application.
Every registrant under this chapter shall sign an application on forms
furnished by the Borough Clerk.
§ 82B-5. Fee.
The registration fee shall be $25, and no part of said fee shall be prorated
for any part of the year.
§ 82B-6. Removal of clippings and debris.
All landscapers shall provide for the removal of lawn clippings and other
landscaping debris and shall not leave or deposit said debris at the curbside
or any other site in the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 82B-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000.
Chapter 83
RECREATION DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies and practices - See Ch. 70. Playgrounds and recreation areas - See Ch.
73.
§ 83-1. Establishment.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford, deeming it necessary
for the proper and efficient conduct of the affairs of the municipality,
and particularly to create a system of recreation programs designed to
amuse, entertain and improve the physical fitness and to bring into closer
harmony and relationship the community of Rutherford as a whole, the
§ 82B-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 83-1
82:496
neighborhoods making up that community and the families abiding therein,
do, pursuant to the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey, hereby
establish and create a Recreation Department.
§ 83-2. Composition.
The Recreation Department shall consist of the Superintendent of
Recreation, other existing recreational employees and such other assistants
and employees as may be determined by the Mayor and Council.
§ 83-3. Expenditures.
The Mayor and Council, through the Recreation Department, shall have full
and complete authority and power to expend moneys raised for and the
operation of Harold Wall Field, Tamblyn Field and Memorial Park and all
recreation programs thereon.
§ 83-4. Powers and duties.
Said Recreation Department, in conjunction with and under the supervision
of the Mayor and Council and the Borough Administrator, shall supervise
methods and arrangements for the proper maintenance and care of the
lands and improvements of Harold Wall Field, Tamblyn Field, Memorial
Park and all structures thereon now or hereafter owned by the borough
and all recreational programs; shall formulate rules and regulations for
the public use and said areas and all recreational programs; shall submit
annually the requested budget indicating what sums may be necessary for
the performance of the above functions and duties; and in all respects
operate through and under the direction of the Mayor and Council and
Borough Administrator in accordance with the administrative procedures
and regulations of the Code of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 83-5. Dispute resolution procedures. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord.
No. 3267-12]
The dispute resolution procedures of the Recreation Department are set
forth in Appendix A of this Code, copies of which are on file with the
Recreation Department and the Borough Clerk. These procedures shall
control over any more general procedures applicable to the Recreation
Department, and over any inconsistent provisions of the Rutherford Code,
to the extent permitted by law.
§ 83-6. Background checks for gym monitors. [Added 12-11-2012 by
Ord. No. 3276-12]
Effective immediately, all gym monitors shall be subject to the same
background check as other Rutherford employees, including the
information required on Rutherford employment application forms and any
civil/criminal database searches permitted or required by law.
Chapter 83A
§ 83-1 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 83-6
82:497
RENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boardinghouses and lodging houses — See
Ch. 14.
Housing Code — See Ch. 47.
Unfit dwellings — See Ch. 123.
§ 83A-1. Definitions; notice procedure.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOOKS AND RECORDS — The books and records of the owner or
landlord, with the governing body having the power to subpoena such
books and records without the necessity of obtaining a court
order.[Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12]
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms providing living facilities
designed or used for one household. Rooms shall consist of living
rooms, full kitchens with windows, dining rooms and bedrooms. Not
to be considered rooms are half rooms, bathrooms, windowless rooms,
foyers, alcoves, kitchenettes and dinettes that are part of kitchens and
terraces.
FAIR RENTAL — The prevailing rental applicable to each dwelling unit
in the Borough as of December 30, 1973, and as may be increased
by Ord. No. 2150-74, Chapter 83A of the Code, its supplements and
amendments thereto.154[Amended 8-2-77 by Ord. No. 2211-77]
GOVERNING BODY — Rutherford's Mayor and Council. For purposes
of this chapter, the governing body shall hear appeals and complaints
from owners and tenants dealing with rents, leases, tax surcharges, and
security deposits, and issue rulings on the same. The Mayor shall vote
on rent control rulings only in cases of a tie.[Added 12-11-2012 by
Ord. No. 3278-12]
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building, or group of adjoining buildings
or row houses having the same ownership, containing four or more
dwellings.[Amended 8-7-79 by Ord. No. 2262-79155]
RENT — Any and all charges made by the landlord to the tenant
in consideration of the tenant's occupancy of the dwelling unit, and
includes parking charges, garage charges or any other charges relating
to any automobile owned or maintained or used by a tenant, and also
includes utility charges imposed on or required by the landlord to be
154. Editor's Note: Prior to the adoption of Ord. No. 2194-76 appearing in this chapter, Ord.
No. 2150-74 was amended 12-19-1974 by Ord. No. 2163-74 and 1-28-1975 by Ord. No.
2164-75; the duration provisions of § 83A-11 were extended on 8-5-1975 by Ord. No.
2177-75; and it was amended in its entirety 8-25-1975 by Ord. No. 2178-75.
155. Editor's Note: Section 6 of Ord. No. 2262-79 provided for the readoption of all provisions
of this chapter except those revised by said ordinance.
§ 83-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 83A-1
82:498
§ 83A-2. Rent increases.
paid by a tenant respecting a dwelling unit, together with all privileges,
services, furnishings, furniture, equipment and facilities in common
areas in connection with the use or occupancy of such portion of the
property.156
SECURITY DEPOSIT — Any form of security which shall be deposited
or advanced by a tenant on a contract, lease or license agreement
for the use or rental of a dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling as
defined above, which shall be deposited or advanced in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 46:8-19 et seq. Such security deposit shall not exceed 1 1/2
times one month's rental as provided in N.J.S.A. 46:8-21.2; however, any
tax surcharge or tax pass-through assessed against a tenant shall not
be included as rent for the purpose of calculating the amount of the
security deposit.[Added 10-2-1990 by Ord. No. 2584-90]
SERVICES — The provision of light, heat, hot water, maintenance,
painting, elevator service, air conditioning, storm windows, screens,
superintendent service and any other benefit, privilege or facility
connected with the use or occupancy of any dwelling unit.
B. Any landlord seeking a rent increase shall notify the tenant, in writing,
at least one month prior to the effective date of said increase as
required by law, and shall likewise notify the governing body,
simultaneously, in writing, of the landlord's intention to seek said
increase. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12]
A. No owner or landlord shall increase the rent of any dwelling unit in a
multiple dwelling more than once in any twelve-month period. The fair
rental, as defined above, may be increased only after said rent has been
in effect for a period of 12 consecutive months commencing from the
date the same was established, but not computed earlier than 12
months prior to January 1, 1973. [Amended 8-2-1977 by Ord. No.
2211-77]
B. Rent increase percentages. [Amended 8-2-1977 by Ord. No.
2211-77; 8-7-1979 by Ord. No. 2262-79; 9-3-1980 by Ord. No.
2286-80; 6-27-1983 by Ord. No. 2344-83; 12-17-2002 by Ord. No.
3018-02; 10-10-2003 by Ord. No. 3033-03]
(1) The fair rental may be increased by only a maximum of 4% in each
twelve-month period, said annual increases to be compounded
annually, except as stated in § 83A-2B(2).
(2) The fair rental may be increased by only a maximum of 2.5% in
each twelve-month period, said annual increases to be compounded
annually, whenever a rental unit is rented to a tenant who is age 65
or older and who has annual adjusted gross income of $50,000 or
156. Editor's Note: The former definition of "Rent Board," as amended, and which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12. See now the
definition of "governing body."
§ 83A-1 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 83A-2
82:499
§ 83A-3. Protected tenants.157 [Added 12-28-1988 by Ord. No.
2523-88]
Tenants residing in a multiple dwelling as defined by this chapter shall
continue to be protected by the provisions of this chapter during the period
of their occupancy following conversion of the multiple dwelling to a threedwelling-
unit structure as long as the number of rooms provided in the
tenant's dwelling unit is not increased as a result of the conversion. This
less. If there is more than one tenant per rental unit, to qualify for
only a maximum of 2.5% rental increase, both such tenants must
be age 65 or older, and both such tenants must have a combined
annual adjusted gross income of $50,000 or less.
(3) The fair rental may be increased by only a maximum of 2.5% in
each twelve-month period, said annual increases to be compounded
annually, whenever a rental unit is rented to a tenant who is
permanently disabled and has been declared as such and has
received an award by the Federal Social Security Administration
and who has annual adjusted gross income of $50,000 or less. If
there is more than one tenant per rental unit, to qualify for only a
maximum of 2.5% rental increases, at least one tenant must be
permanently disabled, and all such tenants must have a combined
annual adjusted gross income of $50,000 or less.
C. The fair rental shall be applied to each dwelling unit, rather than to the
tenant thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person to demand or receive
any rent in excess of the maximum rent established by the governing
body or to demand possession of the space or to evict a tenant because
of failure of a tenant to pay rent in excess of the established maximum
rent. The owner or other person entitled to receive said rents shall not
be prevented, however, from exercising his rights to obtain possession
of housing space as a tenant as a result of the tenant's violation of law
or contract and the owner or other person entitled to receive said rents
shall be provided reasonable grounds to obtain possession of the
premises for his own personal use and occupancy or for the purpose of
substantial altering, remodeling or demolishing the dwelling. In the
event of substantial altering, the relocated tenant shall have the first
option to the reconditioned premises. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord.
No. 3278-12]
D. No landlord may request, demand, receive or obtain any rent increase
unless and until the landlord and the tenant are in receipt of a written
notification to that effect, issued by the governing body, setting forth in
detail the amount of the existing fair rent, the percentage of rent
increase allowed, the amount of said rent increase in dollar amounts,
the new fair rental amount, including the increase, and the effective
date of said increase. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12]
157. Editor's Note: Former § 83A-3, Vacancy decontrol, was repealed 8-2-1977 by Ord. No.
2211-77. See § 83A-16 of this chapter.
§ 83A-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 83A-3
82:500
section shall not be applicable to new tenants taking occupancy in a threedwelling-
unit structure following conversion from a multiple dwelling.
§ 83A-4. Leases. [Amended 8-2-1977 by Ord. No. 2211-77]
§ 83A-5. Governing body as Rent Board. [Amended 8-2-1977 by Ord.
No. 2211-77; 6-27-1983 by Ord. No. 2344-83; 10-2-1990 by Ord. No.
2584-90; 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12; 12-11-2018 by Ord. No.
3484-18]
A. Leases between landlords and tenants for periods longer than one year
may provide for the annual increment permitted by this chapter.
B. Every lease shall clearly set forth the rent in effect on December 30,
1973, and the dates and amounts of any increases thereto.
C. Leases between landlords and subsidized tenants must be renewed by
the landlord, by offering a lease to the tenant, who is required to have a
lease in order to continue to receive his subsidy. [Added 10-2-1984 by
Ord. No. 2384-84]
A. The governing body shall hear appeals from all aggrieved parties under
this chapter. However, the governing body, through the Borough
Administrator or his/her designee, may make determinations in a
summary manner on noncontested appeals or applications under this
chapter. Landlords or tenants may seek rulings from the governing
body under this chapter.
B. (Reserved)
C. (Reserved)
D. (Reserved)
E. The governing body shall have all powers of a rent control board and
such powers as are reasonably necessary to carry out its duties and
functions under this chapter.
F. The governing body shall hold hearings and adjudicate applications
from landlords for additional rental as herein and hereinafter provided;
however, the governing body is not required to hold such hearings on
noncontested applications. Noncontested applications under this
chapter may be administered by the Borough Administrator or his/her
designee.
G. The governing body shall hold hearings and adjudicate applications
from tenants for reduced rental as herein and hereinafter provided. The
governing body shall give both the landlord and tenant reasonable
opportunity to be heard before making any determination. However,
noncontested applications by tenants for reduced rent may be
administered by the Borough Administrator or his/her designee.
§ 83A-3 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 83A-5
82:501
§ 83A-6. Additional rent increase. [Amended 8-7-1979 by Ord. No.
2262-79; 9-3-1980 by Ord. No. 2286-80]
H. The governing body shall hold hearings and adjudicate applications
from tenants for reduction of a tax surcharge as herein and hereinafter
provided. However, noncontested applications for a reduction of a tax
surcharge may be administered by the Borough Administrator or his/
her designee.
I. The governing body shall hold hearings and adjudicate applications
from tenants for reduction of the amount of security deposits as herein
and hereinafter provided. However, noncontested applications for a
reduction of a security deposit may be administered by the Borough
Administrator or his/her designee.
J. The governing body shall receive notices from the landlords or owners
seeking rent, tax surcharge, and security deposit increases and shall
act on and issue orders to tenants and landlords or owners concerning
said increases. Where the notices are not contested, the governing body
may act through the Borough Administrator or his/her designee and
need not hold hearings thereon.
K. The governing body has the power to analyze registration statements
and pertinent data, to subpoena the production of witnesses and
documents, to initiate and schedule hearings, and to make
determinations as to the following: lawful rent and to order retroactive
payments where excessive rents have been charged; lawful tax
surcharges and to order retroactive payments where excessive tax
surcharges have been charged; and lawful security deposits and to
order retroactive payments where excessive security deposits have
been charged. In default of appearance by any parties, the governing
body shall make determinations and issue orders as to rent, tax
surcharges, and security deposits. Notices of the governing body's
actions shall be sent to the landlord and tenant.
L. The governing body may refer cases involving violations or
noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter to the Municipal
Prosecutor for legal action.
M. The action of the governing body as Rent Board shall be deemed to be
final. Appeals therefrom shall be to the courts.
N. Nothing in this chapter shall require the governing body to hold
hearings on noncontested applications or to require monthly governing
body meetings under this chapter where there are no contested
applications pending. On all noncontested applications or appeals
under this chapter, the governing body may act through the Borough
Administrator or his/her designee without a hearing or meeting, whose
administrative determination on noncontested issues shall be final. The
Borough Administrator or his/her designee may refer noncontested
applications to the governing body.
§ 83A-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 83A-6
82:502
A. An owner or landlord may make application to the governing body for a
rental increase beyond that permitted herein on the following grounds:
[Amended 6-27-1983 by Ord. No. 2344-83; 12-11-2012 by Ord.
No. 3278-12]
(1) Capital expenditures. Increases shall be granted for any major
expense incurred by the landlord which is claimed by the landlord
as a capital expenditure under the Internal Revenue Code, but
which is not on account of the replacement or repair of a
component, furnishing, fixture or the like which was already
existing on the premises. Said increase shall be apportioned among
the units based upon the total number of rooms and assessed
monthly over the length of time allowed by the Internal Revenue
Code for depreciating said capital expenditure on a straight-line
depreciation basis. Any such increase will commence upon the later
occurrence of either payment in full for the expense by the landlord
or approval of the increase by the governing body. The landlord
seeking a capital expenditure increase shall appeal for the same to
the governing body upon notice to all tenants in accordance with
this section, and such increases shall not be considered as rent for
the purpose of rental increases under § 83A-2.
(2) Extreme hardship. Hardship increases may be granted by the
governing body upon a finding of economic hardship to the
landlord. Said increases shall be limited to those dwelling units
where the operating expenses, excluding debt service and
depreciation, exceed 60% of the gross rental income.
B. In support of applications for rent increases under Subsection A above,
the landlord shall submit to the governing body sworn financial
statements and evidence concerning requested increases and, in
addition, shall submit a copy of those portions of the landlord's latest
filed federal income tax return indicating receipts and expenses
concerning said multiple dwelling sworn to by the landlord as being
true and accurate or, in the alternative, a financial report of income and
expenses certified to by a certified public accountant. Said applications
and supporting documents shall be filed with the governing body at
least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and the applicant shall
give notice of said application to affected tenants at least 20 days prior
to the date of hearing by mailing notice of said application to each
tenant by regular mail and posting a copy of same in the lobby of the
multiple dwelling or, if no central lobby exists, then in the landlord's
rental office located at or near the premises. [Amended 12-11-2012
by Ord. No. 3278-12]
C. Applications for capital expense increases under Subsection A(1) above
must be filed with the governing body no later than 12 months after the
completion of said improvement or the payment of same by the
landlord, whichever is the earlier. [Added 12-29-1981 by Ord. No.
2311-81; amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12]
§ 83A-6 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 83A-6
82:503
§ 83A-7. Tax surcharge.
D. No rent increase otherwise allowable under this section may be
charged to a tenant with protected tenancy status pursuant to the
Senior Citizen and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act (N.J.S.A.
2A:18-61.22 et seq.) or to a tenant to whom notice of termination has
been given pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.2(g), for the period said tenant
is protected. [Added 12-6-1983 by Ord. No. 2358-83]
E. When major expenses used in support of a hardship increase under
Subsection A(2) above are claimed by the landlord as a capital
expenditure under the Internal Revenue Code but which do not qualify
for a capital expenditure increase under Subsection A(l) above, said
major expenses must be apportioned over the length of time allowed by
the Internal Revenue Code for depreciating said capital expenditure on
a straight-line depreciation basis. [Added 10-2-1984 by Ord. No.
2384-84]
A. At the expiration or termination of a lease or month-to-month tenancy,
the landlord may seek a tax surcharge from the tenant because of an
increase in municipal property taxes. The tax surcharge shall not
exceed that amount authorized by the following provisions. The
landlord shall divide the increase in the present property tax over the
property tax of the base year by the number of rented rooms in the
multiple dwelling to obtain the tax increase per room. The base year for
any apartment receiving a vacancy decontrol increase pursuant to
§ 83A-16 of this chapter after the effective date of this chapter shall be
the year in which said vacancy decontrol increase was granted. The
base year for all other apartments shall be 1973. The tenant shall not be
liable for a tax surcharge in excess of the tax increase per room
multiplied by the number of rooms occupied by the tenant. [Amended
6-27-1983 by Ord. No. 2344-83]
B. Any landlord seeking a tax surcharge shall notify the tenant of the
calculations involved in computing the tax surcharge, including the
present property tax for the dwelling, the property tax for the dwelling
for the base year, the number of rooms occupied by the tenant and the
maximum allowable surcharge.
C. The tax surcharge each tenant is liable for shall be paid in 12 monthly
installments.
D. The tax surcharge shall not be considered rent for the purpose of
computing rental increases or the amounts of security deposits.
[Amended 10-2-1990 by Ord. No. 2584-90]
E. Any tax reduction from a tax appeal, if previously charged to the tenant,
shall, to the extent of 90%, be refunded to said tenant. Said refund shall
be computed in the same manner as the tax surcharge formula.
[Amended 8-7-1979 by Ord. No. 2262-79]
§ 83A-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 83A-7
82:504
§ 83A-8. (Reserved)158
§ 83A-9. Waiver. [Amended 8-2-1977 by Ord. No. 2211-77]
There may be no waiver or avoidance of the provisions of this chapter by
private agreement, directly or indirectly.
§ 83A-10. Registration.
Every owner of a multiple dwelling shall register the same with the Borough
Clerk, on forms to be furnished, giving the information requested, within 30
days of the adoption of this chapter. Owners shall provide the total number
of rental units in each multiple dwelling and the amount of rental on each
unit as of December 30, 1973. In addition thereto, the landlord must provide
the dates and dollar amounts of any rent increases subsequent to December
30, 1973, for each dwelling unit.
§ 83A-11. Duration of provisions. [Amended 9-3-1980 by Ord. No.
2286-80; 12-29-1981 by Ord. No. 2311-81; 6-27-1983 by Ord. No.
2344-83; 12-18-1984 by Ord. No. 2392-84; 12-2-1986 by Ord. No.
2459-86; 12-28-1988 by Ord. No. 2523-88; 10-2-1990 by Ord. No.
2584-90; 11-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2716-94; 10-1-1996 by Ord. No.
2773-96; 10-6-1998 by Ord. No. 2854-98; 11-21-2000 by Ord. No.
2954-00; 12-17-2002 by Ord. No. 3018-02; 10-10-2003 by Ord. No.
3033-03; 11-23-2004 by Ord. No. 3059-04; 11-28-2006 by Ord. No.
3124-06; 12-16-2008 by Ord. No. 3175-08; 12-28-2010 by Ord. No.
F. In the event that the landlord received interest on any tax overpayment,
such interest shall be deemed to be part of the tax reduction for the
purposes of reimbursement under Subsection E above.
G. A tenant shall be entitled to a tax rebate in the event of a reduction in
municipal property taxes. The landlord shall compute the rebate to
which the tenant is entitled by the same formula used in computing a
tax surcharge. Payment shall be made in the form of a credit against the
monthly rent or in the form of a check made payable to the tenant.
H. Whenever a rental property has been converted to a cooperative or
condominium form of ownership and the converted property is
reassessed on account of the change in form of ownership or use, that
portion of any tax increase which is attributable to the reassessment
shall not be passed on, under this section, to any tenant with protected
tenancy status pursuant to the Senior Citizen and Disabled Protected
Tenancy Act (N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.22 et seq.) or to a tenant to whom notice
of termination has been given pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.2g, for the
period said tenant is protected. [Added 12-6-1983 by Ord. No.
2358-83]
158. Editor's Note: Former § 83A-8, Maintenance, was repealed 8-2-1977 by Ord. No. 2211-77.
§ 83A-7 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 83A-11
82:505
3217-10; 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12; 12-22-2014 by Ord. No.
3349-14; 12-27-2016 by Ord. No. 3410-16]
This chapter, being considered emergency legislation, shall expire on
December 31, 2018.
§ 83A-12. New rentals.
The owner of housing space or a dwelling being rented for the first time
shall not be restricted in the initial rent he charges. Any subsequent rental
increases, however, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 83A-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord.
No. 3278-12]
§ 83A-14. Purpose.
This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the Borough and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 83A-15. Severability; when effective.
§ 83A-16. Vacancy decontrol. [Added 8-2-1977 by Ord. No. 2211-77]
A. A willful violation of or noncompliance with any provisions of this
chapter, including but not limited to the willful filing with the governing
body of any material misstatement of fact, shall be punishable by a fine
of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days. A
violation affecting more than one leasehold shall be considered a
separate violation as to each leasehold.
B. A willful noncompliance with a determination, decision or order of the
governing body shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
A. If any provision of this chapter shall be held illegal or unconstitutional,
such illegality or invalidity shall not be construed as impairing the force
or effect of the remaining provisions of the chapter.
B. This chapter shall take effect after passage and publication as provided
by law.
A. Notwithstanding any limitations upon permissible rent increases under
any other provision of this chapter of the Code, upon the voluntary,
uncoerced vacation of any apartment then controlled by this chapter,
the landlord shall have the right to fix the rent for such vacated
apartment at such a sum as he deems appropriate; subject, however, to
the provisions of this section.
B. In order for a landlord to qualify for the vacancy decontrol rent
increase, the landlord shall first be required to file with the governing
body a written statement, signed by the vacating tenant, certifying to
§ 83A-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 83A-16
82:506
the governing body that the landlord has not, in any way, harassed
or pressured the tenant into vacating the dwelling unit and that the
vacation of such unit was a voluntary act on the part of the tenant. Such
noncoercion certification shall not be required in order for the landlord
to qualify for the vacancy decontrol increase, if either: [Amended
12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12]
(1) The increase does not exceed the total of all permissible increases
authorized by any other provision of this chapter;
(2) The tenant has moved from the unit without notice to the landlord;
(3) The unit has been vacated pursuant to a judicially mandated
eviction; or
(4) The tenant has refused to sign such certification and, upon appeal
by the landlord, the governing body has found that such refusal was
unwarranted and that there was in fact no coercion exerted by the
landlord upon the vacating tenant.
A hearing pursuant to Subsection B(4) shall be held before the
governing body upon at least seven days' notice to the vacating
tenant.
C. The decontrol provisions of this section shall apply only to dwelling
units which are physically vacated subsequent to the effective date of
this section.
D. Upon vacation of any apartment hereafter, the landlord shall file a
statement with the governing body certifying to the governing body:
[Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12]
(1) The apartment number and address.
(2) The rent paid by the vacating tenant.
(3) The maximum rent increase which would be permissible under the
other provisions of this chapter.
(4) The number of days such apartment remains vacant.
(5) The rent agreed to by the new tenant for such apartment.
(6) That the vacation of the apartment was the voluntary act of the
vacating tenant and that such vacation was not the result of
landlord harassment or pressure upon such vacating tenant.
E. The governing body shall submit quarterly reports to the Mayor and
Council summarizing the number of apartments vacated during each
such quarter and the differences, if any, between the permissible rent
increases under the other provisions of this chapter as compared to the
increases in rent due to the application of this section. Such quarterly
report shall also include a statement of the number of complaints
received by the governing body with respect to any alleged coercion by
§ 83A-16 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 83A-16
82:507
§ 83A-17. Tenants' property tax rebate procedure. [Added 9-7-1977
by Ord. No. 2213-77]
The annual tenants' property tax rebate required to be made to tenants
of qualified real rental property under the provisions of Chapter 81 of the
Public Laws of 1977 shall be based upon the rentable square feet contained
within residential rental units rather than on the basis of annual rent for
each residential unit in accordance with the provisions of said statute.
§ 83A-18. Rent decreases authorized. [Added 11-16-1982 by Ord.
No. 2332-82]
landlords for the purpose of forcing tenants to vacate apartments.
[Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12]
F. No apartment unit shall be permitted a vacancy decontrol increase
pursuant to this section within 36 months after a previous vacancy
decontrol increase. [Amended 9-3-1980 by Ord. No. 2286-80;
6-27-1983 by Ord. No. 2344-83]
G. Any dwelling unit, once having obtained an increased rent under the
provisions of § 83A-16, shall be limited to the annual increase provided
for in § 83A-2 of the Code. [Added 8-1-1978 by Ord. No. 2237-78;
amended 8-7-1979 by Ord. No. 2262-79; 9-3-1980 by Ord. No.
2286-80]
A. During the term of this chapter, rental decreases may be granted by the
governing body for any decrease in housing space, services, furniture,
furnishings or equipment. Such rent decreases may be granted after
hearing in accordance with this chapter upon petition of a tenant or
group of tenants to the governing body. [Amended 12-11-2012 by
Ord. No. 3278-12]
B. A decrease in services, such as to justify a rent decrease under this
section, shall include any cessation or inadequate provision of the vital
services listed herein, but only where it is the responsibility of the
landlord to provide said services. For the following decreases in
services, a petitioner or petitioners' rent may be decreased in
accordance with the following percentages of the authorized base rent
chargeable to said petitioner, prorated on a daily basis, during the
period of said decrease in services, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 83A-19:
(1) No heat or insufficient heat according to municipal code
requirements: 75%.
(2) No water: 50%.
(3) No hot water: 40%.
§ 83A-16 RUTHERFORD CODE § 83A-18
82:508
§ 83A-19. Procedure for rent decreases. [Added 11-16-1982 by Ord.
No. 2332-82]
(4) Nonoperable electric fixtures (such as to constitute a dangerous
condition or threat to the health and safety to the tenant), per
fixture: 15%.
(5) Faulty plumbing (defined as inoperable fixtures, i.e., tub, sink or
toilets), per fixture: 15%.
(6) Upon finding that the housing unit is totally uninhabitable: 100%.
C. Petitions for rent decreases under the provisions of Subsection B above
shall be limited by the following restrictions:
(1) No decrease shall be granted for any time period which is either
prior to the day in which notice of the service deficiency is found to
have been given to the landlord or its agent (orally or written) or
earlier than 60 days before the filing date of the petition.
(2) No decrease shall be granted in excess of a maximum of 75% of the
total monthly rental (prorated on a daily basis) except for periods of
uninhabitability under Subsection B(6) above.
(3) Petitions alleging a service decrease of 40% or more per unit shall
require that said decrease has existed for more than 24 hours from
the time of the notice to the landlord under Subsection C(l) above;
and for more than six continuous days following the notice where
the petition alleges a decrease of less than 40% per unit.
A. Petitions for rent decreases shall be filed with the governing body on
forms provided by the governing body and shall contain the petitioner's
name, the rental unit and landlord involved, the type and duration of
the alleged service deficiency, the date, time and form of notice of
deficiency provided to the landlord and the authorized base monthly
rental during the time of the deficiency. [Amended 12-11-2012 by
Ord. No. 3278-12]
B. Within 10 days of the receipt of a petition, the governing body shall affix
thereon a notice and date for hearing of said petition before the
governing body (to be within 60 days of filing) and give notice of said
hearing by mailing a copy of the notice and petition to the landlord and
petitioner. [Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12]
C. At said hearing the governing body shall entertain such written and oral
evidence presented by the petitioner, including, if available, any written
or oral reports from municipal code officials or others. [Amended
12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12]
D. Any written evidence to be used at the hearing must be submitted to the
governing body no less than 10 days prior to the hearing date and be
§ 83A-18 PURCHASING, COOPERATIVE § 83A-19
82:509
Chapter 84
(RESERVED)
Chapter 87
SALARY SCHEDULES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies and practices — See Ch.
70.
§ 87-1. Schedules adopted by reference. [Amended 4-5-1977 by Ord.
No. 2207-77; 5-4-1982 by Ord. No. 2314-82]
The Borough of Rutherford, in accordance with the provisions of the Civil
Service Act of New Jersey and Borough Ordinance Nos. 1422, 1556 and
1950, herewith amends the borough's civil service compensation plan by
adopting revised salary ranges and classes of positions as contained in two
separate schedules entitled, "Descending List-Full-Time Positions" and "List
of Part-Time Positions," which said lists are hereby incorporated herein and
adopted by reference.159
§ 87-2. Base salary; increments. [Amended 4-5-1977 by Ord. No.
2207-77; 5-4-1982 by Ord. No. 2314-82]
The yearly compensation or yearly salary without increments, payable at
an hourly rate, and the compensation or salary ranges, as set forth in the
aforesaid attached schedules, are hereby incorporated herein and adopted
by reference as and for each and every class and position mentioned in
said schedules; provided, however, that the increment payments contained
therein are conditioned upon the availability of funds for the same.
Entitlement to said salary increments shall accrue as of January 1 of each
year and shall be paid retroactively to that date, after adoption of the
municipal budget for that year. However, new employees hired after June
available for inspection by any party at the governing body office.
[Amended 12-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3278-12]
E. Decision. No rent decrease shall be granted unless supported by the
preponderance of the evidence submitted at the hearing, and a copy of
said decision shall be sent to each party. Any decrease ordered shall be
paid by the landlord within 10 days of the receipt of the decision or
deducted by the tenant from the next following rental payment due the
landlord.
159. Editor's Note: The schedules and amendments thereto, as well as current Salary
Ordinances, are on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 83A-19 RUTHERFORD CODE § 87-2
84:510
30 of any year shall not be entitled to any increment until January 1 of the
second year of their employment.
§ 87-3. Additional compensation for certain members of Police
Department.
§ 87-4. Longevity. [Amended 4-5-1977 by Ord. No. 2207-77;
5-4-1982 by Ord. No. 2314-82]
A. In addition to the salaries set forth in said schedules for members of the
Police Department, such patrolmen and officers who are from time to
time assigned to the Detective Bureau of the Police Department shall
each receive additional compensation of $300 per annum; provided,
however, that such patrolmen and officers shall only be entitled to said
additional compensation for as long as they remain assigned to the
Detective Bureau, and, upon reassignment to other duties in the Police
Department, such additional compensation shall cease.
B. In addition to the salaries set forth in said schedules for members of the
Police Department: [Added 4-5-1977 by Ord. No. 2207-77;
amended 5-4-1982 by Ord. No. 2314-82]
(1) All members of the Police Department shall be entitled to 14 paid
holidays, said holidays are to be New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday,
Washington's Birthday, Good Friday, Easter, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day,
General Election Day, Thanksgiving Day, day after Thanksgiving
Day and Christmas Day, based upon the annual salary rate.
(2) The members of the Police Department shall be paid for seven
holidays during the month of June and shall be paid for seven
holidays during the month of November.
A. In addition to the salaries set forth in said schedules, the Borough of
Rutherford shall pay additional sums per annum to full-time employees
based on length of service to the borough in accordance with the
following schedule:
(1) Five years of service: 1% of the then current salary of the
employee.
(2) Ten years of service: 3% of the then current salary of the employee.
(3) Fifteen years of service: 5% of the then current salary of the
employee.
(4) Twenty of service: 7% of the then current salary of the employee.
(5) Twenty-five years of service: 8% of the then current salary of the
employee.
B. Longevity payments shall be effective on the earliest of either July 1 or
January 1 next following the anniversary date of employment.
§ 87-2 SALARY SCHEDULES § 87-5
87:511
§ 87-5. Increments awarded on merit.
The provisions of this chapter with respect to increments shall only apply
to those employees who have satisfactorily performed the duties of their
positions.
§ 87-6. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 87-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 89
SANITARY CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Quarantine of animals — See Ch. 10.
Board of Health — See Ch. 16.
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 36.
Licensing of food establishments — See Ch.
36A.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 40.
Housing Code — See Ch. 47.
Nuisance Code — See Ch. 64.
Feeding of pigeons — See Ch. 72.
Smoke control — See Ch. 99.
Unfit dwellings — See Ch. 123.
§ 87-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 87-7
89:512
ARTICLE I
Definition of Words and Terms
§ 89-1. Definitions.
A. All words and phrases herein defined shall also include their usual and
natural meanings as well as those herein especially given.
B. All fish and meat and vegetables found in any place shall be deemed to
be therein, and held for sale or consumption as such food, unless the
contrary be distinctly proved.
C. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD, THIS BOARD, SAID BOARD and BOARD OF HEALTH — The
Board of Health of the Borough of Rutherford. 160
BUTCHER — Includes whoever is engaged in the business of keeping,
driving or slaughtering any cattle or in selling any meat.
CATTLE — Includes all animals except birds, fowl and fish, of which any
part of the body is used for food.
CELLAR — Includes every basement or lower story of any building or
house of which 1/2 or more of the height from the floor to the ceiling is
below the level of the street adjoining.
CONTAGIOUS DISEASE — Includes any disease of an infectious,
contagious or pestilential nature, with which any person may be sick,
affected or attached (more especially however referring to cholera,
yellow fever, smallpox, diphtheria, ship or typhus, typhoid and scarlet
fevers), and also including any new disease of an infectious, contagious
or pestilential nature, and also any other disease publicly declared by
this Board to be dangerous to the public health.
DIRT — Natural soil, earth and stone.
FISH — Includes every part of any animal that lives in water or the flesh
of which is not meat.
GARBAGE — Includes every accumulation of animal or vegetable
matter or both, liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, decay,
dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowls, birds, fruits or vegetables.
LIGHT or LIGHTED — Refers to natural external light.
MEAT — Whenever herein used, includes every part of any land animal
and eggs (whether mixed or not with any other substance).
PERMIT — The permission in writing of this Board, issued according to
its rules and regulations and the Sanitary Code.
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 16, Board of Health.
§ 89-1 SANITARY CODE § 89-1
89:513
PRIVATE MARKET — Includes every store, cellar, stand and place at
which the business is the buying, selling or keeping for sale of meat,
fish, milk or vegetables for human food.
PUBLIC HOUSE — Includes parks, piers, docks and wharves, and water
and open spaces thereto adjacent, and also public yards, grounds and
areas and all open spaces between buildings and streets.
REGULATIONS — Includes special regulations, which latter will be
from time to time issued, and will contain more detailed provisions than
can be herein conveniently set forth.
RUBBISH — Includes all the loose and decayed material and dirtlike
substance that attends use and decay or which accumulates from
buildings, storing or cleaning.
STREET — When used in this Sanitary Code, includes avenues,
sidewalks, gutters, places and public alleys.
TENEMENT HOUSE — Includes every house, building or every portion
thereof which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or is
occupied as the house, home or residence of more than two families
living independently of one another and doing their cooking upon the
premises, or by more than two families upon a floor, so living and
cooking, but having a common right to the halls, stairways, yards, water
closets or privies or some of them.
VEGETABLE — Includes every article of human consumption as food
which (not being meat, fish or milk) is held or offered or intended for
sale for consumption.
§ 89-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 89-1
89:514
ARTICLE II
Nuisances
§ 89-2. Designation.
Whatever is dangerous to human health or whatever renders the ground,
the water, the air or food a hazard or an injury to human health is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons
to create, maintain or aid in the creating or maintaining of any such
nuisance.
§ 89-3. Prohibited behavior.
No person shall aid or contribute in doing any act dangerous to the life
or detrimental to the health of any human being except for justifiable
motives and for adequate reasons, nor shall any person omit any precaution
reasonable and proper to prevent or remove anything that is dangerous or
detrimental to the life or health of any human being.
§ 89-4. Deposit of offensive matter prohibited.161
No person or persons shall cause or aid in causing the deposit or
accumulation of any decaying animal or vegetable matter, foul liquids or
other offensive matter in the form of rubbish, garbage or offal in or upon
any lot, street or highway, or in or upon any public or private place until the
same shall become or be likely to become hazardous to health, or until the
same shall, by reason of offensive odors, become a source of discomfort to
persons living or passing in the vicinity thereof.
§ 89-5. Water pollution prohibited.162
The pollution of any stream, well, spring or reservoir of water used for
drinking purposes is hereby prohibited.
§ 89-6. Sewer and drain restrictions.
The construction of any drain or sewer or the pouring out of foul liquids on
the surface of the ground or elsewhere in such a manner as to become the
source from which offensive odors shall emanate or in such a manner as to
pollute the ground, air or water, to the risk or detriment of the health of
persons living or passing in the vicinity is hereby prohibited.
§ 89-7. Storage of putrescible matter restricted.
The storage of animal refuse or decayable or putrescible matter in liquid or
solid form in any vault, septic tank or other receptacle in such a manner that
the same shall, by reason of offensive odors emanating therefrom, become
161. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 64, Nuisance Code.
162. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 129, Water Pollution, § 129-1.
§ 89-2 SANITARY CODE § 89-7
89:515
a source of discomfort to persons living or passing in the vicinity thereof is
hereby prohibited.
§ 89-8. Marshlands controlled.
All sunken lots or marshlands, or lots below grade where stagnant water
gathers or is collected, are hereby declared nuisances and any owner or
owners, or agents of any such lot or lots or lands shall, on notice from this
Board, fill the same or cause them to be filled with fresh earth, ashes or
cinders.
§ 89-9. Notice of removal; powers of Board.
Where such nuisances, obnoxious gases or vapors or cause of ill health or
disease shall be found on private property, the said Board shall cause notice
thereof to be given to the owner or owners to remove and abate the same
at his own expense, within such time as the said Board may deem proper.
A duplicate of the notice so given shall be left with one or more of the
tenants or occupants of the premises; if the owner resides out of the state
or cannot be reached with notice speedily, notice left at the house or posted
on the premises shall be deemed sufficient. And if the owner or owners thus
notified shall not comply with such notification or order of the local Board
within the time specified, the Board shall proceed to abate such nuisance
and remove the cause of such foul and obnoxious odors, gases or vapors,
or other things detrimental to the public health, and such Board shall have
a right to recover, by action of debt, the expenses incurred by such Board
on the abatement or removal, from any person or persons who shall have
caused or allowed such nuisance, source of foulness or cause of sickness
hazard to the public health, and from any owner, tenant or occupant of
the premises, who, after notice as aforesaid, shall have failed to remove
such nuisance, source of foulness or cause of sickness hazard to the public
health, within the time specified in such notice. And in case such Board of
Health shall fail to recover by such action an amount sufficient to defray
such expenses, or it shall be deemed inexpedient to bring such suit, they
may present a bill certified by such Board or a majority thereof, to the
local municipal authorities, and such bill shall be audited and paid by the
city, Borough, town, township or other local municipal government in and
for which such Board is organized in the same manner as the bills for the
ordinary current expenses for such municipality are paid.
§ 89-10. Polluted water sources controlled.
If any well or spring or any water used for drinking purposes is found to be
polluted or to be the cause of any sickness, the Board may order the same
to be closed or not to be used, and every person who shall disregard or shall
refuse to obey such an order shall be deemed to have violated this chapter.
§ 89-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 89-11
89:516
§ 89-11. Regulations governing control of dogs.163
Allowing any dog to run at large or come in contact with children or any
person other than the immediate household of the owner if, in the opinion of
this Department or the Health Officer, the said dog is vicious and hazardous
to the health of the Borough, or if it molests pedestrians or others without
provocation, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a source of
danger to the public health. Such dogs, when taken out, must be muzzled
completely or on a leash, said leash to be not more than six feet in length.164
163. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 26, Dogs and Kennels.
164. Editor's Note: For additional muzzling provision and penalty see Ch. 26, Dogs and
Kennels, § 26-21.
§ 89-11 SANITARY CODE § 89-11
89:517

ARTICLE III
Scavengers
§ 89-12. Services; acts requiring licenses.165
No privy vault, cesspool or septic tank in the Borough of Rutherford shall
hereafter be cleaned nor shall any material from the same or any garbage,
ashes, swill, refuse, dead animals or other matter which is or may become
offensive or dangerous to health be conveyed through the streets of
Rutherford by any person who has not first obtained a license from this
Board permitting him to perform such services or acts in accordance with
the provisions of this article and such other ordinances, rules and
regulations as the Board may from time to time adopt.
§ 89-13. Application procedure; information required.
All persons required by the preceding section to obtain a license shall make
application for the same to the Board of Health, in writing, addressed to the
Inspector, stating the nature of the business they intend to conduct or the
acts to be performed, the number and kind of wagons or other vehicles to be
used in such business, and the disposition to be made of the material they
may remove, collect or convey, and such other information as the Board of
Health may from time to time require. In case an application is granted, the
Inspector of the Board shall issue a license to the applicant upon receipt of
the proper license fee or fees established by this article.
§ 89-14. Fees.
The license fees to be paid under this article shall be as follows:
§ 89-15. Revocations.
Such licenses may be revoked at any time by the Board whenever, in its
judgment, the licensee has violated any provisions of this article or any rule,
regulation or order made by this Board.
§ 89-16. Regulations governing equipment.
A. For each license to empty cesspools, septic tanks or privy vaults, the
sum of $5 per annum for each vehicle.
B. For each license to collect and remove garbage, ashes, swill or other
material included in § 89-12 and not previously included in this section,
the sum of $3 per annum for each vehicle.
A. All vehicles or receptacles used under any permit for removing the
contents of cesspools, septic tanks or privy vaults, or for conveying
swill, garbage or other liquids or partially liquid material, shall be only
such as may be approved by the Board of Health, shall be watertight,
165. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 92, Sewage Disposal Code, § 92-6.
§ 89-12 SANITARY CODE § 89-16
89:519
§ 89-17. Storage of vehicles required; exception. [Amended
11-28-1964 by Ord. No. 2-64]
Motortrucks or other vehicles used for disposal of garbage or other refuse
matter mentioned in this article shall be stored, after being cleaned, in an
enclosed building or garage, and such trucks or vehicles shall not be stored,
parked or left standing on any open lot or plot of land or any yard area or on
a driveway when not in use for disposal purposes; provided, however, that
this section shall not apply to motortrucks or other vehicles owned by the
Borough of Rutherford.
§ 89-18. Disposal controlled by Board.
None of the material collected, conveyed or handled under this article
shall be disposed of within the Borough of Rutherford in any manner not
approved by the Board of Health.
shall be kept clean and inoffensive, and shall be covered with tightly
fitting wooden, metal or canvas covers, securely fastened, which covers
shall be kept closed at all times except when opened for the admission
or discharge of proper matter.
B. All manure, ashes or other refuse referred to in this article shall be
conveyed in vehicles or receptacles tightly and completely covered and
so constructed as to prevent leaking, spilling or offensive odors.
§ 89-16 RUTHERFORD CODE § 89-18
89:520
ARTICLE IV
Public Conveyances and Public Places
§ 89-19. Smoking prohibited.
Smoking or carrying lighted or partially consumed cigars or cigarettes
or lighted pipes in a public conveyance while being operated within the
Borough of Rutherford is hereby prohibited.
§ 89-20. Prohibited expectorations.166
Expectorating upon the floor, steps or other portions of any public places or
a public conveyance while being operated within the Borough of Rutherford
is hereby prohibited.
166. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 64, Nuisance Code § 64-1.
§ 89-19 SANITARY CODE § 89-20
89:521

ARTICLE V
Live Animals and Poultry.
[Added 3-23-1964 by Ord. No. 1-64]
§ 89-21. Keeping of animals; prohibitions.
No person or persons, association of persons or corporation shall keep or
maintain swine, sheep, cattle, poultry or fowl of any kind, pigeons, rabbits,
hares or guinea pigs within the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 89-22. Exceptions; licensing; fees.
The provisions of § 89-21 of this article shall not apply to the following:
§ 89-23. License revocation; hearing.
The license provided for in § 89-22 of this article may be revoked by the
Board of Health for any violation of this article after public hearing on the
complaint is afforded to the holder of any such license.
§ 89-24. Exemptions requiring special permit.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to marketmen or persons
dealing in live poultry, but in every such case a special permit shall be
required, which permit shall be granted under such conditions and
restrictions as the said Board may deem necessary for the protection of the
public health.
§ 89-25. When effective.
This article shall take effect 30 days after the date of the first publication
thereof.
A. The harboring indoors of poultry, fowl, rabbits or guinea pigs as
household pets or for sale as household pets.
B. The keeping of any of said animals, poultry or fowl by a school or
university under laboratory control.
C. The continuance of a license heretofore issued for the keeping of
pigeons at the location therein stated or any renewals thereof;
provided, however, that the house, coop or runway for said pigeons
shall be at least 75 feet from a building containing a residence for a
human being, and provided further that said license be renewed on or
before December 31 of each year upon written application for the same
being made to the Board of Health and upon payment of a fee of $5 to
said Board of Health for each said renewal of said license.
§ 89-21 SANITARY CODE § 89-25
89:523

ARTICLE VI
Food and Milk
§ 89-26. Sale of contaminated comestibles prohibited.
The sale or exposure for sale of any drink, meat, milk, fish or vegetable food
that is decayed, putrefied or has become chemically or physically changed
so that it is unwholesome or unfit for food or that has been exposed to the
emanation or infection of any communicable disease is hereby prohibited.
§ 89-27. Sale of milk; licensing procedure.
Every person, corporation or association of persons who now is or who
hereafter shall be engaged in the sale or exposure for sale of milk within
the Borough of Rutherford, shall procure a license from this Board, such
license to cost $2 for each store and each vehicle, and may be revoked at
any time by the Board whenever, in its judgment, the licensee has violated
any provisions of this article or any rule, regulation or order made by this
Board. They shall furnish the Board of Health of the Borough of Rutherford
when, and as often as may be requested by said Board or its agents, with a
true and complete statement as to the locality from which the milk so sold
or exposed for sale is produced, also a full and complete list of persons from
whom said milk is purchased, and the names and addresses of all persons
to whom they are regularly selling or delivering milk within said Borough;
and if, at any time after such statement and lists have been furnished, the
locality from which said milk is produced or the person from whom said milk
is purchased is changed, said Board shall be notified immediately.
§ 89-28. Regulations governing cows, stables.
No milk shall be sold or exposed for sale in the Borough of Rutherford
except milk from cows stabled under light, dry and well-ventilated
conditions and in all other respects conforming to the requirements
hereinafter set forth:
A. Each cow shall have at least three feet in width of floor space when
fastened in stanchions, and in all cases where no adequate artificial
means of ventilation are provided, each animal shall have an air space
of at least 500 cubic feet.
B. All stables for the shelter of said cattle shall be provided with a tight,
dry floor. The manure drop shall be watertight.
C. The walls and ceilings of said stables shall be whitewashed or painted
whenever it may be deemed necessary by the Board of Health.
D. Manure shall not be allowed to accumulate in large quantities in stable
yards nor near the buildings where the cattle are kept; and when stored
temporarily in such places it shall be removed at least once per month.
The said stable yards shall be drained and kept in a clean, dry condition,
and no accumulation of household garbage, vegetable or other
§ 89-26 SANITARY CODE § 89-28
89:525
§ 89-29. Regulations governing raw milk and raw cream.
§ 89-30. Sale of ice; licenses; fees.
putrescible matter shall be allowed to remain or decay in said stables
or stable yards.
E. Cattle shall at all times be kept in a clean condition and udders shall be
washed, hand-rubbed or wiped with a clean, damp cloth before each
milking.
F. No milk shall be sold or offered for sale or distributed in the Borough of
Rutherford unless the cows from which it has been obtained have,
within one year, been examined by a competent veterinarian, and are
free from diseases dangerous to the public health.
A. Definitions. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
RAW MILK or RAW CREAM — Milk or cream which has not been
subjected to heat at a temperature of not less than 142º F. for 30
consecutive minutes.
B. Prohibition; exceptions. No person or persons, firm or corporation shall
sell or offer for sale or distribution or have in possession with intent to
sell or distribute in the Borough of Rutherford any raw milk, raw cream
or raw milk products (except butter, cheese or buttermilk); provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as affecting
the sale or distribution of certified milk or certified cream in the
Borough of Rutherford as defined and produced under regulations as
provided for in Chapter 11 of the Sanitary Code of the Department of
Health of the New Jersey Department of Health.167
A. Every person, corporation or association of persons who now is or who
hereafter shall be engaged in the sale or exposure for sale of ice within
the Borough of Rutherford shall procure a license from this Board; such
license to cost $2 for each ice depot and each vehicle and which license
may be revoked at any time by the Board whenever, in its judgment, the
licensee has violated any provisions of this article, or any rule,
regulation or order made by this Board. They shall furnish the Board of
Health or its agents, when and as often as requested, with a true and
complete statement as to the locality from which the ice so sold or
exposed for sale is harvested or, if artificial ice, where manufactured.
B. No ice shall be sold or exposed for sale in the Borough of Rutherford
that has been harvested from any pond, lake or river upon which
skating is allowed, nor shall any ice be sold or exposed for sale in the
Borough of Rutherford that is harvested or manufactured from any
locality or in any manner not approved by this Board.
167. Editor's Note: For current provisions, see N.J.A.C. 8:21-10.1 et seq.
§ 89-28 RUTHERFORD CODE § 89-31
89:526
§ 89-31. Mercantile refrigeration.
All refrigerators or iceboxes maintained in any butcher shop or other
mercantile business carried on in the Borough of Rutherford shall be
opened, at all times when said business is being carried on, to inspection
by this Board of Health or an authorized agent. No person engaged in any
such mercantile business shall allow any animal or vegetable matter which
is foul or which is in a state of decay to remain within said refrigerator or
icebox, nor shall the said refrigerator or icebox be allowed to become foul
or malodorous through the lack of proper cleaning and disinfecting.
§ 89-32. Regulations governing meat.
§ 89-33. Wrapping of bread required.
All bakers, wholesale or retail confectioners or grocers or others selling
bread shall wrap each and every loaf of same in clean paper.
§ 89-34. Structural regulations.
A. No beef, pork, veal, mutton or lamb, nor any part of any animal from
which any of said meats are obtained, shall be sold for food purposes or
exposed for sale or held in possession in a store in which food is sold
unless the said animal has been examined both before and after
slaughtering, by a Meat Inspector duly appointed by the United States
Government or by some other competent public official, and has been
passed as fit for food and has been stamped with a proper identification
mark or marks according to the system adopted by the United States
Bureau of Animal Industry. The provisions of this section shall be
construed to apply to all meat, sausage, chop meats and edible viscera.
B. All meats delivered in the Borough of Rutherford, either by wholesalers
or retailers, shall be protected from contamination by flies, dust and
dirt while in the process of delivery, and no meat (fish and poultry
included) shall be exposed for sale outside any market or store or
retailed from any vehicle whatever.
C. All scrap meat, decayed vegetables, waste or offal which shall
accumulate in any market or store shall be kept in watertight, flyproof
metal containers when placed outside said market or store and shall be
removed only in such wagons or other conveyances as shall be
approved for the purpose by the Board of Health.
A. No sleeping room of a dwelling, apartment or tenement shall be directly
connected with a room which is used as a restaurant or public dining
room or with the room in which the food for consumption in said dining
room is to be prepared or cooked.
B. No store in which food is sold shall be directly connected with any
sleeping room of a dwelling, apartment or tenement house.
§ 89-31 SANITARY CODE § 89-35
89:527
§ 89-35. Regulations governing bakeries.
All bakeries or bakeshops shall be open at all times to the inspection of the
Board of Health. Said bakeries or bakeshops shall be kept in a thoroughly
sanitary condition, shall be used for no other purpose and shall not be
connected with any sleeping room of a dwelling, apartment or tenement
house.
§ 89-36. Regulations governing manufacture and sale of ice cream.
All persons engaged in the sale of ice cream shall file with the Board of
Health before the first day of January of each year a true statement of the
place where the milk and cream to be used is produced, of the place of
manufacture and from whom ice cream is purchased. All premises where
ice cream is manufactured for sale in the Borough of Rutherford shall be
kept in a thoroughly sanitary condition and shall be open to the Board of
Health for inspection at all times. No refrozen ice cream, nor ice cream one
or all of the various ingredients of which could not be sold separately under
this chapter, shall be sold or offered for sale.
§ 89-37. Regulations governing utensils in public premises.
All hotels, restaurants, cafes, soda fountains and other places where food is
produced, manufactured, stored, cooked, prepared, distributed and sold or
intended for sale for human consumption shall be provided with adequate
facilities for the treatment of cooking and heating utensils by boiling water
or steam under pressure or by other means which shall yield the same
results; and all utensils intended for a second use, including pots, pans,
dishes, plates, cups, saucers, glasses and other containers repeatedly used
for food, and all knives, forks, spoons and food implements, shall be subject
to treatment with boiling water or steam under pressure for at least three
minutes after such services or by such other method that effective
sterilization of each article shall be properly carried out between each use.
Where sufficient or adequate sterilizing equipment has not been or cannot
be installed as above specified, sanitary single-service receptacles (paper
cups and utensils), which are to be thrown away after being used, may be
adopted and used in whole or in part as a service.
§ 89-38. Manufacturing conditions for custard and cream-filled
products.
All commercially prepared custard or cream-filled bakery products shall be
made under the following conditions:
A. Only pasteurized milk or cream shall be used in the preparation of
custard and cream-filed bakery products.
B. The temperature and time of heating the mix shall be, at a minimum,
the equivalent of a temperature 142º F. for a period of not less than 30
minutes.
§ 89-35 RUTHERFORD CODE § 89-38
89:528
C. Upon completion of the cooking of the mix, it shall be immediately
transferred into previously sterilized containers, properly covered and
chilled without delay, to 50º F. or below, and maintained at such
temperature until used.
D. The filling apparatus shall be of suitable, impervious material and shall
be cleaned and properly sterilized before each use. No cloth filling bag
shall be used.
E. The hands of employees engaged in the preparation of custard and
cream-filled bakery products shall not touch the custards or cream
fillings.
F. No pastries containing custards or cream fillings shall be displayed in
windows or show cases except those that are chilled to 50º F. or below.
G. Pastries containing custard or cream filling shall not be sold or
delivered from vehicles except such vehicles as are equipped with a
refrigerated compartment maintained at a temperature of 50º F. or
below; provided, however, that such pastries may be delivered from
manufacturers to retail dealers or consumers by special trip without
continuous refrigeration when it is possible to cause such delivery
within two hours' elapsed time.
§ 89-38 SANITARY CODE § 89-38
89:529

ARTICLE VII
Vital Statistics
§ 89-39. Annual appointment of Registrar.
There shall be appointed annually by the Board of Health, at the first
regular meeting in January of each year, a suitable person to be Registrar of
Vital Statistics in and for the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 89-40. Duties of Registrar.
In addition to the duties prescribed by law to be performed by such officer,
the Registrar of Vital Statistics shall perform such other duties as may from
time to time be required by the Board of Health. He shall, in addition to
transmitting all certificates of marriages, births and deaths received by him
to the State Bureau of Vital Statistics, report the same to the local Board of
Health at least once in each month.
§ 89-41. Documents returned to Registrar.
The return of all marriage, birth and death certificates required by law or
by an ordinance of the Board of Health to be made by physicians, midwives,
nurses, clergymen, magistrates and other persons professionally officiating
at such marriage, birth or death shall be made to the Registrar of Vital
Statistics.
§ 89-42. Fees for copies of documents. [Added 3-10-1958 by Ord.
No. 1-58; amended 4-23-1990 by Ord. No. BH 1-90; 10-25-2004 by
Ord. No. BH 3-04]
Certified copies of marriage, birth or death records, certified copies of
certificates of domestic partnerships and vital records abstract
certifications, certified to be correct under the seal of the Board of Health
Registrar of Vital Statistics shall be issued upon payment a fee of $5 for
each certified copy.
§ 89-39 SANITARY CODE § 89-42
89:531

ARTICLE VIII
Communicable Diseases
§ 89-43. Enumeration of reportable diseases.
Every physician practicing in the Borough of Rutherford shall report, in
writing, to the Board of Health the name of every patient he or she shall
find affected with anthrax, chickenpox, cholera (Asiatic,), diphtheria
(membranous croup), dysentery, (amoebic and bacillary), encephalitis
(lethargic), glanders, influenza, leprosy, malaria, measles, German measles,
meningitis (epidemic cerebrospinal), mumps, ophthalmia meonatorum,
paratyphoid fever, pneumonia (broncho or lobar), plague, acute anterior
poliomyelitis (infantile paralysis), rabies (hydrophobia), Rocky Mountain
spotted fever, scarlet fever, smallpox (varioloid), streptococcic sore throat,
tetanus, trachoma, trichinosis, tuberculosis (all forms), tularemia, typhoid
fever, typhus fever (Brill's disease), undulant fever, whooping cough, yellow
fever or any other communicable disease that may hereafter be declared
by this Board to be dangerous to public health, together with the precise
locality where such patient may be found, immediately after such physician
shall ascertain the nature of such disease.
§ 89-44. Layman's report; time limit.
Every homeowner or householder who has reason to believe that any person
living, dwelling or being in any building or apartment under his control is
affected with any of the communicable diseases enumerated in § 89-43 of
this article shall, when no physician has attended such sick person, within
12 hours after discovering the same report the facts, in writing, to the
Health Officer of the Board of Health.
§ 89-45. Periods of isolation.
The minimum period of isolation of persons affected with the diseases
hereinafter named shall be as follows:
A. Chickenpox: until 12 days after the appearance of the eruption and until
the crusts have fallen and the scars completely healed.
B. Diphtheria (membranous croup): until two successive negative cultures
have been obtained from both the nose and throat at intervals of not
less than 24 hours or until the bacilli present have been shown to be
nonvirulent.
C. Measles: until seven days after the appearance of the rash and until all
abnormal discharges from the nose, ears and throat have disappeared
and until the cough has ceased.
D. Mumps: until two weeks after the onset of the disease and all swelling
of glands has disappeared.
§ 89-43 SANITARY CODE § 89-45
89:533
§ 89-46. Medical examination by Board authorized.
Whenever it shall be deemed necessary by this Board, or its authorized
agents, to establish the true character of any disease which is suspected to
be communicable, a medical examination of the person or persons affected
by such disease may be ordered by the said Board or its agents. Any person
or persons interfering with or refusing to permit such examination shall be
guilty of violating this chapter.
§ 89-47. School attendance regulations.
No principal, teacher or superintendent of any school shall knowingly
permit any child sick with any disease mentioned in § 89-43 of this article,
or any child residing in any house in which such disease, except typhoid
fever, shall exist, to attend any school until such time as the Board of Health
certifies to such teacher that said child can attend school without danger of
communicating the disease to others.
§ 89-48. Regulations governing use of library.
No person from any dwelling wherein a disease dangerous to the public
health exists shall take any book or magazine to or from the public library
without a permit from the Board of Health. The Board will inform the
librarian of all reported cases of said diseases and, until a written permit is
given, he shall allow neither books nor magazines to be taken to or returned
from the dwelling where such cases exist.
§ 89-49. Regulations governing quarantine.
In case communicable disease occurs in the Borough of Rutherford, any
person affected therewith shall be isolated, quarantined or placed under
other restrictive measures as may be required. Whenever isolation or
quarantine is to be established on any premises, the Health Officer shall
cause a written order establishing such isolation or quarantine to be served
upon the person in charge of such premises. Service upon any responsible
member of a household shall be deemed sufficient service upon all the
members of the household of the person served. In lieu of such service,
E. Acute anterior poliomyelitis (infantile paralysis): until three weeks after
the onset of the disease and until the temperature has returned to
normal.
F. Scarlet fever: until 21 days after the onset of the disease and until all
abnormal discharges from the nose, ears, throat or suppurating glands
have ceased.
G. Smallpox: until 14 days after the onset of the disease and until scabs
have all separated and the scars completely healed.
H. Whooping cough: until at least three weeks after the onset of the
disease, and until paroxysmal coughing has ceased.
§ 89-45 RUTHERFORD CODE § 89-49
89:534
such order may be posted on the building or premises occupied by the
affected person or persons. When so posted, all persons on such premises
shall be bound by such notice. When such isolation or quarantine has been
established, it shall remain in force until the Health Officer has caused to
be served on the affected person or persons or posted on the premises, a
notice in writing terminating such isolation or quarantine.
§ 89-50. Known exposures prohibited.
No person shall knowingly bring or cause to be brought into the Borough
of Rutherford any person infected with any communicable disease, except
upon a permit granted by the Board of Health; and no person shall
knowingly bring or cause to be brought into said Borough any article liable
to propagate a communicable disease.
§ 89-51. Identification of quarantined premises.
§ 89-52. Disinfection of public vehicles required.
In case a coach, hack, cab, carriage or other vehicle used for the
conveyance of passengers shall convey a patient suffering from a
communicable disease, said coach, hack, cab, carriage or other vehicle shall
be disinfected under the direction of the Board of Health or its authorized
agent before being used again.
§ 89-53. Whooping cough.
A. Whenever there shall occur in the Borough of Rutherford any case of
diphtheria, epidemic cerebrospinal meningitis, measles, acute anterior
poliomyelitis (infantile paralysis), scarlet fever, smallpox or typhus
fever, the Board of Health or its authorized agent shall place upon the
house or houses in which said case or cases are confined a placard
naming the disease, and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons
to remove said placard without authority of said Board.
B. Whenever a placard shall be placed upon a house as provided in
§ 89-51A of this article, no person or persons except the medical
attendant, clergyman and nurses shall enter therein or depart
therefrom without the permission of the Board of Health or its
authorized agent.
A. No parent or guardian of any infant under 10 years of age suffering
from the disease commonly known as "whooping cough" shall permit
any such infant to appear in the street or in any other public place
within the Borough of Rutherford unless such infant shall wear and
expose upon the arm a band of yellow material bearing upon it the
words, "Board of Health, Rutherford, Whooping Cough." The band shall
be in a form to be prescribed and supplied by the Board of Health and
shall be worn for a period beginning with the earliest recognition of the
disease and continue until danger of infection is over, but in no event
less than six weeks.
§ 89-49 SANITARY CODE § 89-53
89:535
§ 89-54. Rabid animals.168
It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having interest in or having
in their possession or under their control, or having knowledge of, any dog
or cat or other animal affected with rabies or suspected of being affected
with rabies to forthwith notify the Health Officer of the Board of Health by
telephone, telegraph or in person, if practicable, and also in writing, signed
by the person making the same, which report shall state where such animal
may be found and shall contain, if possible, a description of the animal, the
location of the animal and the name and address of the owner.
§ 89-55. Communicable diseases of animals.
Every veterinary surgeon who is called to examine or professionally attend
any animal within the Borough of Rutherford having the glanders or farcy or
any contagious disease shall, within 24 hours thereafter, report in writing to
the Board of Health of said Borough of Rutherford the following facts: first,
a statement of the location of such diseased animal; second, the name and
address of the owner thereof; third, the type and character of the disease.169
§ 89-56. Animal bites.170
The occurrence of any person or animal being bitten by a dog, cat or other
animal shall be immediately reported to the Board of Health, and such
animal causing the bite and the animals having been bitten shall be confined
for a period of not less than 10 days for the purpose of being examined
for symptoms of rabies. The head of any dead animal, which immediately
preceding its death was suspected of having rabies or exhibited symptoms
of having rabies, shall be submitted to the Board of Health for a laboratory
examination for rabies.
B. No parent or guardian of any infant under the age of 10 years suffering
from whooping cough shall permit any such infant to board any
streetcar or other public conveyance or to visit any house, other than
the house in which such infant resides, or any store, school, Sunday
school or building of public assembly.
168. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 10, Animals, Art. I, Quarantine.
169. Editor's Note: See Ch. 16, Board of Health, § 16-4B, for fee payable to veterinarian.
170. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 10, Animals, Art. I, Quarantine.
§ 89-53 RUTHERFORD CODE § 89-56
89:536
ARTICLE IX
Boarding Homes for Children
§ 89-57. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARDING HOME FOR CHILDREN — Any home or house or other place
conducted by any person or association who advertises himself or holds
himself out as conducting a boarding home for children or who has in
his custody or control one or more children, unattended by parents or
guardians, for the purpose of providing such children with food and lodging,
excepting children related to him by blood or marriage or have been legally
adopted by him.
§ 89-58. License required; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person or association to conduct or maintain
a boarding home for children or to engage in or assist in conducting a
business of placing children without having a written license therefor from
the Board of Health of the Borough of Rutherford, provided that nothing
in this code shall apply to any institution or department maintained or
operated by the State of New Jersey.
§ 89-59. Term of license.
No license above provided for shall be granted for a term exceeding one
year.
§ 89-60. License information.
Every such license shall state the name of the licensee; the particular
premises in or at which the business shall be carried on; and the number of
children that may be maintained, boarded or cared for at any one time.
§ 89-61. Conformance to standards required.
No greater number of children shall be kept at any one time on the premises
than is authorized in the license and no children shall be kept or disposed of
within a building or place not designated in the license. No license shall be
granted unless a boarding home conforms to the standards and regulations
of the Board of Health.
§ 89-62. Revocations.
The record of such license when issued shall be kept by the Board of
Health. Said licenses shall be subject to revocation for violation of any of the
regulations mentioned therein or whenever, in the judgment of the Board of
Health, such boarding home is no longer needed or is not conducive to the
well-being of the children.
§ 89-57 SANITARY CODE § 89-63
89:537
§ 89-63. Provisions for inspections or examination of records.
The Board of Health shall visit and inspect, or designate persons to visit
and inspect, the premises and investigate the manner of conducting the
business licensed. Said Board and such persons shall have the right to call
for and examine the records required by these regulations to be kept and to
inquire into all matters concerning such licensed premises and the children
therein, and it shall be the duty of the licensee to give all information to
such persons and afford them every reasonable facility for examining the
records, inspecting the premises and seeing the inmates thereof.
§ 89-64. Records required.
Every person, firm, corporation or association conducting a boarding home
for children or engaged in the placing of children as defined in these
regulations shall keep a record, in a form to be prescribed by the Board of
Health, wherein shall be entered the name, age, sex, color and religion of
every child cared for or treated by him, brought to him for placing, finding
a home for, giving out for adoption or otherwise disposing of, together with
the name and address of each of the parents of said child, the name of every
child who dies while in his care, together with date of such death, also the
name and residence of the person with whom the child is placed or by whom
it is adopted, this entry to be made 24 hours after such child is given out,
taken away or disposed of in any manner. A true copy of such record shall
be sent to the Board of Health at such times as the Board of Health shall
require.
§ 89-65. Surety bond required.
All licensees must submit to the Board of Health a surety bond for $1,000
for each child boarded or to be boarded from outside of the state.
§ 89-63 RUTHERFORD CODE § 89-65
89:538
ARTICLE X
Burials
§ 89-66. Burials prohibited in Borough.
No body of any person shall be buried in the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 89-67. Restricted funerals.
There shall not be a public or church funeral of any person who has died
of smallpox, diphtheria, membranous croup, scarlet fever, measles, yellow
fever, typhus fever, leprosy or Asiatic cholera, but the funeral of such person
shall be private and held within 24 hours after the death of said person, and
it shall not be lawful to permit at the funeral of any person who has died of
any of the above-named diseases, or at any services connected therewith,
any person whose attendance is not necessary.
§ 89-68. Reportable causes of death.
It shall be the duty of every undertaker having notice of the death of any
person within the Borough of Rutherford of smallpox, varioloid, diphtheria,
membranous croup, scarlet fever, yellow fever, typhus fever, Asiatic cholera,
leprosy, measles or any other communicable disease dangerous to the
general health of the community, or of the bringing of the dead body of
any person who has died of any such disease into said Borough, to give
immediate notice thereof to the Board of Health.
§ 89-69. Prohibited transportation.
No public coach, hack, cab or carriage or any upholstered vehicle used for
the conveyance of passengers shall be used to convey the body of a person
who has died from any communicable disease.
§ 89-66 SANITARY CODE § 89-69
89:539

ARTICLE XI
Licenses
§ 89-70. Expiration dates.
All licenses issued by the Board of Health under this chapter except when
otherwise specified in said license shall expire on December 31 following
the date of issue.
§ 89-71. Display required.
All licenses issued pursuant to Article III and Article VI of this chapter
shall be prominently displayed on the outside of each vehicle used for the
purpose for which the license is granted.
§ 89-70 SANITARY CODE § 89-71
89:541

ARTICLE XII
Sewer Connections171
§ 89-72. Connections required.
All owners of property along the line of any sewers constructed for the
purpose of carrying sewage matter in any of the streets of this Borough
shall connect their house and other buildings with the sewer in the street
adjoining said property upon 30 days' notice, in writing, from the Board
of Health to make such connection; said notice to be served by delivering
the same to the owner of the said property or by leaving the same at the
residence of the owner with a member of the family above the age of 18
years and explaining the contents thereof or, in case of a nonresident owner,
by serving the same on the resident agents, if any, and by mailing the same
by registered mail to the owner's last known post office address.
§ 89-73. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation who shall not comply with the
notice provided for in § 89-72 of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
pay a penalty not exceeding $25, and for each day of delay after the
expiration of said notice are not complied with there shall be an additional
penalty not exceeding $10.
171. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 91, Sanitary Sewers.
§ 89-72 SANITARY CODE § 89-73
89:543

ARTICLE XIII
Buildings
§ 89-74. Cleanliness; repair required.
Every dwelling and every factory building and every part thereof and the
yard, court, passage and area or alley connected with the same shall be kept
clean and free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, garbage or other matter.
The owner, agent, lessee or occupant of any dwelling or factory building
or part thereof shall thoroughly cleanse all the rooms, passages, stairs,
floors, windows, doors, walls, ceilings and drains thereof as often as shall be
required by the Board of Health or its officers and shall, when notified so to
do, well and sufficiently whitewash or paint the walls and ceilings thereof.
§ 89-75. Unfit structures.172
Whenever it shall be decided by the Department of Health that any building
or part thereof is unfit for human habitation by reason of its being infected
with disease or vermin or by reason of its being in a condition dangerous
to health or life or to be likely to cause sickness among the occupants,
and notice of such decision shall have been affixed conspicuously on the
building or any part thereof so decided to be unfit for human habitation,
and personally served upon the owner, agent or lessee if the same can be
found within the state, requiring all persons therein to vacate such building
or part thereof for the reasons to be stated therein as aforesaid, such
building or part thereof shall, within 10 days thereafter, be vacated or in
case of special emergency, within such shorter time as in said notice may be
specified.
§ 89-76. Maintenance required.
The owner, lessor or agent of any building or part thereof used in any
degree for occupation for human beings, whether for business or dwelling
purposes, shall keep the roofs, gutters and every part of the same and the
side walls of such buildings so that the same shall not leak and shall cause
all rainwater to be drained and conveyed from such roofs, gutters or side
walls in such manner as to prevent the dripping of water upon the ground
or upon any portion of the structure or in the yard adjacent thereto.
§ 89-77. Usage and structural requirements.
A. A building or portion of the building occupied as a dwelling shall be
lighted and ventilated by means of at least one window in each room,
said window opening into the outer air.
B. No person shall use any room for sleeping in any dwelling house,
apartment house, hotel or other building which is overcrowded and
where the cubic capacity for each adult occupying such building or
room is less than 400 cubic feet, and for each child under 12 years of
172. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 47, Housing Code; and Ch. 123, Unfit Dwellings.
§ 89-74 SANITARY CODE § 89-77
89:545
§ 89-78. Facilities required at construction sites.
It shall be the duty of the owner or contractor engaged in the construction
or erection of any new building or other construction work to provide a
sufficient number of water closets or privy vaults for the use of the persons
employed on said work. Such water closets or privy vaults shall be placed at
the commencement of the work and shall be continued until the completion
of the same. Every such water closet or privy vault shall be kept and
maintained at all times in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 89-79. Water required.
Every owner or other person having charge of any building or portion of a
building occupied as a tenement house, apartment house or dwelling house
shall provide a means of plentiful supply of pure water for the use of the
occupants thereof.
§ 89-80. Water in cellar.
It shall be the duty of the owner of every structure used for dwelling or
business purposes to keep the cellar free from accumulation of water. In
case such accumulations occur, said owner shall immediately have such
water pumped out and have the cause repaired or conditions altered so that
further accumulations will be prevented.
age, 250 cubic feet. Upon written order from the Board of Health, the
number of occupants for such building or rooms so overcrowded shall
be reduced in accordance with this section.173
C. Every building used in any away for occupation for human beings,
whether for business or dwelling purposes, shall be provided with
water closets and urinal accommodations so that the same may be
adequate and reasonably convenient for the use of the occupants of said
building.
D. No person shall paper the walls or ceilings of any room in any dwelling
house, tenement, hotel, apartment building or any building used for
dwelling purposes without first having scraped or thoroughly removed
all the old paper from the walls or other parts of said building.
173. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 14, Boardinghouses and Lodging Houses.
§ 89-77 RUTHERFORD CODE § 89-80
89:546
ARTICLE XIV
Chemical Plants
§ 89-81. Manufacturing processes requiring permits.
No person, persons, firm or corporation shall carry on or permit to be
carried on in the Borough of Rutherford the manufacture, compounding
or mixing of any acids, dyes, chemicals, poisonous substances, drugs or
any other chemical substances without a special permit from the Board of
Health as hereinafter provided. No person, persons, firm or corporation
shall carry on or permit to be carried on any business that shall create
an odor or fumes that shall be noxious, unhealthful or detrimental to the
neighborhood where said manufactory is located for residential purposes
without a permit from the Board of Health as hereinafter provided.
§ 89-82. Application; licensing procedures.
Any person desiring to engage in said business as aforesaid shall, before
doing so, make written application to the Board of Health on a blank to be
prepared and furnished by the Board of Health, setting forth the nature and
details of the business proposed to be carried on; and the permit to transact
such business, if issued, shall be of such form and under such regulations as
the Board of Health shall prescribe. In the event that any person, persons,
firm or corporation shall engage in said business as aforesaid without
having first obtained said permit or shall fail to comply with the regulations
of said permit and the regulations of the Board of Health, such business
may be summarily abated. No such permit shall be transferable in case of
transfer or sale of said business, but in such case, a new application must be
made and a new permit granted to the person, persons, firm or corporation
who propose to conduct said business.
§ 89-83. Fees.
There shall be paid before the permit shall be granted and submitted with
the application therefor a fee of $25 for each new application and a fee of
$10 for each renewal thereof.
§ 89-84. Excepted professions.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit chemists, druggists,
physicians or dentists from manufacturing or compounding drugs and
chemicals for professional purposes.
§ 89-81 SANITARY CODE § 89-84
89:547

ARTICLE XV
Weeds, Refuse and Underbrush
§ 89-85. Removal required after notice.
Any owner or owners, occupant or occupants of any lot or tract of land shall
remove all grass and weeds and refuse and underbrush in such lot or tract
of land within seven days after notice to cut and remove the same has been
given to said owner or owners, occupant or occupants by the Health Officer
of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 89-86. Service of notice.
The notices mentioned in § 89-85 of this article shall be given by delivering
to the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said lots or tracts of
land, written demands for the removal of all grass and weeds and refuse
and underbrush therefrom, or by leaving the same at the residences of said
owner or owners, occupant or occupants, with a member of the family above
the age of 14 years or, in case the owner or owners are nonresidents, by
mailing the same to the owner or owners at his or their last known post
office address, postage prepaid.
§ 89-87. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not more than $5
for each offense. Each day which any violation hereof shall continue after
the termination of the period stated in the notice provided for in this article
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 89-88. Provision for removal by Board.
If such grass and weeds and refuse and underbrush shall not be removed as
provided for in this article, the same may be cut and removed by and under
the direction of the Board of Health, and the cost thereof as nearly as can
be ascertained, shall be certified to the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Rutherford and shall thereupon become and be a first and paramount lien
upon such premises and shall be added to and recorded and collected with
and in the same manner as the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such premises.
§ 89-89. Disposition of revenue.
The imposition and collection of the fine imposed for the violation of this
article shall not bar the right of the Borough of Rutherford to collect the
cost of cutting and removing said grass and weeds, but the remedy shall be
cumulative.
§ 89-85 SANITARY CODE § 89-89
89:549

ARTICLE XVI
Enforcement
§ 89-90. Provisions for enforcement.
Any member of the Board of Health or the officers or agents thereof shall
make the inspections and examinations required by this chapter, any law of
this state or by any code, ordinance, regulation or order of the Board.
§ 89-90 SANITARY CODE § 89-90
89:551

ARTICLE XVII
Penalty
§ 89-91. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter for which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a penalty of not more than $100 for each and every offense.
§ 89-91 SANITARY CODE § 89-91
89:553

ARTICLE XVIII
Repealer and Effective Date
§ 89-92. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter be and they hereby are repealed.
§ 89-93. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication and as required
by law.
§ 89-92 SANITARY CODE § 89-93
89:555
Chapter 91
SANITARY SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitary Code — See Ch. 89.
Sewage Disposal Code — See Ch. 92.
Disposal of industrial wastes — See Ch. 93.
Sewers and wastewater disposal — See Ch. 94.
Stormwater management — See Chs. 107A
and 107B.
Water pollution — See Ch. 129.
§ 91-1. Sewer system described.
The sanitary sewer system of the Borough of Rutherford shall consist of the
main sewer, sewer laterals and building connections, which are defined as
follows:
§ 91-2. Administration of sewer system.
The Department of Public Works shall have complete supervision and
control, subject to the action of the Mayor and Council, of the construction,
operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewer system.
§ 91-3. (Reserved)174
§ 91-4. Connections with laterals. [Amended 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
3157-08; 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 3171-08]
All connections with the sewer laterals shall be approved by the Borough’s
plumbing subcode official and/or Department of Public Works. The property
owner shall obtain the appropriate street opening permit and maintain the
street opening as required by Borough Code.175
A. The main sewer consists of the sewer lines laid in and along the streets
and through private rights-of-way.
B. The sewer laterals are the sewer lines extending from the main sewer to
the curbline.
C. The building connections are the sewer lines extending from the
curbline to within six feet of the building.
174. Editor's Note: Former § 91-3, Construction of sewer laterals, was repealed 6-24-2008 by
Ord. No. 3157-08.
175. Editor's Note: See Ch. 109, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. III, Street Openings.
§ 89-93 RUTHERFORD CODE § 91-5
89:556
§ 91-5. Licensing of plumbers; bond required.
Every person who shall be licensed as provided for in the preceding section
shall execute a bond to the Borough of Rutherford in the sum of $1,000 with
sufficient surety to be approved by the Mayor and Council, conditioned that
he will indemnify and save harmless the said borough against all damage
and costs from any injury which may occur to persons or property by reason
of any neglect or carelessness on his part during the progress of said work,
and every such person shall execute a further bond to the said borough in
the sum of $250 with like surety, conditioned that he will indemnify and save
harmless the said borough against all damage and costs occasioned by any
injury or obstruction which he may do or cause to be done to any of the
sewers of said borough in any manner whatsoever.
§ 91-6. Street opening prohibited; exception.
The tapping of a main sewer or the digging up of the streets for that purpose
or for the purpose of replacing or repairing the same by any person, firm
or corporation is hereby prohibited, except by agents and employees of the
Borough of Rutherford and upon special permission granted by the Mayor
and Council.176
§ 91-7. (Reserved)177
§ 91-8. Permit required; additional fees. [Amended 12-18-1962 by
Ord. No. 1874; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 3157-08]
No connection with the sewer system shall be made except upon application
for a permit for the same being made to the Borough Clerk, setting forth the
location of the property, description of the improvement and the nature of
the waste to be carried by said connection. The Borough Clerk shall issue a
permit upon the payment of a fee at the following rates:
§ 91-9. Regulations governing connections. [Amended 7-3-1973 by
Ord. No. 2129-73; 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 3157-08]
All connections with sewer laterals shall be made in a careful and
workmanlike manner and shall consist of pipe of accepted standard
construction such as ductile iron pipe, cast-iron pipe and polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) pipe.
A. Each housekeeping unit: $100.
B. Automobile service stations, garages and laundries: $250.
C. All other places of business not specifically mentioned in this chapter:
$150.
176. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 109, Street and Sidewalks, Art. III.
177. Editor's Note: Former § 91-7, Fee, as amended, was repealed 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
3157-08.
§ 91-5 SANITARY CODE § 91-10
89:557
§ 91-10. Usage regulations. [Amended 11-3-1954 by Ord. No. 1683]
The sanitary sewer system shall be used only for the discharge of fluid
refuse from sinks, bath and house laundry tubs, showers baths, urinals and
waste from toilets and such other waste as the Mayor and Council shall from
time to time authorize by ordinance to enter said sewer system.
§ 91-11. Prohibited substances. [Amended 11-3-1954 by Ord. No.
1683]
The discharging or the depositing of any of the following substances in the
sewer system is hereby prohibited:
A. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, wood shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics or any other solid or viscous substance capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage system.
B. Gasoline, naphtha, petroleum products or any substance which may
create an explosion hazard in the system.
C. Oils, fats or grease except as may result from household, hotel or
restaurant operation.
D. Surface or rain water from yards, areas, courts, cellars, drains or roofs.
E. 178This ordinance also provided for the relettering of former
Subsections F and G as E and F, respectively. Milk, brewery or distillery
waste in any form.
F. Any waste or substance which shall cause or result in:
(1) Chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with materials of
construction to impair the strength or durability of any sewer
structure.
(2) Mechanical action that will destroy or damage the sewer structure.
(3) Restriction of hydraulic capacity of sewer structures.
(4) Restriction of normal inspection or maintenance of sewer
structure.
(5) Placing of unusual demands on the sewage-treatment equipment or
process.
(6) Limitation of effectiveness of the sewage treatment process.
(7) Danger to public health or safety.
(8) Obnoxious conditions inimical to the public interest.
178. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, pertaining to rubbish or garbage, was repealed
4-18-1995 by Ord. No. 2727-95.
§ 91-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 91-12
89:558
§ 91-12. Prohibited discharge.
No person, firm or corporation shall discharge sewage from any lands and
premises into any public street, watercourse or other public place.
§ 91-13. Maintenance required; penalty. [Amended 6-26-1967 by
Ord. No. 1978]
Grease traps, acid traps, special trap devices or other appliances necessary
to properly protect the sewer system from stoppage shall be installed by the
owner or occupant of the property at its or his expense when notified by
the Mayor and Council, in writing, to make such installation. Upon failure
or neglect of any such owner or occupant to comply with such notice, in
addition to the penalties hereinafter provided for violation of this chapter,
the permit to connect said property with the sewer system may be revoked
by the Mayor and Council.
§ 91-14. Revocations. [Amended 11-3-1954 by Ord. No. 1683]
In addition to other penalties herein provided for the violation of this
chapter, the Mayor and Council may revoke a permit for a connection with
the sewer system for any violation thereof. In the event that the Mayor
and Council shall revoke a permit, as herein provided, the discharge of
sewage into the sewer system shall be immediately discontinued, and any
person, firm or corporation or occupant of any premises who shall continue
to discharge sewage into the system after said revocation shall be deemed
to have violated this chapter, and each day's continuation of such violation
shall constitute a separate violation thereof.
§ 91-15. Inspections.
An unused building connection shall not be connected with the sewer
system until the Superintendent of Public Works has inspected the same
and has found it to be clean and to conform with the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 91-16. Closing of connections.
Upon the demolishing or razing of a building, the building connection shall
be sealed in a manner to be approved by the Superintendent of Public Works
at the expense of the property owner.
§ 91-17. Illicit stormwater sewer connections prohibited. [Added
12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 3148-07179]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit illicit connections to
the municipal separate stormwater sewer system(s) operated by the
179. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 91-17 and
91-18 as §§ 91-18 and 91-19, respectively.
§ 91-12 SANITARY CODE § 91-17
89:559
Borough of Rutherford so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory. The definitions below are the same as or based on
corresponding definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate stormwater sewer system operated by the Borough
of Rutherford, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES
permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit
(NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may
include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited
to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Borough of Rutherford or other public body and is designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or
finished product. Noncontact cooling water may however contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 91-17 RUTHERFORD CODE § 91-17
89:560
§ 91-18. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable and if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held to be unconstitutional, the decision of the court
respecting such provision or provisions shall not affect the validity of any
other provisions which can be given effect without such invalid provision or
provisions.
§ 91-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-18-2007 by Ord. No.
3148-07]
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 per day for so long as the
violation continues.
Chapter 91A
SERVICE STATIONS AND MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR
FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise control — See Ch. 63.
Nuisances — See Ch. 64.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 68.
Zoning — See Ch. 131.
§ 91A-1. Purpose; scope.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing
or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the
production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, byproduct, or waste product. Process wastewater includes,
but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact
cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
C. Prohibited conduct. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, through an illicit connection to the municipal separate
stormwater sewer system operated by the Borough of Rutherford, any
domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater, or
other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
D. Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the Building
Department of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 91-17 SERVICE STATIONS AND MOTOR VEHICLE § 91A-1
91A:561
§ 91A-2. Hours restricted.
All service stations or motor vehicle repair facilities in the Borough of
Rutherford, except those establishments located in the ORD or HC Highway
Commercial Zoning District, shall be closed between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 5:00 a.m., prevailing time, on every day of the year.
§ 91A-3. Violations and penalties.
§ 91A-4. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistencies.
Chapter 92
SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 91.
Disposal of industrial wastes — See Ch.
Sewers and wastewater disposal — See Ch. 94.
A. The purpose of this chapter is the regulation of the opening and closing
hours of service stations and motor vehicle repair facilities in order to
safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough
of Rutherford. It has been determined that the all-night or late-night
operation within the Borough of Rutherford of service stations and
repair facilities located in close proximity to residential areas has been
and is continuing to disturb the peace and repose of its citizens, thereby
creating a public nuisance.
B. The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall not apply to nor
include any service stations or motor vehicle repair facilities located
within the ORD or HC Highway Commercial Zoning District.
A. Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in any court authorized by law to
hear and determine the matter, be fined such sum not exceeding $500,
as such court in its discretion may impose, or, if the party so convicted
is a natural person, such person may be imprisoned for such term not
exceeding 30 days, as such court in its discretion may impose, or be
fined such sum not exceeding $500, as such court in its discretion may
impose, or such natural person may be both imprisoned and fined not
exceeding the maximum limits set forth herein, as such court in its
discretion may impose.
B. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 91A-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 92-1
92:562
§ 92-1. Adoption of code.
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems; the issuance
of licenses or permits to locate, construct, empty or clean said systems;
and fixing penalties for the violation thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to
c. 188, P.L. 1950 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6). A copy of said code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof
herein.
§ 92-2. Title of code.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1953)."
§ 92-3. Filing.
Three copies of the said Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1953) have been placed on file in the office of the secretary, clerk
or other similar officer of this Board of Health upon the introduction of this
chapter and will remain on file in said office for the use and examination of
the public.
§ 92-4. License required; issuance.
§ 92-5. Certificate required; issuance.
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage
disposal system until a license for the location, construction or
alteration of said sewage disposal system shall have been issued by the
Board of Health.
B. The Board of Health may issue a license if an application for the same is
accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in New Jersey stating that the design of the
individual sewage disposal system as proposed is in compliance with
the code.
A. New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in operation nor
shall new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or
occupied which must rely on such a system for sewage disposal until
the Board of Health shall have issued a certificate indicating that said
disposal system has been located and constructed in compliance with
the terms of the license issued and the requirements of the aforesaid
code. Issuance of such certificate shall not be required for alterations to
an existing individual sewage disposal system.
B. The Board of Health may issue such a certificate if an engineer licensed
to practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a statement
in writing signed by him, to the Board of Health, that the said disposal
§ 92-1 SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE § 92-5
92:563
§ 92-6. Regulations governing licensing; permits.180
§ 92-7. Hearings.
In case any license or certification required by this chapter is denied by the
Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board within 15
days after request therefor is made by the applicant, and upon such hearing
the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination
and take action accordingly within 15 days after the date of such hearing.
§ 92-8. Powers of Board.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system which is being erected or installed in violation of
the code to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy such violation and, thereafter, the work continued without any
violation of any of the provisions of the code; and after issuance of any such
order and the service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with
or working in and about the erection or installation of any such disposal
system, or any part thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except
as aforesaid.
§ 92-9. Fees.
The following fees and charges are hereby established:
system has been located and constructed in accordance with the terms
of the license issued and the requirements of the aforesaid code.
A. Persons shall not engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic
tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the reception or storage
of human excrement who do not hold a license issued by the Board of
Health to engage in such business. Such licenses shall be valid for a
period of one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed by the
Board of Health. Said license may be revoked for the failure of the
licensee to comply with the provisions of the code or any rule or
ordinance of the Board of Health, after public hearing by said Board.
B. The contents of any septic tank, cesspool, privy or other receptacle
containing human excrement shall not be removed until a permit for
such removal has been obtained from the Board of Health.
A. For the filing of an application and plans for a license to locate and
construct an individual sewage disposal system, $25.
B. For the filing of an application and plans for a license to alter an
existing individual sewage disposal system, $10.
C. For the issuance of a license to locate and construct or alter an
individual sewage disposal system, $5.
180. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 89, Sanitary Code, § 89-12.
§ 92-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 92-9
92:564
§ 92-10. Violations and penalties.
§ 92-11. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts of same inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter and the code established hereunder are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 92-12. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this chapter or code
shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such declaration shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions.
§ 92-13. When effective.
This chapter and the code herein established shall take effect 30 days after
the first publication of the chapter in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.
Chapter 93
SEWERS: DISPOSAL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewage Disposal Code - See Ch. 92. Sewers and wastewater disposal - See Ch. 94.
D. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system, or part
thereof, caused by the failure of the licensee to locate and construct or
alter the same in accordance with the terms of the license issued or the
terms of the aforesaid code, an inspection fee of $5 shall be charged.
E. For the issuance or renewal of a license to a person or corporation
engaged in the business of cleaning or emptying receptacles for the
reception and storage of human excrement or other putrescible matter,
$5 for each vehicle or conveyance.
F. For the issuance of a permit to clean or empty any receptacle used for
the reception or storage of human excrement or other putrescible
matter, $1.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of or any order promulgated under this chapter or the
Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey (1953) made a
part hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than
$2 nor more than $100 for each violation.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 92-9 SEWERS: DISPOSAL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE § 92-13
93:565
§ 93-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — The Joint Meeting, Rutherford, East Rutherford and Carlstadt.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Rutherford in the County of Bergen and State
of New Jersey.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The liquid wastes from industrial processes, as
distinct from domestic or sanitary waste.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY — A person whose industrial waste
output has:
PERMITTEE — Any person which has been issued a permit for discharge of
industrial waste.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
group or owner.
§ 93-2. Permits.
A. A flow of 5,000 gallons or more per average workday;
In it a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued
under Section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and
amendments thereto; or
B.
Significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on the treatment works or the quality of its
effluent.
C.
A. Application.
(1) Any person desiring to deposit or discharge or who is now
discharging any industrial waste into the sewage collection system
of the borough or Agent shall make application to the Agent for a
permit to discharge said industrial waste. Such application shall be
in a form prescribed by the Agent and shall include the following:
(a) Number of persons employed.
(b) Daily hours of plant operation.
(c) Water consumption.
(d) Description of processes using water.
(e) List of chemicals used with their CAS number.
(f) Source, volume and rate of wastewater discharge.
§ 92-13 RUTHERFORD CODE § 93-2
93:566
(g) An analysis of composite samples of wastewater as required by
§ 93-3B and C herein shall be attached to the application for a
permit.
(h) Required signatures. An application submitted by a
corporation must be signed by the principal executive officer of
the corporation or by an official of the rank of corporate vice
president or above who reports directly to such principal
executive officer to make such applications on behalf of the
corporation. In the case of a partnership or a sole
proprietorship, the application must be signed by a general
partner or proprietor.
(i) Required certification. Each application shall contain a
certification by a professional engineer licensed in the State of
New Jersey that the information required by Subsection A(1)(c)
through (g) above is accurate and correct in his professional
opinion.
(j) Any additional information required by the borough or its
agent.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, all persons
presently discharging industrial waste into the Agent's sewage
collection system shall have 30 days from the effective date of this
chapter to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Issuing of permit. If all requirements of this chapter have been met, the
Agent shall issue a permit for the discharge into the Agent's sewage
collection system of the waste described in the application submitted
for said permit. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period not to
exceed two years and renewed upon reapplication of the permittee, at
least 60 days prior to the expiration of said permit.
C. Revocation of permits and disconnection.
(1) If the discharge of industrial waste into the Agent's sewage
collection system has been altered, reconstituted or in any way
changed from that which was discharged into the Agent's sewage
collection system at the time the Agent's permit was issued so that
it violates any provision of this chapter or otherwise violates any
provisions of this chapter, and the Agent shall have notified the
permittee in writing of such violation, and if the permittee fails to
comply with the permit conditions, or does not cease to discharge
into the Agent's system within 24 hours, the permittee's permit
shall be revoked, and the Agent may disconnect or plug the
connection whereby the permittee's industrial waste enters the
Agent's sewage collection system, and service shall be restored
only at the permittee's expense and only when said permit has been
reissued by the Agent.
§ 93-2 SEWERS: DISPOSAL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE § 93-2
93:567
§ 93-3. Characteristics of industrial waste.
(2) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, in the event that
the permittee shall discharge or permit the discharge into the
Agent's sewage collection system of any substance which may
create a present and immediate hazard to the public health, safety
or welfare or to the sewage collection system of the Agent, the
Agent may immediately disconnect or plug the connection whereby
said substance is entering the sewage collection system.
(3) In the event that a connection to the Agent's sewage collection
system serves users other than a permittee, the permittee shall
provide a means whereby the permittee's sewer service can be
disconnected or plugged without interfering with service to other
users.
(4) The borough, its Agent and state and federal representatives shall
have access to enter all properties of the contributory industry for
the purpose of inspections, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing.
A. Industrial waste may be discharged into the Agent's sewage collection
system only after a permit has been issued, pursuant to § 93-2 of this
chapter.
B. No waste shall be permitted to be discharged into the Agent's sewage
system which contains either suspended solids, biochemical oxygen
demand or chemical oxygen demand greater than normal domestic
sewage. The effluent limitation for the parameters are:
(1) Suspended solids: 300 parts per million.
(2) Biochemical oxygen demand: 250 parts per million.
(3) Chemical oxygen demand: 400 parts per million.
C. Waste containing an unduly high concentration of substances or
characteristics which will interfere with the normal operation of the
sewage treatment plant of the Agent is prohibited, and the discharge of
the same into the sewage collection system shall be grounds for
revocation of the permit described in § 93-2 of this chapter.
(1) The concentration of these substances shall be determined by
analysis of the inflow into the Agent's sanitary system and shall not
exceed the following requirements:
Substance
Limit
(mg/1)
Total solids 5,000
Phenols 0.005
Cyanide as CN 2.0
§ 93-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 93-3
93:568
Substance
Limit
(mg/1)
Chromium as Cr 3.0
Copper as Cu 1.0
Iron as Fe 5.0
Nickel as Ni 3.0
Zinc as Zn 2.0
Boron as B 1.0
Lead as Pb 0.1
Ether soluble matter 10.0
Arsenic as AS 4.0
Aluminum sulfate 10.0
Barium 2.0
Cadmium 0.02
Mercury 0.01
Selenium 0.02
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.10
(2) Surface-active agents or synthetic detergents shall be of an
approved type, with a high degree of biodegradability.
(3) Any waste having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 shall not
be allowed.
(4) Temperature shall not exceed 150º F.
D. Testing. Any analysis to determine the sewage strength as required
under this chapter shall be performed by a certified laboratory
approved by the Agent and/or New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and shall be performed at the expense of the
discharger. All such tests shall be performed in compliance with the
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
current edition. In the case of a major contributing industry, in addition
to the analysis required under § 93-2A(1)(g) hereof, analyses, based on
samples collected within 30 days of the date of submission, shall be
submitted on a semiannual basis each May 31 and November 30. Said
semiannual analyses shall be for those parameters required by the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency or the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection. The Agent may require
additional tests to determine if the permittee is complying with the
limitations of the permit issued by the Agent. The Agent reserves the
right to perform additional testing at its own expense when the Agent
deems it necessary.
§ 93-3 SEWERS: DISPOSAL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE § 93-4
93:569
§ 93-4. Certain discharges prohibited.
The discharge of the following waste into the sewage collection system of
the Agent is prohibited and shall be grounds for revocation of the permit
and/or disconnection from the Agent's sewage collection system pursuant
to § 93-2:
A. Gasoline, benzene, toluene, xylene, naphtha, fuel oil or mineral oil or
other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
B. Garbage, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paint
residues, cannery waste, bulk solids, paper mill wastes or any other
solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage
system.
C. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substances which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, is capable of creating a hazard or
menace to life or property or of preventing entry into the sewers for
their maintenance and repair.
D. Any radioactive isotopes.
E. Any wastes containing viable pathogenic bacteria other than those
normal to domestic sewage.
F. Concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions or other wastes
which are highly colored and which color cannot be removed by the
Agent's sewage treatment plant.
G. Any waste containing grease or oil that will solidify or become viscous
at temperatures between 32º and 150º F.
H. Surface or rain water, cooling water and water from roof or cellar
drains, groundwater or unpolluted industrial or unpolluted commercial
process water.
I. Any waste which, in the opinion of the Agent, is harmful to any portion
of the sewerage system or to its operating personnel or the general
public.
J. Any water or waste which, in the opinion of the Agent, contains any
toxic substances in quantity sufficient to constitute a hazard to humans
or animals or to interfere with the process of the sewage treatment
plant whereby the discharge from the same will exceed state, federal or
other legal requirements for the receiving stream.
K. Any waste as defined in 40 CFR 128.131 of the Federal Register.
§ 93-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 93-5
93:570
§ 93-5. Quantity of industrial waste.
Where the average daily flow of any individual permittee is greater than
1% of the average daily flow of the entire sanitary system of the Agent, as
a condition to the granting of a permit, holding facilities may be required
to be constructed on the premises of the permittee by, and at the expense
of, the permittee, which shall control the quantity and rates of discharge so
that the rate will be constant over a twenty-four-hour period for each day of
the week.
§ 93-6. Control of industrial waste.
§ 93-7. Required reports.
All major contributing industries, and other industries deemed necessary by
the Agent, shall file periodic and other reports with the Agent as required
under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and amendments thereto.
A. Any person who shall be permitted to discharge industrial wastes into
the sanitary sewer system shall construct and thereafter shall properly
maintain, at his own expense, a suitable control manhole to facilitate
observation, measurement and sampling when, in the opinion of the
Agent, such manhole is necessary to properly observe, measure and
sample the output of that particular permittee. Any such control
manhole shall be constructed at an accessible, safe, suitable and
satisfactory location in accordance with plans approved by the Agent
prior to commencement of construction. Failure to install such a
manhole may result in the rejection of or revocation of the permit
pursuant to § 93-2 of this chapter. Manholes shall be constructed on
each service sewer individually connected to sewage collection system.
B. Whenever necessary in order to comply with local, county, regional,
state and/or federal regulations, including Section 307 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act and amendments thereto, a permittee shall
provide, at its expense, such facilities for pretreatment and handling of
industrial waste as is necessary to remove or neutralize objectionable
substances before said waste is discharged into the sewage collection
system of the Agent.
C. Whenever facilities for treatment of industrial wastes are provided by
the permittee before discharge into the Agent's sewage collection
system, such facilities shall be maintained continuously, at the expense
of the permittee, in satisfactory operating condition; and borough, state
and federal representatives shall have access to such treatment
facilities and records regarding the same at reasonable times for the
purpose of inspecting, testing, observation and measurement.
D. The Agent, as a condition of granting a permit or renewal of the same,
may require the permittee to install, operate and maintain automatic
monitoring and recording equipment for such parameters as flow, pH
and temperature.
§ 93-5 SEWERS: DISPOSAL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE § 93-7
93:571
This information will be a requirement for issuance and continuation of any
permit issued by the Agent for connection with the Agent's sanitary sewer
system.
§ 93-8. Transfer of permit.
The permit issued under this chapter is issued to a specific user for a
specific operation. The permit shall not be assigned, transferred or sold to
a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation.
§ 93-9. Accidental discharges.
§ 93-10. Applicable standards.
The disposal into the sewer system of any pollutant by any person is
unlawful, except in compliance with federal standards promulgated
pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and amendments
thereto and any more stringent state and local standards.
§ 93-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined as
follows:
A. Notification of discharge. Permittees shall notify the Agent immediately
upon accidentally discharging waste in violation of this chapter and/or
the permit issued for such discharge to enable countermeasures to be
taken by the Agent to minimize damage to the borough sewage
treatment facilities, treatment processes and the receiving waters. This
notification shall be followed within 15 days of the date of the
occurrence by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the
accidental discharge and the measures taken to prevent future
occurrences.
B. Notice to employees. In order that employees of the users be informed
of the Agent's requirements, users shall make available to their
employees copies of this chapter, together with such other wastewater
information and notices which may be furnished by the Agent from time
to time directed to more effective water pollution control. A notice shall
be furnished and permanently posted on the permittee's bulletin board
advising employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in
violation of this chapter and/or the permit issued hereunder.
C. Submission of time schedules. When the Agent finds that a discharge of
wastewater has taken place in violation of prohibitions or limitations
prescribed by this chapter and/or the permit issued hereunder, the
Agent may require the permittee to submit for approval, with such
modifications as it deems necessary, a detailed time schedule of specific
actions which the permittee shall take in order to prevent or correct a
violation of requirements.
§ 93-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 93-11
93:572
Consecutive Days of
Noncompliance
Penalty
(per day)
0 to 15 $750
15 to 30 $1,500
31 or more $1,500
§ 93-12. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or its application to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the regulations or the
application of such provisions to other persons or other circumstances shall
not be affected.
§ 93-13. Fees.
§ 93-14. Repealer.
All other ordinances and parts of ordinances and resolutions, insofar as they
are inconsistent with any of the terms or provisions of this chapter, are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
§ 93-15. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect following final passage, adoption and
publication on the earliest date allowable by law.
A. Applicants shall pay the following fees:
(1) Major contributing industries: an application fee in the amount of
$1,000, plus a fee in the amount of $500 for each year of the
permit.
(2) All others: an application fee of $500, plus a fee in the amount of
$250 for each year of the permit.
(3) All applicants shall reimburse the Agent for any reasonable fee paid
by the Agent for professional review of applications by the Agent's
Engineer or Attorney.
B. The above fees shall be paid to the Agent upon receipt of the permit.
§ 93-11 SEWERS: DISPOSAL OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE § 93-15
93:573
Chapter 94
SEWERS AND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 22.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 91.
Sewage Disposal Code — See Ch. 92.
Disposal of industrial waste — See Ch. 93.
Water pollution — See Ch. 129.
§ 94-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Sewers and the
Disposal of Wastewater Ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford."
§ 94-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
FLOTABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of flotable fat
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
NATURAL OUTLET — An outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface or groundwater, including the Passaic River or any of its tributaries.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with minor quantities of ground-, storm- and surface waters that
are not admitted intentionally.
SANITARY WASTE — Waste derived principally from dwellings, office
buildings and sanitary conveniences. When segregated from industrial
wastes, it may come from industrial plants or commercial enterprises.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community; the preferred term is
"wastewater."
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes called "storm sewer") — A drain or sewer for
conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from
any source.
STRENGTH OF WASTE — A measurement of suspended solids and/or
biochemical oxygen demand and/or chemical oxygen demand and/or any
other parameter determined by the Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission as
§ 93-15 RUTHERFORD CODE § 94-2
94:574
a fair indicator of the relative use, other than volumetric, of Passaic Valley
Sewerage Commission facilities by industrial wastes.
§ 94-3. Unsuitable discharges restricted.
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the
municipality any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided and where a national pollution
discharge elimination system permit has been obtained from the
appropriate governmental authority, where required.
§ 94-4. Connection permit required.
No person shall make connection on roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to
a public sanitary sewer, unless approved by the municipality for the purpose
of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
§ 94-5. Administrator to be designated.
The governing body shall appoint or designate some suitable person to
administer this chapter.
§ 94-6. Compliance required.
All users of the wastewater facilities shall comply with the requirements
of the written rules and regulations of the Passaic Valley Sewerage
Commission which have been adopted and which from time to time shall
have been adopted, which regulations shall become effective upon filing of
certified copies in the office of the Municipal Clerk after the effective date
of this chapter.
§ 94-7. Termination of permit or use.
Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or any permit issued under
the authority of this chapter may result in the termination of the permit and/
or the termination of the authority to discharge into the system.
§ 94-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment not
to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day in which a violation of any
provision of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 94-9. Effect on existing legislation.
No ordinance heretofore adopted by the municipality shall be affected by
this chapter, except that, if any provision of the prior ordinance is in conflict
§ 94-2 SEWERS AND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL § 94-9
94:575
with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall
control.
§ 94-10. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter shall be declared to be unconstitutional invalid
or inoperable, in whole or in part, by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining portion not declared to be unconstitutional invalid or inoperable
shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 94-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication in
accordance with the provisions of law.
Chapter 95
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
§ 95-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 95-2. Definitions.
A. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford find that the
preservation, protection, and planting of trees and other plants
conserves and enhances the Borough's physical and aesthetic
appearance, and generally protects the public health and safety and
general welfare.
B. The intent of this chapter is to limit the adverse impact of damage and
removal of Borough trees associated with construction. This chapter
preserves and perpetuates the Borough's tree stock located on public
property within the public right-of-way through the establishment of
regulatory controls for the preservation of street trees.
C. This chapter contains Shade Tree Commission rules and regulations for
the planting, control, protection and improvement of shade trees upon
streets and highways in the Borough of Rutherford and provides
penalties for the violation thereof.
A. As used in this chapter, the terms hereinafter set forth shall have the
following meanings:
COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of
Rutherford, including any of its duly appointed members and any of its
duly authorized agents, representatives, or employees.
DRIPLINE — A boundary on the soil surface delineated by the outer
branch spread of the tree or group of trees.
LANDMARK TREE — Any tree designated and identified as such by the
Shade Tree Commission as to be of rare species, or of significant age,
§ 94-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 95-2
94:576
or of superior height or trunk or dripline diameter to be considered an
outstanding specimen for a tree of its species, or of significant local
history.
PERMITS — Written permission of the Commission. Whenever,
pursuant to any provision of this chapter, the Commission shall have
occasion to deny an application for a permit, it shall, in determining
whether or not to approve such permit, take into consideration the
nature, species, size, age and condition of any tree involved; the
location thereof in the street, park and Borough property; the planting,
care, protection, maintenance, or removal procedures involved; the
public safety and welfare; and the improvement and advancement of
the Shade Tree Program of the Commission.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation, or any
combination thereof and/or agents of the same. Where, in the proper
context, it is so required, this term may be construed to designate the
plural as well as the singular.
REPLACEMENT ASSESSMENT — The value of a tree as determined by
the appraisal of a trained forester or licensed tree expert retained by
the Commission for that purpose.
SHADE TREE — Any deciduous tree with an erect perennial trunk
at least two inches in diameter four inches from root flare, definitely
formed crown of foliage and a height of at least 15 feet at maturity
within the Borough's right-of-way and/or within 10 feet of the curbline,
but not including private property or Borough parks.
STREET — Any road, avenue, street or highway dedicated to the public
use for street purposes. A street shall be deemed to include all portions
lying between the dedicated or established right-of-way lines and/or
planting easement thereof, said lines being identical with the front
property lines of lands abutting the street.
TREE — Any shade tree, shrub or plant, or any root, branch, flower or
other part thereof that is located in or upon any street, except those
located or planted on county or state parks, parkways and highways.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE — The area designated by the Rutherford
Shade Tree Commission to be free of equipment, supplies or building
materials and to be delineated by an orange construction fence.
B. Any term or provision of this chapter that contemplates, directs,
regulates or prohibits the doing of any act may, in applicable cases and
where the context so requires, be construed to include the causing,
allowing, permitting or suffering of such act to be done by others under
the direction, control or supervision of the person charged therewith.
Every such act shall be deemed to be within the scope of this chapter,
regardless of whether it is a deliberate, intentional or purposeful act, or
a careless, negligent or unintentional act.
§ 95-2 SEWERS AND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL § 95-3
94:577
§ 95-3. Commission; personnel; appointment.
The regulation, planting and care and control of shade and ornamental
trees and shrubbery upon and in the streets and highways of the Borough
of Rutherford, except state highways, unless the State Department of
Transportation shall assent thereto, and except county highways, parks and
parkways, unless a county shade tree commission or county department
of parks and recreation is operative and shall assent thereto, shall be
exercised by and under the authority of the Rutherford Shade Tree
Commission, which is hereby created. The Commission shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. The membership
of the Shade Tree Commission shall consist of:
§ 95-4. Commissioner's term lengths; subsequent appointments.
The first Commission members shall be appointed within 60 days after
the effective date of this chapter and the terms shall commence upon the
day of their appointment and shall be for the respective periods of one,
two, three, four and five years. The initial term of each appointee shall be
designated in his or her appointment. All subsequent appointments, except
to fill vacancies, shall be for the full term of five years, to take effect
on January 1 next succeeding each appointment. Any vacancy occurring
during the term of any Commissioner shall be filled in the manner provided
herein for the unexpired term only. In the event that membership of any
Commission is increased, the new members shall be appointed in such
manner that the terms shall expire in accordance with the foregoing.
§ 95-5. Alternate members.
The Mayor may appoint up to two alternate members to the Shade Tree
Commission. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" and shall serve
during the absence or disqualification of any regular member or members.
The term of each alternate member shall be five years, commencing on
January 1 of the year of appointment; provided, however, that in the event
two alternate members are appointed, the initial term of Alternate No. 2
shall be four years and the initial term of Alternate No. 1 shall be five
years. The terms of the first alternate members appointed pursuant to this
section shall commence on the day of their appointments and shall expire
on the fourth or fifth December 31 next ensuing after the date of their
appointments, as the case may be. An alternate member may participate in
A. Five residents of the Borough of Rutherford, one of whom may also be a
member of the Borough of Rutherford's Department of Public Works
Shade Tree Division. Each of these members shall serve without
compensation, except as hereinafter provided, and shall have the right
to vote on matters properly before the Shade Tree Commission; and
B. One member of the Borough Council who shall serve as a nonvoting
liaison between the Shade Tree Commission and the Mayor and Council
and the citizens of Rutherford.
§ 95-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 95-5
94:578
discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order
that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member.
§ 95-6. Organization; salary of secretary.
The Commission shall organize within 30 days after the appointment of
its total membership for the remainder of the then calendar year, and
thereafter annually, by the election of one of its members as Chairperson
and the appointment of a secretary, who need not be a member. The
salary of the secretary, who may be compensated, even if a member of
the Commission, shall be fixed by the Borough of Rutherford Mayor and
Council.
§ 95-7. Powers of Commission.
The Shade Tree Commission organized under this article shall have the
power to:
§ 95-8. Annual report of Commission; appropriations.
A. Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, planting and
care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located, or
which may hereafter be planted, in any public street or highway, except
such as are excluded pursuant to § 95-3, including planting, trimming,
spraying, care and protection thereof;
B. Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same, so far
as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection;
C. Remove or require the removal of any tree or shrub, or part thereof,
that is dangerous to public safety;
D. Make recommendations to the governing body regarding the creation,
alteration, amendment and repeal of any and all ordinances, written
rules and regulations, as may be necessary or proper for carrying out
the provisions of this chapter, provided that the ordinances, written
rules and/or regulations do not conflict with this chapter and conform to
applicable state statutes;
E. Care for and control such streets; encourage arboriculture (and/or
regulate and provide recommendations to the Department of Public
Works Shade Tree Division in matters pertaining to the removal and
enforcement of tree removal on all lands);
F. Designate landmark trees.
A. During the month of December each year, the Commission shall render
to the Borough of Rutherford Mayor and Council an annual report of the
work it has accomplished in the prior year and the estimated sum
necessary for the proper conduct of its work during the ensuing fiscal
§ 95-5 SEWERS AND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL § 95-8
94:579
§ 95-9. Permit required.
No person shall, without first having obtained a permit from the Shade Tree
Commission, do any of the following acts:
year, which shall include the sums estimated to be expended for such of
the following items as it is anticipated expenditure will be made:
(1) Expenses for services of a licensed tree expert;
(2) Expenses of Commission members in discharging official duties,
including expenses incident to attendance at professional
meetings;
(3) Purchase of trees and shrubbery;
(4) Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the cost of
services for the prudent promotion of the work;
(5) Other maintenance expenses, (including stump work, crane work
needed by outside contractors, etc.).
B. The Borough of Rutherford Mayor and Council shall annually
appropriate such sum as it may deem necessary for the proper conduct
of the work of the Shade Tree Commission.
A. Tree injury.
(1) Cut, prune, break, injure, remove, disturb, or interfere in any way
with any tree, including the root system;
(2) Spray with any chemical any tree or near a tree that is deleterious
to tree health;
(3) Place salt, brine, oil or any other substance injurious to plant
growth in any street, park or any public property in such a manner
as to injure any tree;
(4) Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device to a tree or to any guard
around such tree; provided, however, that nothing herein shall
prevent any agency of government from affixing, in a manner
approved by the Shade Tree Commission, public notices upon a
tree in connection with the administration of governmental affairs;
(5) Remove or damage any guard or device placed to protect any tree;
(6) Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree
to permit the access of air, water and fertilizer to the roots of such
trees.
B. Construction protection.
(1) Build any fire or station any tar kettle, road roller, fuel oil
dispensing truck, or other engine in any street or any other place in
§ 95-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 95-9
94:580
§ 95-10. Wires and utility trimming.
such a manner that the heat, vapors, fuel, or fumes therefrom may
injure any tree as determined by a licensed tree expert;
(2) Store equipment, supplies or building materials in the tree
protection zone or pile any debris such as soil and rocks against
any shade tree;
(3) Excavate, change grade or pave within four feet of any tree;
(4) Use or operate any power equipment or any other implement or
tool in such a manner as to damage or destroy any tree;
(5) Make any site improvement, erection, alteration, or repair of any
structure or building without placing required protection around
all street trees and nearby trees as will effectually prevent injury to
such trees as directed by the Shade Tree Commission (the owner,
contractor, or other person in charge thereof).
C. Plant any tree in any park, street or public property.
D. Obstructions.
(1) Place or maintain in any street or park any stone, cement, sidewalk
or other substance within four feet of any tree which shall impede
the free access of air or water to the roots;
(2) Where any tree is to be surrounded by pavement of stone, cement,
asphalt or any other substance tending to impede the free access of
air and water to the roots of the tree, no portion of such pavement
shall be nearer to any portion of the base of the trunk than four
feet;
(3) Shade tree permits shall not be required for any necessary work
performed by the Department of Public Works during normal work
operations.
A. No person or utility company shall string any wires in or through a
public park or property or prune any trees without a permit.
B. Every person having or maintaining any electric, telephone, telegraph,
cable TV, or other wires running in or through a street, public property,
or park shall securely fasten and maintain such wires in such manner as
will safeguard all trees against any damage therefrom and shall make
periodical adjustments whenever necessary to prevent damage to all
trees.
C. No person shall, without a permit, attach or fasten any wires, insulator
or any other device for holding any wire to any tree.
D. Whenever the Commission shall deem it necessary to prune or remove
any tree, any persons having a wire running in or through any street,
§ 95-9 SEWERS AND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL § 95-10
94:581
§ 95-11. Planting and removal of trees; notice and hearing;
emergencies.
In every case where the property of an abutting owner will be chargeable
with the cost of the removal and/or planting of any shade tree or trees,
the Commission shall give notice of the meeting at which it is proposed to
consider said planting by publishing the notice at least once, not less than
20 days before the meeting, in a newspaper circulating in the municipality,
or by personal service of a copy of the notice upon the abutting owner at
least 10 days before the meeting. The notice shall specify the street, streets,
or portions thereof, on which such planting is proposed and require all
persons who may object thereto to present their objections, in writing, at
the office of the Commission at or before the meeting. Before final action
shall be taken, all objections so filed shall be considered. The Commission
park or public property shall temporarily remove such wire within 24
hours after the service upon the owner or their agent of a written notice
to do so.
E. Any public utility or its agents may not proceed to prune or remove
trees for line clearance of utility wires in nonemergency situations
pursuant to a line clearance program without submitting a work plan 30
days in advance of work and obtaining a permit.
F. All tree work done while trimming around utility lines in and along the
Borough's streets, parks and parkways shall be by target pruning. All
trimming is to be conducted with consideration for the health of any
tree while allowing for proper utility line clearance, as determined by
the Rutherford Shade Tree Commission. Any improper work will void
the issue permit. Any work performed under permit from the Shade
Tree Commission shall be performed in accordance with current
recommendations and approved standards of the National Arborist
Association,181 American National Standards Institute (ANSI), ANSIZ133.1
and 300A, and the New Jersey Certified Tree Experts Board.
G. Any public utility or its agents may undertake emergency tree work to
restore electrical service or limited spot work to prevent interruption of
electrical, telephone, telegraph, cable TV or other wire services. In such
event, the utility will notify the Commission and the Department of
Public Works of said work within three business days of its occurrence.
H. A public utility company shall exercise reasonable diligence in the
installation and maintenance of its facilities, including underground
and overhead utility lines, so as to avoid damage to trees. Periodic
adjustments may be required whenever necessary to protect the tree.
I. The Shade Tree Commission may grant to a public utility a blanket
permit for the installation and the maintenance of subsurface and
aboveground plant construction.
181. Editor's Note: See now the Tree Care Industry Association.
§ 95-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 95-11
94:582
shall give reasonable notice of its intention to remove, or cause the removal
of, a tree, or part of a tree, dangerous to public safety, unless public safety
requires immediate removal, in which case no notice shall be necessary.
The determination as to whether immediate removal is necessary to protect
the public safety shall be made by the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works or his/her designee.
§ 95-12. Public improvements affecting trees and consent of
Commission.
No statute, ordinance or regulation giving any person, state, county or
municipal board, body or official, power or authority to lay any sidewalk
along, or to open, construct, curb or pave any street, or to do any similar
act, shall be construed to permit or authorize any interference with or injury
to a street shade tree without the consent of the Shade Tree Commission
within whose jurisdiction such tree shall be located. In all cases, such
Commission shall reasonably cooperate with such person, board, body or
official for the general public good. Nothing contained in this chapter shall
be held to take away or diminish any of the powers or authority of the
Bergen County Parks Department over the trees or shrubbery in any county
park or parkway within its jurisdiction.
§ 95-13. Hindrance of duties prohibited.
No person shall prevent, delay or in any manner interfere with the
Commission or its authorized agents in the performance of their lawful
duties.
§ 95-14. Violations and penalties; restitution; enforcement.
A. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter or who fails to
comply with the terms and provisions of any permit issued pursuant
hereto shall, for a first offense, pay a fine of $200. For all subsequent
offenses, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, any person who
violates any provisions of this chapter or who fails to comply with the
terms and provisions of any permit issued pursuant hereto shall pay a
fine of not less than $200 nor more than $1,500 for each violation. Each
day that a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or its duly authorized agents or employees,
with the advice and consent of the Executive Secretary, by like
proceedings and process consistent with the practice for the
enforcement of ordinances of the Borough of Rutherford.
B. A copy of any ordinance of the Commission, certified under the hand of
its Secretary or Chairperson, shall be received in any court of this state
as full and legal proof of the existence of the ordinance and that all
requirements of law in relation to the ordaining, publishing and making
of the same, so as to make it legal and binding, have been complied
with, unless the contrary be shown.
§ 95-11 SEWERS AND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL § 95-14
94:583
§ 95-15. Disposition of penalties and restitution.
C. In addition to the penalties authorized by § 95-14A of this chapter, the
Commission requires that a person who removes, damages, or
otherwise destroys a tree in violation of a municipal chapter pay
restitution or a replacement assessment to the municipality, to be
placed in the Shade Tree Commission Trust Fund account to be set
aside for use pertaining to trees. The replacement assessment shall be
the value of the tree as determined by the appraisal of a trained forester
or licensed tree expert (LTE) retained by the Commission for that
purpose. The cost of hiring said LTE is part of the replacement
assessment cost being paid by the person being penalized. In lieu of an
appraisal, the Commission will use a formula and schedule based upon
the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers Guide for Plant
Appraisal, 9th Edition (or latest edition) guidelines. The Commission
shall evaluate the value of the tree based upon its species, variety,
location and its condition at the time of removal or destruction and
based on the current value per square inch at diameter breast height
(DBH).
D. Stop-work orders.
(1) Stop-work orders on behalf of the Commission may be issued, in
writing, by the following, in order of hierarchy, for any tree work or
other activity which he/she believes is carried on in violation of any
provision of this chapter:
(a) The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or its
duly authorized agents or employees; but if unavailable or
impractical then
(b) A duly authorized police officer; but if unavailable, or
impractical then
(c) The Executive Secretary.
(2) A copy of the order shall be served upon any person engaged in
such tree work or such other activity. If no such person is present
upon the property, then the order shall be served upon the owner of
the property in question. Thereafter, any further work shall comply
with the terms and conditions of any permit issued by the
Commission or its designee with respect to such property and the
provisions of this chapter.
A. All monies collected, either as fines or penalties, for any violation of a
rule or regulation of the Shade Tree Commission or as a charge against
real estate, under any provision of this chapter, shall be forthwith paid
over to the Custodian of the Municipal Funds.
B. Restitution shall be paid to the Rutherford Shade Tree Commission as
set forth in § 95-14C for the value of a tree removed, destroyed or
damaged and for the value of labor and materials required. The
§ 95-14 RUTHERFORD CODE § 95-15
94:584
§ 95-16. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by an action, decision or directive of the Commission
shall have the right within 14 days to appeal such action, decision or
directive by submitting a written request to the full Commission setting
forth the reasons for the appeal. Any person aggrieved by the Commission's
action, decision or directive on such appeal shall then have the right, within
21 days, to appeal to the Borough Council. The appeal to the Borough
Council must be in writing with a copy sent to the Commission. The Borough
Council shall, by resolution, within 30 days of the submission date of the
appeal, modify, affirm, or deny the Commission's decision with such
conditions as may be appropriate. If the Borough Council fails to act within
the thirty-day period, then the decision of the Commission shall stand.
§ 95-17. Liability.
Nothing in the chapter contained shall be construed to make the
Commission or any member thereof responsible for the death or injury of
any person, or for any injury to any property or street tree or shrub.
§ 95-18. Fee schedule.
The Shade Tree Commission shall adopt, from time to time, a fee schedule
for permits and services. The Commission shall review it periodically and
shall amend same by a majority vote.
§ 95-19. Repealer.
All other provisions of this chapter which are not affected by this
amendatory chapter are hereby ratified and confirmed and shall remain in
full force and effect. However, all ordinances or parts of ordinances which
are inconsistent with the provisions of this amendatory chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 95-20. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this chapter, but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 95-21. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication as required
by law.
Rutherford Shade Tree Commission shall administer the Shade Tree
Commission Trust Fund for the care, protection, and enhancement of
Borough trees, parks and public properties.
§ 95-15 SEWERS AND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL § 95-21
94:585
Chapter 96
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Chs. 21 and 53. Commercial property maintenance — See Ch.
21A.
§ 96-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STREET — Includes "street," avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, driveway,
sidewalk, park, parking lot, parking area and places used by the general
public.
PERSON — Includes any individual of either sex, corporation, partnership,
association, joint-stock company, societies and other entities capable of
being sued.
CART — A hand-drawn or propelled vehicle or wheeled container made of
metal, wood or other materials such as is generally provided by merchants
for carting or carrying merchandise or foodstuffs to automobiles; or other
places.
§ 96-2. Lawful area of removal.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a cart, as defined herein,
for a distance of more than 500 feet from the property of a mercantile
establishment.
§ 96-3. Abandonment of cart on streets and sidewalks prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, his agent or employee to leave, suffer or
permit to be left any cart, either owned by him or in his possession, custody
or control, upon any borough sidewalk or street.
§ 96-4. Ownership to be designated on each cart.
The owner or owners of shopping carts used in connection with any retail
business and intended for use by patrons in carrying articles of merchandise
shall clearly designate on each cart the name and address of such owner or
owners.
§ 96-5. Storage by borough upon removal.
The borough shall remove or cause to be removed any cart found upon any
sidewalk or street and take the same to borough property where it shall be
held until redeemed, sold or otherwise disposed of, as hereinafter provided.
§ 95-21 RUTHERFORD CODE § 96-6
96:586
§ 96-6. Costs of recovery.
Whenever the borough shall take any cart containing identification of
ownership or right to possession, a notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to
such person that such cart is held by the borough and that said cart may be
redeemed upon payment of $5 to the borough.
§ 96-7. Redemption. [Amended 5-4-1988 by Ord. No. 2499-88]
The cart must be redeemed within 15 days after notice that such cart is
held by the borough, and such owner shall be entitled to receive such cart
upon the payment of the sum of $25. No cart shall be delivered to a person
seeking to redeem the same unless proof is submitted establishing to the
satisfaction of the borough such person's ownership or right to possession.
Any delivery to a person deemed entitled thereto by the borough, from the
proof submitted, shall be an absolute defense to the borough against any
other person claiming to be entitled thereto.
§ 96-8. Disposal at public sale. [Amended 5-4-1988 by Ord. No.
2499-88]
When any cart remains in the custody of the borough for a period of 30
days after removal and with respect to which no person has presented to
the borough proof establishing to its satisfaction such person's ownership
or right to possession, the borough shall give public notice in any local
newspaper that at a specified time and place, not less than five days after
such notice is published, such carts will be sold at public auction for not
less than $25, plus the cost of advertising said sale. If after said notice of
sale is given any person desires to redeem any cart prior to the sale, such
person shall pay to the borough for redemption the sum of $25, plus the cost
of advertising the sale. A general description of the cart or carts to be sold
shall be sufficient. Said sale shall be conducted by the borough or by such
persons as the borough shall designate.
§ 96-9. Disposal if not sold.
If said cart or carts are not sold at public auction, the borough may
dismantle, destroy or otherwise dispose of such cart or carts. Any
disposition of such cart or carts made pursuant to this chapter shall be
made without any liability of the borough to the owner of such cart or other
person lawfully entitled thereto or having an interest herein.
§ 96-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-4-1988 by Ord. No.
2499-88]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter or fail to redeem
a cart after notice shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $25 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 days, or both
fine and imprisonment, for the first offense; and by a fine not exceeding
$50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both fine and
imprisonment, for each subsequent offense.
§ 96-6 SHOPPING CARTS § 96-11
96:587
§ 96-11. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this chapter shall
be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
declaration shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions.
§ 96-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 96-13. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 96A
SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 96A-1. Findings.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford, County of Bergen,
State of New Jersey, hereby finds and adopts, as if set forth more fully
herein, the fact assertions of the "Whereas" clauses of this ordinance182 as
its findings of fact. This chapter shall become effective January 1, 2019,
after being published in accordance with law.
§ 96A-2. Short-term rentals prohibited.
§ 96A-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Borough Code, it shall
be unlawful for an owner, lessor, sublessor, any other person(s) or
entity(ies) with possessory or use rights in a dwelling unit, their
principals, partners or shareholders, or their agents, employees,
representatives and other persons or entities, acting in concert or a
combination thereof, to receive or obtain actual or anticipated
consideration for soliciting, advertising, offering, and/or permitting,
allowing, or failing to discontinue the use or occupancy of any dwelling
unit, as defined herein, for a period of 30 days or less.
B. Nothing in this chapter will prevent formation of an otherwise lawful
occupancy of a dwelling unit for a rental period of more than 30 days.
182. Editor's Note: Refers to Ord. No. 3473-18. A complete copy of the ordinance, including the
"whereas" clauses, is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 96-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 96A-3
96:588
ADVERTISE or ADVERTISING — Any form of solicitation, promotion, and
communication for marketing, used to solicit, encourage, persuade, or
manipulate viewers, readers, or listeners into contracting for goods and/
or services in violation of this chapter, as same may be viewed through
various media, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, flyers,
handbills, pamphlets, commercials, radio, direct mail, Internet websites,
or text or other electronic messages, for the purpose of establishing
occupancies or uses of rental property, for consideration, which are
prohibited by this chapter.
CONSIDERATION — Soliciting, charging, demanding, receiving or
accepting any legally recognized form of consideration, including a promise
or benefit, a quid-pro-quo, rent, fees, other form of payment, or thing of
value.
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or portion thereof, whether furnished or
unfurnished, which is occupied in whole or in part, or intended, arranged
or designed to be occupied, for sleeping, dwelling, cooking, gathering and/
or entertaining, as a residential occupancy, by one or more persons. This
definition includes an apartment, condominium, building, cooperative,
converted space, or potions thereof, that is offered to use, made available
for use, or is used for accommodations, lodging, cooking, sleeping,
gathering and/or entertaining of occupants and/or guests, for consideration,
for a period of 30 days or less.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — Constitutes a family-type situation, involving
one or more persons living together that exhibit the kind of stability,
permanency and functional lifestyle equivalent to that of a traditional family
unit, as further described in the applicable reported and unreported
decisions of the New Jersey Superior Court.
OCCUPANT — Any individual using, inhabiting, living, gathering,
entertaining, being entertained as a guest, or sleeping in a dwelling unit, or
portion thereof, or having other permission or possessory right(s) within a
dwelling unit.
OWNER — Any person(s) or entity(ies), association, limited liability
company, corporation, or partnership, or any combination, who legally uses,
possesses, owns, leases, subleases or licenses (including an operator,
principal, shareholder, director, agent, or employee, individually or
collectively), that has charge, care, control, or participates in the expenses
and/or profit of, a dwelling unit pursuant to a written or unwritten
agreement, rental, lease, license, use, occupancy agreement or any other
agreement.
PERSON — An individual firm, corporation, association, partnership,
limited liability company, association, entity, and any person(s) and/or
entity(ies) acting in concert or any combination therewith.
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY — The use of a dwelling unit by an occupant(s).
§ 96A-3 SHOPPING CARTS § 96A-4
96:589
§ 96A-4. Permitted uses.
The residential occupancy of an otherwise lawful and lawfully occupied
dwelling unit for a period of 30 days or less by a person who is a member
of the housekeeping unit of the owner, without consideration, such as house
guests, is permitted.
§ 96A-5. Advertising prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to advertise, solicit or promote by any means actions in
violation of this chapter.
§ 96A-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 96A-7. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of this chapter but shall be confined in its effect to the
provision directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall
have been rendered.
§ 96A-8. Effect on other laws.
This chapter shall supersede and replace any other provisions of the Code
of the Borough of Rutherford, currently existing or later enacted, which
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Official,
Fire Official and/or other Subcode or Code Official, as their jurisdiction
may arise, including other persons designated by the Mayor and
Council, and in conjunction with the Rutherford Police Department
when necessary, to issue municipal civil infractions directing alleged
violators of this chapter to appear in court or to file civil complaints.
B. A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, a
nuisance per se, and is hereby further found and declared to be
offensive to the public health, safety and welfare.
C. Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter, without
regard to intent or knowledge, shall be liable for a minimum civil
penalty, upon adjudicated violation or admission, of $750, and up to the
maximum civil penalty of $1,250. Each day of such violation shall be a
new and separate violation of this chapter.
D. The penalty imposed herein shall be in addition to any and all other
remedies that may accrue under any other law, including, but not
limited to, eviction proceedings and/or injunction, reasonable
attorney's fees or other fees and costs, in the Borough's Municipal
Court or the Superior Court of New Jersey in the vicinage of Bergen
County, or in such other court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction by
either summary disposition or by Zoning or Construction Code
municipal proceeding.
§ 96A-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 96A-8
96:590
have or may be construed to have differing or contrary terms or conditions
relating to the subject of this chapter. This chapter is not intended to alter
the currently existing or later enacted amendments to the Borough's Zoning
Code183 and is solely intended to address those situations set forth within
§ 96A-2.
Chapter 97
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 22.
Garage sale signs — See Ch. 39A.
Numbering of buildings and lots — See Ch.
63A.
Zoning — See Ch. 131.
183. Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Zoning.
§ 96A-8 SIGNS § 96A-8
97:591

ARTICLE I
Political Signs
[Adopted 9-5-1984 by Ord. No. 2381-84]
§ 97-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POLITICAL SIGN — A sign which directs attention to an issue, issues,
candidate or candidates for public consideration in an election.
§ 97-2. Posting on public property prohibited.
No political sign shall be erected, posted or placed on public property.
§ 97-3. Posting on private property restricted.
§ 97-4. Posting on utility structures prohibited.
Political signs posted on fire hydrants, public telephone booths, public
utility poles or similar public fixtures are expressly prohibited.
§ 97-5. Posting regulations.
Signs may be posted for any national, state or local election no sooner than
30 days prior to the date of the election and must be removed eight days
after the date of the election.
§ 97-6. Each sign to be separate offense.
The erection, posting and placing of each individual sign shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 97-7. Violations and penalties; removal.
A. No political sign shall be erected, posted or placed on private property
without the express consent of the owner, who shall then be responsible
for compliance with this article.
B. No sign in excess of eight square feet shall be permitted to be placed on
grounds or yards, front, rear or side, facing any public street. All such
signs must be at least eight feet from the inner sidewalk line, and if
there is no sidewalk, 20 feet from the street line.
C. No sign in excess of eight square feet shall be permitted on any private
building, except that each political candidate shall be entitled to one
sign on one private building designated as said candidate's campaign
headquarters.
§ 97-1 SIGNS § 97-7
97:593
§ 97-8. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon final passage and publication
as required by law.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article by permitting
signs on his premises contrary to the above provisions shall be subject
to a fine not exceeding $100.
B. Any political candidate who, directly or indirectly or by his agent or
representative, permits such violation for 72 hours after notification to
remove the same shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $150.
§ 97-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 97-8
97:594
Chapter 98
SKATEBOARDS, BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES AND SCOOTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 12.
Playgrounds and recreation areas — See Ch.
73.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 126.
§ 98-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context, the terms herein shall be defined as follows:
BICYCLE — Includes vehicles with two wheels, 20 inches or more in
diameter, one in front of the other, having a saddle-like seat for the rider,
steered by a handle bar and driven by pedals.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Rutherford.
PERSON — An individual, association of individuals or corporation.
ROLLER SKATES — Includes a skate with small wheels instead of a runner
for skating on a surface other than ice.
SCOOTER — Includes a vehicle that consists typically of a narrow footboard
mounted between two wheels tandem with an upright handle attached to
the front wheel that is operated by placing one foot on the footboard and
pushing with the other foot.
SKATEBOARD — Includes a vehicle that consists typically of a narrow
footboard mounted between four small wheels that is operated by placing
one foot on the footboard and pushing with the other foot.
§ 98-2. Operation prohibited in certain areas.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to ride or operate a bicycle,
roller skates, scooter or skateboard upon any sidewalk within the
commercial zone districts, in or upon any municipal parking facility, on any
public plaza within the Borough of Rutherford or on posted private property
within the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 98-3. Rules and regulations.
A. Persons riding or operating bicycles, roller skates, scooters or
skateboards shall comply with the traffic laws of the State of New
Jersey, the Traffic Ordinance of the borough184 and such other rules and
regulations as may be adopted from time to time by the governing body
of the Borough of Rutherford.
184. Editor's Note: See Ch. 126, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 97-8 SKATEBOARDS, BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES § 98-3
98:595
§ 98-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person of eight years of age and under 18 years of age violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall have his or her bicycle, roller skates,
scooter or skateboard impounded by the Borough of Rutherford Police
Department for a period of time not less than seven days nor more than
30 days, and during that period of time the offender cannot ride or operate
his or her bicycle, roller skates, scooter or skateboard on the streets or
roadways of the borough. Notification of the violation of this chapter shall
be addressed to the parents or guardian of the offender.
§ 98-5. Additional violations and penalties.
Any person of 18 years of age and over violating any of the provisions of this
chapter may be subjected to a fine of not exceeding $50 by the Judge before
whom such person is convicted or the penalties prescribed in § 98-4 hereof.
§ 98-6. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Borough of Rutherford Police Department to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 98-7. Severability.
Every section of this chapter or subdivision or separate part thereof shall be
considered a separate provision and in case any such provision shall be held
by a proper legal tribunal to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall
not affect any other provision except so far as the provision so declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid shall be inseparable from the remainder of
any portion thereof.
Chapter 99
SMOKE CONTROL
B. Persons riding bicycles, roller skates, scooters or skateboards upon a
roadway shall ride in single file; provided, however, that this regulation
shall not apply on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles, roller skates, scooters or skateboards.
C. Every person riding or operating a bicycle, roller skates, scooter or
skateboard shall obey all stop signs and traffic signals in the same
manner and to the same extent as would be required if said person was
operating a motor vehicle.
D. No person riding upon a bicycle, roller skates, scooter or skateboard
shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle.
§ 98-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 99-1
99:596
§ 99-1. Adoption of code.
A code regulating the emission of smoke from fuel-burning equipment,
internal-combustion engines, open fires, stacks or chimneys and providing
for the inspection of fuel-burning equipment is hereby established pursuant
to the Public Health and Sanitation Code Adoption by Reference Act (P.L.
1950, c. 188).185 A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 99-2. Title of code.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Smoke Control Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 99-3. Filings.
Three copies of the said "Smoke Control Code of New Jersey (1953)" have
been placed on file in the office of the Health Officer of this local Board of
Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain there for the
use and examination by the public so long as this chapter is in effect.
§ 99-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or code established
herein or any order made pursuant thereto or who shall refuse to comply
with any such order shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of
not less than $2 nor more than $100 for each violation.
§ 99-5. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts of same inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this chapter and the code established hereunder are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 99-6. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this chapter or code
shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such declaration shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions.
§ 99-7. When effective.
This chapter and the code herein established shall take effect 30 days after
first publication.186
Chapter 100
185. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 et seq.
186. Editor's Note: Former §§ 99-8 and 99-9, adopted 7-7-1936 by Ord. No. 1382, were repealed
6-26-1967 by Ord. No. 1980.
§ 99-1 SNOW REMOVAL § 99-7
100:597
SNOW REMOVAL
§ 100-1. Removal required.
The owner, tenant or occupant of any lands abutting upon the public
highways of the Borough of Rutherford shall remove all snow and ice from
the abutting sidewalks of such highways within 12 hours of daylight after
the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
§ 100-2. Removal by borough authorized.
In the event that the owner, tenant or occupant of any such real estate shall
fail to remove such snow or ice as provided in § 100-1 hereof, the same
may be removed by and under the supervision of the Superintendent of
Public Works. The cost of removal of any such snow or ice from any sidewalk
shall be certified to the governing body of the Borough of Rutherford by
the Superintendent of Public Works. The governing body shall examine such
certificate and, if found to be correct, shall cause such cost to be charged
against the real estate so abutting upon such sidewalk, and the amount so
charged shall thereupon become a lien and tax upon such real estate and be
added to and be a part of the taxes next to be levied and assessed thereon,
and enforced and collected with interest by the same officers and in the
same manner as other taxes.
§ 100-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SIDEWALK — Any walk which consists of cement, concrete, bluestone,
petroleum hard-top or other covering placed upon the surface of the
ground.
§ 100-4. Snow removal restricted. [Added 2-6-1996 by Ord. No.
2752-96187]
No owner, tenant or occupant of nonresidential lands abutting upon the
public streets of the Borough of Rutherford shall throw, put, place or cause
to be thrown, put or placed into, upon or within any improved right-of-way
of any street, road or avenue within the Borough of Rutherford any snow
and ice from said nonresidential lands.
§ 100-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-6-1996 by Ord. No.
2752-96]
A. Any person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this chapter, excepting § 100-4, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not exceeding $200 and, in default of
187. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 100-4
through 100-6 as §§ 100-5 through 100-7, respectively.
§ 99-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 100-5
100:598
§ 100-6. Repealer.
An ordinance entitled "An Ordinance to Provide for the Removal of Snow
and Ice from the Sidewalks of the Streets and Highways in the Borough
of Rutherford," No. 868, adopted on June 21, 1916, be and it is hereby
repealed.
§ 100-7. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 102
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land subdivision and site plan review — See
Ch. 50.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 107.
§ 102-1. Permission for excavation required; exception.
No person shall excavate or otherwise remove soil for sale or for use other
than on the premises from which the soil is taken, except in connection
with the construction or alteration of a building on such premises or normal
grading incidental thereto, without first having procured permission
therefor from the Mayor and Council.
§ 102-2. Information and map required.
The Mayor and Council shall not consider any application for the removal
of soil from the premises for sale or otherwise unless and until the owner
of the premises shall first file with the Borough Clerk an application
requesting such permission, stating the location of the proposed soil
removal and the length of time required for the same, together with a map
of the premises showing the contour lines and proposed contour grades
resulting from such intended soil removal in relation to the topography of
the premises; and the said proposed contour lines and proposed grades
payment thereof, may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day any such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense
punishable as such hereunder.
B. Any person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation violating the
provision of § 100-4 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500 for each
violation.
§ 100-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 102-2
102:599
shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the Mayor and Council. No
such permission for soil removal shall be issued until the proposed contour
lines and grades have been approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 102-3. Criteria for evaluation.
The Mayor and Council, in considering and reviewing the application and
in arriving at its decision, shall be guided and take into consideration the
public health, safety and general welfare, and particular consideration shall
be given to the following factors:
§ 102-4. Hearing.
In the event permission is not granted, the applicant, upon written request
for a hearing made to the Mayor and Council, shall be given an opportunity
to be heard within 30 days thereafter.
§ 102-5. Permission granted.
If, after examining the application and the map provided for in § 102-2
hereof, or after the hearing in the event a hearing is requested by the
applicant, the Mayor and Council shall be of the opinion that the proposed
soil removal will not create conditions inimical to the public health, welfare
and safety and will not result in the creation of any sharp declivities, pits
or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems, depressed land values,
nor create any drainage, sewerage problems or other conditions of danger,
permission to remove the soil shall be granted. Such permission shall be
effective for a period of time to be determined by the Mayor and Council.
§ 102-6. Regulations governing removal.
If permission to remove the soil is granted, the owner or person in charge
shall conduct the operation so that there shall be a minimum of dust and dirt
in the air, that the streets are kept clean of falling soil from conveyances of
the same and that there are no sharp declivities, pits or depressions and in
such a manner that the area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris
and graded to conform with the contour lines and grades as approved by
the Mayor and Council.
A. Soil erosion by water and wind.
B. Drainage.
C. Soil fertility.
D. Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
E. Land values and uses.
F. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the borough.
§ 102-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 102-7
102:600
§ 102-7. Removal of topsoil prohibited.188
The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of the soil,
when permission has been duly granted, shall not take away the top layer
of arable soil for a depth of six inches, but such top layer of arable soil to a
depth of six inches shall be set aside for retention on the premises and shall
be respread over the premises when the rest of the soil has been removed,
pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 102-8. Fee; bond required.
Before any permit or permission for soil removal shall be granted or issued,
the owner or applicant shall pay to the Borough Clerk a fee in the amount
to be determined by the Mayor and Council and shall file with the Mayor
and Council a bond, with corporate surety authorized to do business in New
Jersey, in such an amount as shall be deemed sufficient by the Mayor and
Council to insure the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken
pursuant to the permission granted by the Mayor and Council under the
authority of this chapter. The obligation of said bond shall not be released
or terminated until the Mayor and Council are satisfied that the said work
has been completed in accordance with the said permit.
§ 102-9. Compliance required,
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed under the
provisions of this chapter unless a permit therefor shall have first been
obtained as provided herewith, and no excavation shall be made and no soil
removed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 102-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $200, or imprisonment
in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of
the Judge before whom such conviction shall be made. Each and every
violation and nonconformance of this chapter or each day that any provision
of this chapter shall have been violated shall be construed as a separate and
distinct violation thereof.
§ 102-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately after publication according to
law.
188. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 50, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations, § 50-11D.
§ 102-7 SOIL REMOVAL § 102-11
102:601
Chapter 104
SOLICITATIONS FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solicitors, peddlers and canvassers — See Ch.
105.
§ 104-1. Definitions. [Amended 5-5-1992 by Ord. No. 2647-92]
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Rutherford.
CHARITABLE — Includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service,
welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, either actual or
purported.
CLERK — The Borough Clerk of the Borough of Rutherford.
CONTRIBUTIONS — Includes the words food, clothing, money,
subscription, property, donations, gifts and contribution.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford.
PERSON — Any individual, association of individuals or corporation and
includes any trustee, agent or other similar representatives thereof.
PROMOTER — Any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes
or attempts to promote, manage, supervise or organize a campaign of
solicitation.
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — The request, directly or indirectly, of money,
credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea
or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or
other thing of value will be used for a charitable purpose as defined in
this chapter. A "solicitation" as herein defined shall be deemed completed
when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any
contribution.
§ 104-2. Permit required; exceptions.
No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable purpose within
this borough without a permit from the governing body authorizing such
solicitation; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not
apply to any established person organized and operated exclusively for
religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit
of any person if the solicitations by such established person are conducted
among the members thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for
making such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections
§ 102-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 104-2
104:602
or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of any such
established person.
§ 104-3. Application procedures; information required. [Amended
5-5-1992 by Ord. No. 2647-92189]
A written application for a permit to solicit as provided by § 104-2 of this
chapter shall be made to the Clerk upon forms provided by the borough.
Such application shall be sworn to and filed with the Clerk at least 30 days
prior to the time for which the permit is required. The Clerk shall place
said application on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the governing body. Said application shall contain the following information
or, in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reason or reasons why such
information cannot be furnished:
A. The name, address or headquarters of the person applying for the
permit.
B. If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the
applicant's principal officers and managers and a certified copy of the
resolution, if any, authorizing the solicitation.
C. The purpose for which the solicitation is to be made, the total amount of
funds proposed to be raised thereby and the use or disposition to be
made of any receipts therefrom.
D. A specific statement, supported by reasons and, if available, figures
showing the need for the contributions to be solicited.
E. The names and addresses of the person or persons by whom the
receipts of such solicitations shall be disbursed.
F. The names and addresses of the person or persons who will be in direct
charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all promoters
connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation.
G. Any outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the
solicitation.
H. The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred
dates for the beginning and ending of the same.
I. The estimated cost of the solicitation.
J. The amount of wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be
expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitation and
the names and addresses of all such persons.
K. A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds
collected for charitable purposes by the applicant, said statement
189. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 104-3, Solicitations Advisory Board
established, and renumbered the remaining sections of this chapter.
§ 104-2 SOLICITATIONS FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES § 104-3
104:603
§ 104-4. Evaluation of applications. [Amended 5-5-1992 by Ord. No.
2647-92]
Prior to review by the governing body, the Clerk shall examine all
applications and shall make or cause to be made such further investigation
of the application and the applicant as she shall deem necessary. Upon
request of the governing body, the applicant shall make available for
inspection by it, or any person designated in writing by the governing body
as its representative for such purpose, all of the applicant's books, records
and papers at any reasonable time before the application is granted, during
the time a permit is in effect or after a permit is granted.
§ 104-5. Criteria for issuance. [Amended 5-5-1992 by Ord. No.
2647-92]
The governing body shall authorize the issuance of a permit whenever it
shall find the following facts to exist:
giving the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising
it, and final distribution thereof. If any part of the total contributions
and income was derived from tag day appeals, the statement shall
indicate clearly the amount so derived, and that no part thereof has
been used for compensation of tag day solicitors.
L. A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work
being done by the applicant within the borough.
M. A statement that the actual cost of the solicitation will not exceed 20%
of the total amount to be raised.
N. A statement to the effect that, if a permit is granted, it will not be used
or represented in any way as an endorsement by the borough or by any
officer thereof.
O. Such other information as may be reasonably required by the governing
body in order for it to determine the kind and character of the proposed
solicitation and whether such solicitation is in the interest of, and not
inimical to, the public welfare.
A. That all of the statements made in the application are true.
B. That the applicant and all individuals associated with it, as officers
managers or agents, have a good character and reputation for honesty
and integrity.
C. That the control and supervision of the solicitation will be under
responsible and reliable persons.
D. That the applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or
enterprise.
E. That the solicitation will not be a fraud on the public.
§ 104-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 104-5
104:604
§ 104-6. Issuance; fee. [Amended 5-5-1992 by Ord. No. 2647-92]
Upon authorization of the governing body, the Clerk shall issue a permit
upon payment to her of a fee of $10 as a permit fee and the sum of $0.50 for
each copy of the permit.
§ 104-7. Regulations governing permits.
§ 104-8. Permits nontransferable.
Any permit issued under this chapter shall be nontransferable and it shall
be returned to the Clerk within two days of its date of expiration, together
with all copies thereof.
§ 104-9. Credentials required. [Amended 10-16-1962 by Ord. No.
1868; 5-5-1992 by Ord. No. 2647-92]
F. That the solicitation is promoted solely by a desire to finance the
charitable cause described in the application, and will not be conducted
primarily for private profit.
G. That the cost of raising the funds will be reasonable. Any such costs in
excess of 20% of the amount collected shall be considered to be
unreasonable unless special facts are presented showing that peculiar
reasons make a cost higher than 20% reasonable in the particular case.
A. Permits shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the
solicitation is to be made, permit number, the date issued, the dates
within which the permit holder may solicit and a statement that the
permit does not constitute an endorsement by the borough or by any of
its officers of the purpose or of the person conducting the solicitation.
All permits must be signed by the Clerk. No permit may grant the right
to solicit longer than 90 days from its date, but the governing body may
extend the same for not more than 90 additional days upon a showing
that unnecessary hardships would be created by a failure to extend the
same.
B. A permit for tag day solicitations shall be limited to only one such tag
day during one calendar year for any one person.
C. Solicitations authorized and permitted pursuant to this chapter shall be
conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. [Added
5-5-1992 by Ord. No. 2647-92; amended 7-6-1993 by Ord. No.
2681-93]
A. All persons to whom permits have been issued shall furnish credentials
to their agents and solicitors for such solicitation. Such credentials
shall include the name of the permit holder, the date of issuance, the
name and address of the solicitor to whom issued and the period of time
for which it is valid. A copy of such credentials must accompany the
filing of the application for approval by the governing body. No person
§ 104-5 SOLICITATIONS FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES § 104-9
104:605
§ 104-10. Receipts required; exceptions. [Amended 5-5-1992 by
Ord. No. 2647-92]
Any person receiving money or anything of value of $1 or more from any
contributor shall give to the contributor a written receipt signed by the
solicitor stating the name of the permit holder, the permit number, the date
and the amount received; provided, however, that this provision shall not
apply to any contributions collected by means of a closed box or receptacle
used in solicitations with the approval of the governing body where it is
impractical to determine the amount of such contribution.
§ 104-11. Revocation.
A permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the
governing body upon written complaint to it, and after public hearing being
afforded to the holder of the permit, charging fraud, misrepresentation
or false statement in the permit application, any violation of this chapter,
conviction by the holder of the permit or any of its managers or agents
of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or conducting the
solicitation in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute
a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or
general welfare of the public. The Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police of
any revocation or suspension of a permit.
§ 104-12. Accounts, records required.
No person shall solicit any contributions for any charitable purpose without
maintaining a system of accounting whereby all donations to it and all
disbursements are entered upon the books or records of such person's
treasurer or other financial officer.
§ 104-13. Financial report required.
It shall be the duty of all persons issued permits under this chapter to file
with the Clerk within 30 days after the solicitation has been completed or
within such further time as the governing body may allow a detailed report
and financial report showing the amount raised by the solicitation and the
amounts expended in collecting such funds.
§ 104-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not exceeding $200 and, in default
shall solicit under a permit without said credentials in his or her
possession. Said documents must be shown, upon request, to all
persons solicited or to any police officer of the borough.
B. Tag day solicitors shall be volunteers receiving no compensation for
their services.
§ 104-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 104-14
104:606
of payment thereof, may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for
a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 104-15. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable and if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held to be unconstitutional, the decision of the court
respecting such provision shall not affect the validity of any other provisions
which can be given effect without such invalid provision or provisions.
§ 104-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 105
SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise from peddlers or solicitors — See Ch.
63.
Peddling or soliciting in parks — See Ch. 73.
Sale of precious metals — See Ch. 77A.
Solicitations for charitable purposes — See
Ch. 104.
Special sales regulations — See Ch. 106.
§ 105-1. Definitions. [Amended 2-17-1998 by Ord. No. 2829-98]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — As used herein shall mean and include an individual, firm,
partnership or corporation.
PEDDLER — Any person, who, whether by foot or conveyance, goes from
person to person, or from house to house or from place to place, taking or
attempting to take orders or subscriptions for the sale, purchase or lease of
goods, wares or merchandise of any description for the purpose of selling
and delivering them to purchasers.
SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER — Any individual, whether a resident of the
Borough of Rutherford or not, traveling by foot or any other conveyance,
from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, taking
or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or for
services to be performed in the future, whether or not a sample is carried
or displayed and whether or not advance payments are collected; provided,
however, that this provision shall not apply to wholesale salesmen calling on
retail merchants.
§ 104-14 SOLICITATIONS FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES § 105-2
104:607
§ 105-2. License required; exception.
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of solicitor, peddler or
canvasser without first obtaining a license therefor from the Borough Clerk;
provided, however, that persons under 17 years of age are allowed to
solicit only when under the supervision of an adult, and said adult shall
be required to obtain a license as a solicitor, peddler or canvasser prior to
soliciting, peddling or canvassing in the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 105-3. Application procedure; information, references required.
All applications for licenses shall be in writing on forms furnished by
the Borough of Rutherford, signed by the applicant and presented to the
Borough Clerk. The said application shall state the full name, address or
addresses of the applicant for the preceding 3 years; height, weight and
place of birth of the applicant; whether or not the applicant has been
previously arrested or convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation
of a municipal ordinance, and, if so, the nature of the offense and the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor; the nature of the goods, wares
or merchandise to be sold, offered for sale or to be purchased; the name
and address of the applicant's employer, if any; the place where the goods
to be sold or orders taken therefor are manufactured and produced, where
such goods are located at the time the applications is filed and the proposed
method of delivery; a description of the vehicle to be used, if any; and the
names of at least two property owners of the County of Bergen and State
of New Jersey who will certify as to the applicant's good character and
business responsibility, or, in lieu of the names of references, such other
available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility
of the applicant as will enable an investigation to properly evaluate such
character and business responsibility. The application shall be accompanied
by a letter from the applicant's employer, if any, authorizing the applicant to
act as a representative. The application shall also be accompanied by a twoinch-
square passport-type photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days
of the filing of the application. The application shall be further accompanied
by a nonrefundable fee of $10 to cover the cost of investigation of the facts
therein stated.
§ 105-4. Investigation by Police Department. [Amended 5-28-2013
by Ord. No. 3291-13]
Upon receipt of the application for a license as herein provided, the
Borough Clerk shall forthwith transmit the same to the Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall also cause such investigation of the applicant's
business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the
protection of the public good. If, as a result of such investigation, the
applicant's character and business responsibility is found to be satisfactory,
the Chief of Police shall endorse his approval on the application and return
it to the Borough Clerk, who shall issue the license. If, as a result of
such investigation, the applicant's character and business responsibility are
found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse his disapproval
§ 105-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 105-4
104:608
on the application and return it to the Borough Clerk, and the license
shall not issue. In the event that the Chief of Police shall disapprove the
application, the applicant shall have the right to appeal such action of the
Chief of Police to the governing body, which body shall, after public hearing
being afforded to the applicant, affirm the action of the Chief of Police or
reverse the same and order the license to be issued by the Borough Clerk. A
fee in an amount established pursuant to § 76-27H of the Rutherford Code
shall be imposed for the background investigation. An additional fee shall
be charged at the rate permitted by the State of New Jersey law at the time
said request is made for the purpose of processing fingerprint identification
checks with the State Bureau of Identification.
§ 105-5. Records required.
The Borough Clerk shall keep an accurate list of all licenses issued pursuant
to this chapter in a book for that purpose.
§ 105-6. Photograph required; display of license.
The photograph of the license accompanying the application shall be
attached to the license and the licensee shall exhibit the license to any
police officer or other person upon request.
§ 105-7. Expiration date; renewal; fees. [Amended 5-28-2013 by
Ord. No. 3291-13]
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire exactly one year
from the date of issuance; provided, however, that licenses theretofore
issued may be renewed for a further period of one year upon the written
application of the holder of such a license for a renewal of the same made
to the Borough Clerk. Such application shall set forth any changes or
additions to the licensee's original application and shall be accompanied by
a nonrefundable fee of $10 to cover the cost of investigation of the facts
therein stated. The procedure to be followed with respect to an application
for an original or first license as set forth in this chapter shall apply to an
application for a renewal of such license to the extent that such procedure
is applicable.
§ 105-8. Hours restricted.
The business licensed pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted only on
weekdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
§ 105-9. State statutes govern.
The issuance of licenses hereunder shall be in strict compliance with
N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq.
§ 105-10. Location restrictions. [Added 2-17-1998 by Ord. No.
2829-98190]
§ 105-4 SOLICITATIONS FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES § 105-10
104:609
§ 105-11. Exception.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any charitable campaign to
be conducted with the approval of the governing body.191
§ 105-12. Revocation.
A license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the governing
body upon written complaint to it and after public hearing being afforded
to the licensee, charging fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in
the license application or in the course of carrying on the business; any
violation of this chapter; conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude; or conducting the licensed business in an unlawful manner
or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a
menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
§ 105-13. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held unconstitutional, the decision of the court respecting
such provision shall not affect the validity of any other provisions which can
be given effect without such invalid provision or provisions.
§ 105-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not exceeding $200 and in default
of payment thereof may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for
a term not exceeding 30 days. Every day on which such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall have any exclusive right to any
location in the public streets nor shall any be permitted a stationary
location thereon nor shall any be permitted to operate in a congested
area where such operations might impede or inconvenience the public
use of such streets. For the purpose of this subsection, the judgment of
the police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as
to whether the area is congested and the public impeded or
inconvenienced.
B. No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall conduct any trade or business of
any kind whatsoever within the Rutherford Business District (See
§ 131-7E). Nothing herein contained shall be construed to affect the
right of a duly licensed solicitor to solicit funds for charitable purposes
within said district. [Amended 2-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3451-18]
190. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered the subsequent sections as §§ 105-11
through 105-16, respectively.
191. Editor's Note: For regulations governing such campaigns see Ch. 104, Solicitations for
Charitable Purposes.
§ 105-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 105-15
104:610
§ 105-15. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 105-16. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 105A
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 105A, Special Improvement Districts, comprised of Art.
I, Park Avenue Business Improvement District, adopted 10-15-1996
by Ord. No. 2776-96, as amended, was repealed 9-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 3402-16.]
Chapter 106
SPECIAL SALE REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage and lawn sales — See Ch. 39A. Sale of precious metals — See Ch. 77A.
§ 106-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Rutherford.
BOROUGH LICENSE OFFICER — The Clerk of the Borough of Rutherford.
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALE — A sale held out in such a
manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer
goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.
GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE — A sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock
of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including
but not limited to the following sales: adjuster's; adjustment; alteration;
assignee's bankrupt; benefit of administrator's; benefit of creditors'; benefit
of trustees; building coming down; closing; creditor's committee; creditor's
end; executor's; final days; forced out; forced out of business; insolvents';
last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale; receiver's;
trustee's; quitting business.
GOODS — Includes any goods, wares, merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
§ 105-15 SPECIAL SALE REGULATIONS § 106-1
106:611
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or entity or any kind.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE — A sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale
will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the
stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new
location or will then continue business from other existing locations.
§ 106-2. License required.
A license issued by the Borough License Officer, bearing a license number
and the date on which the license was issued, shall be obtained by any
person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised
or held out by any means to be one of the following kinds as herein defined:
going-out-of-business sale; removal of business sale; and fire and other
altered goods sale.
§ 106-3. Establishment requirement.
Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or
described in the application for a license hereunder for a period of at least
six months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a
license, provided that, upon the death of a person doing business in the
borough, his or her heirs, devisees, legatees or representatives shall have
the right to apply at any time for a license hereunder.
§ 106-4. Interval between sales.
Any person who has held a sale, as regulated hereunder, at the location
stated in the application within one year past from the date of such
application shall not be granted a license.
§ 106-5. Applicability.
Where a person applying for a license hereunder operates more than one
place of business, the license shall apply only to the one store or branch
specified in the application and no other store or branch shall advertise or
represent that it is cooperating with it, or in any way participating in the
licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale
advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it
or participating in any way in the licensed sale.
§ 106-6. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect persons acting
pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; persons
acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials; duly
licensed auctioneers, selling at auction; any publisher of a newspaper,
magazine or other publication who in good faith publishes any
advertisement, without actual knowledge of its false, deceptive or
§ 106-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 106-6
106:612
misleading character, or without actual knowledge that the provisions of
this chapter have not been complied with.
§ 106-7. Application requirements; fee.
§ 106-8. Effect of license.
A. Written information required. A person desiring to conduct a sale
regulated by this chapter shall make a written application to the
License Officer setting forth and containing the following information:
(1) The true name and address of the person from whom the goods to
be sold were purchased and the price paid therefor, and if not
purchased, the manner of such acquisition.
(2) A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
(3) The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy.
(4) The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted.
(5) A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale,
including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of
goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted.
(6) The means to be employed in advertising such sale together with
the proposed content of any advertisement.
(7) A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such
sale as disclosed by applicant's records. Said inventory shall be
attached to and become a part of the application required under
this chapter. All goods included in such inventory shall have been
purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without
cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on
consignment. Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in
contemplation of or for the purpose of conducting any sale
regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase or additions to the
stock of goods of the applicant made within 60 days before the
filing of an application hereunder shall be deemed to be of such a
character.
B. License fee. Any applicant for a license hereunder shall submit to the
License Officer with the application for license a license fee of $5. Any
applicant for renewal of any license granted hereunder shall submit to
the License Officer with his application for renewal a renewal license
fee for $5.
A. License period and renewal procedure. The license shall authorize the
sale described in the application for a period of not more than 30
consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, following the
issuance thereof. The License Officer shall renew a license for one
§ 106-6 SPECIAL SALE REGULATIONS § 106-8
106:613
§ 106-9. Duties of licensee.
A licensee hereunder shall:
period of time only, such period to be in addition to the 30 days
permitted in the original license and not to exceed 30 consecutive
days, Sunday and holidays excepted, when the License Officer finds
that facts exist which justify the license renewal; that the licensee
has filed a written application for said renewal; that the licensee has
submitted with the application for renewal a revised inventory showing
the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold and not
listing any goods not included in the original application and inventory.
For the purposes of this subsection, an application for a license under
the provisions of this chapter covering goods previously inventoried as
required hereunder shall be deemed to be an application for renewal,
whether presented by the original applicant or by any other person.
B. Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only one type of sale
described in the application at the location named therein.
C. Salable goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods
described in the inventory attached to the application.
D. Surrender of general license. Upon being issued a license hereunder for
a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the License
Officer all other business licenses he may hold at that time applicable to
the location and goods covered by the application for a license under
this chapter.
E. Nontransferability. Any license hereunder provided for shall not be
assignable or transferable.
A. Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever, during the period
of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory
attached to the application for license.
B. Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or
misleading advertising, and in any advertisement by handbills,
circulars, placards, signs, notices, newspapers or publication or other
advertising, include therein the number and date of the license issued
by the License Officer.
C. Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity
with any advertising or holding out incident thereto.
D. Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate
of the inventory submitted with the application and present the same to
inspecting officials upon request.
E. Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and
apart from the goods on sale and make such distinction clear to the
public.
§ 106-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 106-10
106:614
§ 106-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount not exceeding
$100 or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days, or both, in
the discretion of the Judge. Each day any such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense punishable as such
hereunder.
§ 106-11. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distant
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
§ 106-12. Repealer.
Any and all ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting or inconsistent
with any of the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed but only to
the extent of any such conflict or inconsistency.
§ 106-13. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon its passage and publication according to
law.
Chapter 106A
SPORTS EQUIPMENT PROHIBITION IN ROADWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Skateboards, bicycles, roller skates and
scooters — See Ch. 98.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 109.
§ 106A-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
borough residents and the motoring public, by prohibiting the placement
of basketball sports equipment from being placed or used in the public
roadways and in the public rights-of-way.
§ 106A-2. Prohibition.
Basketball poles, nets, or hoops of any kind are hereby prohibited from
being used in and on any public street, roadway, right-of-way, sidewalk, curb
area, or tree apron within the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 106-10 SPORTS EQUIPMENT PROHIBITION IN § 106A-3
106A:615
§ 106A-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the terms and provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subjected to a fine of not more than $50
per offense.
§ 106A-4. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Borough of Rutherford Police Department to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 107A
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, STATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 37.
Subdivision and site plan regulations — See
Ch. 50.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 51.
Soil removal — See Ch. 102.
Borough stormwater management — See Ch.
102B.
Zoning — See Ch. 131.
§ 107A-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 107A-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
§ 106A-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-1
107A:616
§ 107A-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding Borough, generally including housing and access to public
transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be
a county planning agency or a county water resource association created
under N.J.S.A 58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates
authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Rutherford and the Borough of
Rutherford Board of Education.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 107A-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, § 107A-2
107A:617
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
§ 107A-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-2
107A:618
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Borough of Rutherford, the Borough of Rutherford Board
of Education, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
§ 107A-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, § 107A-2
107A:619
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 107A-3. General standards.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
§ 107A-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-3
107A:620
§ 107A-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 107A-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
(3) Alternative standards shall provide at least as much protection
from stormwater-related loss of groundwater recharge, stormwater
quantity and water quality impacts of major development projects
as would be provided under the standards in N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 107A-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 107A-4F and G.
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
§ 107A-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, § 107A-4
107A:621
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 107A-4F and G may be obtained for the enlargement
of an existing public roadway or railroad or the construction or
enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following
conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of § 107A-4F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 107A-4F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
§ 107A-4F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 107A-4F and
G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at § 107A-4E into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection E(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
§ 107A-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-4
107A:622
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 107A-4E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 107A-4E(2)(i)[2] above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see § 107A-4E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
§ 107A-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, § 107A-4
107A:623
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension. Examples of grates subject to this standard
include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm
sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 107A-4G(1) are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 107A-4G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 107A-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-4
107A:624
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 107A-4F and G
shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate county clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 107A-7, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 107A-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
§ 107A-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, § 107A-4
107A:625
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than reportable
quantities as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 107A-5, complete one of
the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
§ 107A-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-4
107A:626
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 107A-2 shall be submitted to
the appropriate soil conservation district for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable soil conservation district guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, agricultural development means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
§ 107A-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, § 107A-4
107A:627
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1
Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
§ 107A-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-4
107A:628
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 107A-7, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources
of technical guidance are listed in § 107A-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2
TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90
Extended detention basin 40 to 60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See § 107A-6C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60 to 80
Wet pond 50 to 90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
§ 107A-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, § 107A-4
107A:629
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 107A-4F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 107A-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
county soil surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
§ 107A-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-4
107A:630
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top-of-bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank
is undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subparagraph shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and soil conservation district
staff to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
§ 107A-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, § 107A-4
107A:631
§ 107A-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 107A-4G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4, Hydrology and
Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at § 107A-5A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at § 107A-5A(1)(b). A runoff coefficient
or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies
that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of
the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time
of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
§ 107A-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-5
107A:632
§ 107A-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is
in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn,
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land
use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
§ 107A-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, § 107A-6
107A:633
§ 107A-7. Sources for technical guidance.
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 107A-8D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 107A-8.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 107A-4 of this chapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 107A-4 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsections A(1) and A(2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures, such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
§ 107A-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-7
107A:634
§ 107A-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each soil conservation
district may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
§ 107A-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, § 107A-8
107A:635
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 107A-8C, freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See § 107A-8D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
§ 107A-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-8
107A:636
§ 107A-9. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks Borough approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at § 107A-9C below as part of the submission of the applicant's
application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter and all other applicable codes,
laws and ordinances governing stormwater management.
(3) The applicant shall submit 12 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
§ 107A-9C of this chapter.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's Site
Development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the Borough board or official from which
Borough approval is sought. That Borough board or official shall consult
the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this chapter.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
§ 107A-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, § 107A-9
107A:637
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map, as
appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 107A-3
through 107A-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
§ 107A-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-9
107A:638
§ 107A-10. Maintenance and repair.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 107A-4 of this chapter.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 107A-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The Borough official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the Borough Engineer, waive submission of any of
the requirements in § 107A-9C(1) through C(6) of this chapter
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 107A-1C of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements of § 107A-10B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
§ 107A-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL, § 107A-10
107A:639
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer as having the
responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 107A-10B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on § 107A-10B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 107A-10B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 107A-10B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 107A-10B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by § 107A-10B(6) and B(7) above.
(9) The requirements of § 107A-10B(3) and B(4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the Borough or another governmental agency. If same
are to be dedicated, the posting of a two-year maintenance
guarantee by the applicant and other requirements as to the
applicant shall be established under a development agreement with
§ 107A-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107A-10
107A:640
§ 107A-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, fails
to maintain, or uses any structure or land in violation of this chapter shall
be subject to the following penalties: Any person, firm or corporation who
or which shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof in any court authorized by law to hear and determine the matter,
be fined such sum not exceeding $500 as such court in its discretion may
impose or, if the party so convicted is a natural person, such person may
receive both a fine in accordance with this section and may be imprisoned
for such term not exceeding 90 days as such court in its discretion may
impose.
§ 107A-12. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the ordinance by the county
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.
Chapter 107B
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, BOROUGH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 37.
Land subdivision and site plan
regulations — See Ch. 50.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 51.
Soil removal — See Ch. 102.
State-mandated stormwater control — See
Ch. 107A.
Zoning — See Ch. 131.
the public agency and/or as part of the dedication process,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the Borough shall so notify the responsible
person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible
person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and repair of the
facility in a manner that is approved by the Borough Engineer or
his designee. The Borough, in its discretion, may extend the time
allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for good cause. If the
responsible person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance
and repair, the Borough or county may immediately proceed to do
so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Borough in which the major
development is located from requiring the posting of a performance or
maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
§ 107A-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, BOROUGH § 107A-12
107B:641
§ 107B-1. Intent and purposes.
§ 107B-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. The general intent of this chapter is to manage the increased rate and
velocity of surface water runoff created by certain alterations of the
ground cover and natural runoff patterns.
B. This chapter is deemed essential and necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Rutherford
and the surrounding communities by accomplishing the following
purposes:
(1) To reduce flood damage to public health, life and property.
(2) To minimize increased stormwater runoff from any new land
development.
(3) To maintain the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and
bridges.
(4) To induce water recharge into the ground where practical.
(5) To prevent, to the greatest extent feasible, an increase in non-pointsource
pollution.
(6) To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage and other purposes.
(7) To reduce the impact of development upon stream erosion in areas
where this would be detrimental.
(8) To reduce erosion from any development or construction project.
(9) To minimize the increases in runoff pollution due to land
development which otherwise would degrade the quality of water
and might render it both unfit for human consumption and
detrimental to biological life.
(10) To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources
by means of controlling harmful flood discharges, stream erosion
and runoff pollution.
(11) To reduce public expenditures for replacement or repair of public
facilities resulting from artificially induced flood peaks.
C. Any and all other purposes set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-93 are herein
incorporated into this chapter.
A. Word usage. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein
indicated. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
§ 107A-12 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107B-2
107B:642
singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the
word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual.
B. Terms defined. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms and words
listed in this section shall have the same meanings herein given. Terms
and words not defined herein shall have, for the purposes of this
chapter, the meanings given them in Chapter 37, Flood Damage
Prevention; Chapter 50, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations;
and Chapter 131, Zoning, as the same now reads or may be amended.
Terms and words not defined herein or in these chapters but defined in
the Municipal Land Use Law192 shall have, for the purposes of this
chapter, the meanings given them in the Municipal Land Use Law, its
amendments or supplements thereto. Terms and words not defined in
any of the foregoing sources shall have the meanings established by
common usage of the words unless the context herein clearly indicates
the contrary. The following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings when used herein:
APPLICANT — Any person, partnership, corporation or public agency
requesting permission to engage in land disturbance activity,
construction or development.
APPROVED PLAN — A plan to control stormwater runoff approved
by the Borough of Rutherford Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Borough of Rutherford except
where the Board of Adjustment is authorized to act pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-76b, in which case it shall mean the Board of Adjustment of the
Borough of Rutherford.
CHANNEL — A watercourse with definite bed and banks which confine
and conduct continuously or intermittently flowing water.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT — An agreement or covenant running
with the land which prohibits all land or vegetation disturbance in favor
of a permanent dedication to natural open space, each agreement to be
entered into between the applicant and the Borough.
DESIGN STORM — The most intense probable precipitation to occur in
a given region in a twenty-four-hour period, with a frequency of once in
one, five, 25 or 100 years.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage channels are required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the
flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 58:1, 13:1A-8 and 13:1A-12.
193
192. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
193. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 58:1-1 et seq. was repealed; see now N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.
Furthermore, N.J.S.A. 13:1A-8 was repealed by Chapter 78 of the Laws of 1981; see now
§ 107B-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, BOROUGH § 107B-2
107B:643
DRAINAGEWAY — Any watercourse, trench, ditch, depression or other
hollow space in the ground, natural or artificial, which collects or
disperses surface water from land.
ENGINEER — The Borough Engineer or his designee.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — Any area which should not
be disturbed by uses incompatible with the paramount public interest
in the prevention of surface water runoff and attendant environmental
damage. Examples of "environmentally critical areas" include but are
not limited to lakes, ponds, floodplains and flood hazard areas,
designated stream corridors, steep slopes, highly erodible soil
wetlands, swamps, bogs, marshes, aquifer recharge and discharge
areas and heavily wooded areas.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting, filling of land and any other activity which alters land,
topography or vegetative cover.
NATURAL DRAINAGE FLOW — The topographical pattern or system of
drainage of surface water runoff from a particular site, including the
various drainageways and watercourses which carry surface water only
during periods of heavy rains, storms or floods.
NON-POINT-SOURCE — Surface water entering a channel from no
definable discharge source.
RUNOFF — The part of precipitation as well as any other flow
contribution which appears in surface streams or watercourses, natural
or artificial.
SEASONAL HIGH-GROUNDWATER TABLE — As shown in the Bergen
County Soil Survey, subject to field investigation.
SURFACE WATER — All water produced by precipitation, flood,
drainage, springs, seeps or other man-made discharge flowing over the
land or contained within a natural or artificial watercourse.
SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan prepared by a New
Jersey licensed professional engineer, consistent with the purposes and
policies of this chapter, which fully indicates necessary land treatment
measures and techniques, including a schedule for implementation and
maintenance and discharge calculation.
SURFACE WATER RUNOFF — That part of runoff which travels over
the ground surface and through channels, natural and artificial.
SURFACE WATER RUNOFF DAMAGE — All damage or harm to
property values, land, vegetation and water supplies, including but
not limited to flooding, soil erosion, siltation and other pollution of
watercourses and diminished recharge of groundwater supply, which
damage results or is likely to result when the dispersion of surface
N.J.S.A. 13:1B-49.1 et seq. Furthermore, N.J.S.A. 13:1A-12 was repealed by Chapter 78 of
the Laws of 1981.
§ 107B-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107B-2
107B:644
§ 107B-3. Administration.
Except as may be hereinafter provided, this chapter shall be administered
by the Planning Board of the Borough.
§ 107B-4. When approval required.
The surface water management plan shall be approved by the Planning
Board prior to site plan approval, except as hereafter provided, and for any
applications for preliminary approval of major subdivisions, as defined in
Chapter 50, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations, of the Code of the
Borough of Rutherford, New Jersey.
§ 107B-5. Approval of surface water management plan required;
procedures; waiver.
water typical of the land in a meadow of good hydrologic condition is
increased in rate, velocity or quantity.
WATERCOURSE — All rivers, streams, brooks, waterways, lakes,
ponds, marshes, swamps, bogs and all other bodies of water, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or
border on the Borough or any portion thereof.
WATERSHED — An area of surface water runoff related to a point of
concentration, such as the topographically determined confluence with
another body of water or a man-made culvert, etc.
A. No person shall engage in any land disturbance activity on any property
within the Borough unless he shall have submitted a surface water
management plan to the Planning Board and obtained approval of such
plan and permit or a written waiver of necessity from the Planning
Board.
B. The Planning Board may waive the need for a stormwater management
plan upon recommendation of the Borough Engineer after finding that
there is no appreciable increase anticipated in rate, velocity or duration
of runoff based on plans and drainage calculations submitted.
C. The Board may waive the specific requirements of this chapter upon
recommendation of the Borough Engineer where such waiver would be
in the best interest of the Borough of Rutherford. Any waiver by the
Borough of Rutherford does not waive the requirements of any other
governmental agencies.
D. Approval by Planning Board.
(1) The surface water management plan and all major amendments
thereto shall be approved by the Planning Board after review and
favorable report by the Borough Engineer as provided in this
chapter.
§ 107B-2 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, BOROUGH § 107B-5
107B:645
§ 107B-6. Required data.
The applicant shall submit a separate surface water management plan for
any proposed site plan or major subdivision except as may be provided in
§ 107B-9. The surface water management plan shall be coordinated with the
sedimentation and erosion control plan required pursuant to P.L. 1975, c.
251 (N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.), as amended. The plan shall contain but not be
limited to the following data:
(2) The Planning Board, in approving said surface water management
plan, may impose lawful conditions or requirements designated or
specified thereon or in connection therewith. These conditions and
requirements shall be provided and maintained as a condition to
the establishment, maintenance and continuance of the use and
occupation of the affected land.
E. Minor amendments to a surface water management plan may be
approved by the Engineer, who shall notify the Planning Board of the
nature and reason for the change.
A. Lot and block numbers of the site as shown on the current Tax Map of
the Borough.
B. The name and address of the owner of the site and of the applicant, if
different from the owner.
C. A topographic survey of all watersheds tributary to and including the
site. Said survey shall be drawn at a scale which, in the opinion of the
Borough Engineer, is adequate to depict accurately all elements critical
to the plan. The use of aerial topography available from the Borough is
encouraged.
D. Mapping of hydrologic soil types as extracted from the latest edition of
the Soil Survey of Bergen County, New Jersey, published by the United
States Department of Agriculture.
E. An inventory of existing features, both natural and man-made, including
topography, marshes, woods, agricultural lands, rock outcrops,
impervious areas and the extent, location, description and rating of
significant stormwater structures such as swales, ditches, streams,
diversions, ponds, pipelines, culverts and other man-made devices.
F. The location, description and quantification of proposed changes to the
site, including an inventory of land uses and other features which will
alter runoff patterns, volumes and rates or which will otherwise have an
impact upon the ability of soils, vegetation and drainage facilities to
perform satisfactorily.
G. The designation of critical or other areas to be left undisturbed, shown
in sufficient detail to be accurately marked on the land.
§ 107B-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107B-6
107B:646
H. A computation of the total surface water runoff before and after the
disturbance of land and/or construction of impervious surface.
I. The location, description and rating of proposed surface water facilities
with details, as necessary, to illustrate the construction of all significant
components.
J. Profiles and cross-sections of all streams, 500 feet upstream and
downstream of the tract.
K. The construction sequence schedule for the implementation of the
recommendations of the surface water management plan.
L. Additional data and information and revisions as required by the
Planning Board.
M. Draft deed restrictions and agreements for joint ownership by the
developer and his assigns of detention or retention facilities and
drainage structures which are required by the development.
(1) Detention and retention basins and other structures which are not
to be within the right-of-way of roadways which will be dedicated to
the Borough shall remain the property of and shall be maintained
by the developer or his assigns.
(2) Retention and detention basins and the land on which they are
constructed and appurtenant structures shall be owned and
maintained by a property owner's association which shall include
all of the proposed lots in the development.
(3) The Borough shall have the right to enter upon private property to
inspect the condition of all drainage structures, including retention
and detention basins, to determine if they are being maintained in a
manner which will permit them to operate as designed.
(4) In the event that maintenance is not being accomplished in an
adequate and proper manner in the opinion of the Borough Council,
the owners of the lands upon which such drainage structures exist
may be served written notice setting forth the manner in which the
owners have failed to maintain such drainage structures and
including a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be
remedied within 45 days thereof and stating the date and place of a
hearing thereon, which shall be held within 15 days of notice. At
such hearing, the Borough Council may modify the terms of the
original notice as to deficiencies and may give a reasonable
extension of time, not to exceed 65 days, within which they shall be
remedied. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modification thereof shall not be remedied within said 45 days or
any permitted extension thereof, the Borough Council may enter
upon such land for the purpose of maintaining the drainage
structures contained thereon.
§ 107B-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, BOROUGH § 107B-6
107B:647
§ 107B-7. Review and approval of plans.
(5) The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed pro
rata against the properties within the development in accordance
with assessed value at the time of imposition of the lien and shall
become a lien and tax on said properties and be added to and be a
part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon and shall be
enforced and collected with interest by the same officers and in the
same manner as other taxes.
N. A design of all retention and detention facilities containing a flood
routing through the facility in the form of an inflow-outflow hydrograph
using any of the following methods: Puls Method, Muskingum Method,
Average Lag Method, Working Value Method or other method approved
by the Borough Engineer. Inflow hydrograph shall be determined by
Triangular or SCS Method, whichever is applicable, or other method
approved by the Borough Engineer.
O. The plan's ability to comply with applicable state regulations, as
formulated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
A. Surface water management plans shall be reviewed by the Planning
Board with the advice and assistance of the Engineer. The Planning
Board's consideration of applications shall be guided by but not limited
to the following factors:
(1) The suitability of the applicant's proposed surface water
management measures, devices and planning techniques, whether
involving on-site or off-site measures, or some combination thereof,
in respect to the total surface runoff, velocities and rates of
discharge which the applicant's proposed construction or land
disturbance may generate.
(2) Existing and proposed topography, present vegetation and
hydrologic soil features.
(3) Groundwater recharge and discharge areas, wet soils and seasonal
high groundwater table; alluvial, poorly drained and somewhat
poorly drained soils.
(4) The design storm.
(5) Natural drainage flow and pattern throughout the subwatershed
affected by the plan.
(6) Land uses in both the immediate vicinity and the surrounding
drainage region.
(7) Any other applicable or relevant environmental and resource
protection statutes, regulations and provisions of this chapter.
(8) Any other factors relevant to the coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development of the site, vicinity, township and region.
§ 107B-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107B-7
107B:648
§ 107B-8. Minimum surface water management plan standards.
The following are the minimum design standards acceptable to the
Borough. Should the state or county agencies have jurisdiction in this area,
the more stringent of all regulations shall apply.
B. If, after considering the above factors and after consultation with the
Engineer, the Planning Board determines that the proposed land
disturbance or construction will generate no surface water runoff that
will not be managed in accordance with standards of this chapter or will
not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare in
light of the paramount interest in the prevention of conditions which
may result in surface runoff damage, the Planning Board shall approve
the plan and issue the necessary permit. If the Planning Board shall
determine, after consultation as provided above, that the proposed land
disturbance or construction will be detrimental to the public interest as
defined above, the Planning Board shall deny the permit and shall
clearly and concisely state the reasons.
A. General standards.
(1) The rate of surface water runoff from the site for one-year, fiveyear,
ten-year, twenty-five-year and one-hundred-year frequency
storms considered individually following project completion shall
not exceed that which prevailed prior to disturbance.
(2) Efforts shall be made to minimize land disturbance, the
introduction of impervious surfaces and the alteration of recharge
areas.
(3) Natural retention areas such as ponds, depressions and marshes
shall be preserved and integrated into the management plan to the
greatest extent possible.
(4) Surface water shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another.
(5) Surface water runoff shall be controlled in such a manner as to
avert the need for modification or addition of off-site drainage
structures unless adequate provision has been made therefor.
(6) The plan should coordinate with the soil erosion sediment control
plan.
(7) To the greatest possible extent, the plan shall avoid the
concentration of flow and shall provide for dissipation of velocities
at all concentrated discharge points.
(8) Reestablishing vegetative cover shall be in accordance with the
Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
in New Jersey, latest addition.
§ 107B-7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, BOROUGH § 107B-8
107B:649
(9) Timing for the plan shall establish permanent stormwater
management measure prior to construction or other land
disturbance, to include seeding and establishing sod in grass
standards.
B. Specific standards.
(1) The surface water management plan shall incorporate a detailed
collection system designed to convey satisfactorily all runoff
originating not only on the site but also from areas tributary to the
site.
(2) Surface water runoff to be accommodated by the collection and
retention/detention system shall be computed through use of
methodology published in Technical Release No. 55, United States
Department of Agriculture, or by the rational formula:
Q = CiA
Where
Q = The design runoff in cubic feet per second.
C = The runoff coefficient.
i = The rainfall intensity in inches per hour.
A = The area, in acres, tributary to proposed structure.
(3) Drainage design for all watersheds of 10 acres or less shall use the
rational formula; of 10 to 100 acres shall use the rational formula
or TR55 Method of Analysis; and of over 100 acres shall use the
TR55 Method of Analysis. Where the rational formula is employed,
the following parameters shall govern:
Runoff Coefficient C
Topographic Grade
Land Use
0% to
10%
10% to
20% Over 20%
Wooded .25 .30 .35
Pasture, lawn, grassed
areas and cultivated
fields
.30 .35 .40
Except cornfields .45 .50 .55
Impervious surfaces .95 .95 .95
Residential
1 unit per acre or less .40 .45 .50
1 to 3 units per acre .45 .50 .55
3 to 6 units per acre .50 .55 .60
Above 6 units per acre .60 .65 .70
§ 107B-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107B-8
107B:650
Runoff Coefficient C
Topographic Grade
Land Use
0% to
10%
10% to
20% Over 20%
Other As approved by Borough Engineer
(4) Rainfall intensity i.
(a) The rainfall intensity for facility design shall be based on
rainfall intensity/duration curves applicable to Bergen County.
Consideration shall be given to the position and use of the
structure within the drainage system by assuming conservative
design storms in critical areas. Generally, the following
minimum recurrence intervals shall apply:
[1] Cross drains, pipes or culverts crossing roadways: 25
years.
[2] Grassed waterways and diversions: 10 years.
[3] At low points subject to roadway flooding: 25 years.
[4] Riprap protection: 25 years.
[5] Retention or detention basins: 100 years.
(b) Times of concentration shall be representative of land use,
cover and slope and shall be acceptable to the Borough
Engineer.
C. Pipelines.
(1) Construction standards and details shall comply with Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1989, New Jersey
State Highway Department, or latest revision.
(2) Pipe shall be sized by use of the Manning Formula. Actual pipe
design capacity shall not exceed 95% of flowing-full capacity with
head and tail water considerations, except that no pipe shall be less
than 15 inches in diameter. Minimum velocity at flowing-full
condition shall be three feet per second. Maximum velocity shall be
20 feet per second.
(3) Pipes under and adjacent to roadways or which are to be
maintained by the Borough shall be reinforced concrete.
(4) Friction factor "n" for concrete pipe shall be 0.013 and for
corrugated metal pipe shall be 0.024.
(5) All transitions in slope, horizontal direction and junctions shall be
confined to manholes, catch basins or other accessible structures.
D. Open channel flow.
§ 107B-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, BOROUGH § 107B-8
107B:651
(1) Standards for design and construction shall comply with Soil
Conservation Service (SCS) standards.
(2) Maximum velocities shall be limited to values permitted in the SCS
standards for the soil types existing on the site.
(3) The Manning Formula shall be used for sizing open channels.
Values of "n" shall be consistent with the lining of the channel and
the velocity of flow.
E. Retention/detention basins.
(1) Retention or detention basins constitute an acceptable means of
achieving the goals stated in § 107B-1. Innovative techniques for
limiting peak runoff are encouraged. All methods are subject to
review by the Borough Engineer and to approval by the Board.
(2) Where basins are used, they shall be so located on the site as to
pose the least potential hazard and nuisance to downstream and
surrounding properties. As a minimum, all portions of the basin,
including earthen embankments, shall comply with the setback
requirements applicable to the zone in which they are situated.
Notwithstanding conformance to the setback limitations, the
location must be satisfactory to the Board.
(3) Standards of design for detention of floodwater-retarding
structures shall conform to the following criteria or to those
promulgated pursuant to the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act of 1975.194 Should said standards be contradictory, the more
stringent shall apply. The design inflow shall be determined for the
drainage areas as stated above (see § 107B-6N). A storm of onehundred-
year frequency and twenty-four-hour duration shall
govern the size of the basin. The basin shall have the demonstrated
capability to attenuate storms of the one-, twenty-five- and onehundred-
year frequencies to the extent required. Emergency
spillways shall be adequate for a one-hundred-year storm flow plus
33%.
(4) Earthen embankments.
(a) Earthen embankments and slopes shall not exceed 3:1 on the
downstream slope and 2:1 on the upstream slope. Where
embankments are proposed, they shall be provided with a level
top which affords sufficient stability and accessibility. The
following shall be considered as minimum top widths:
194. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 107B-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107B-8
107B:652
§ 107B-9. Exemptions.
The following are specifically exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
Height of Dam
(feet)
Top Width
(feet)
0 to 15 10
15 to 20 12
20 to 25 14
(b) Earthen dams and embankments shall be provided with an
adequate clay core. They shall be constructed from suitable
materials and shall be compacted to 95% of maximum
laboratory density as determined by ASTM 1557 Method D.
The applicant shall provide the services of a testing laboratory
as directed by the Borough Engineer to confirm that proper
compaction has been achieved. The entire basin construction
shall be subjected to inspection by the Borough Engineer.
Embankments shall be constructed to a height above the
design top elevation to accommodate settling plus two-foot
freeboard. The use of embankments as driveways is
discouraged. Dams and embankments must be maintained free
from trees, burrows and erosion during the life of the facility.
(5) Principal spillways and affiliated components must have a design
life at least equal to that of the entire basin. Outlets shall promote
stable downstream channel conditions. Trash racks to prevent
spillway fouling shall be considered. All basins shall also have an
emergency spillway in addition to the principal outflow structure.
Basins designed to retain waters during dry weather periods shall
not be acceptable.
(6) In general, fencing around the periphery of the basin for security
shall be provided only upon recommendation from the Board,
which shall also determine the type and height on a case-by-case
basis.
A. Minor subdivisions as defined in Chapter 50, Land Subdivision and Site
Plan Regulations.
B. Site plans for development where the vegetative cover of the land will
not be disturbed.
C. Agricultural use of lands when operated in accordance with a
conservation plan approved by the local Soil Conservation District.
D. Single-family dwelling construction on individual lots not a part of any
larger development, together with the construction of permitted
accessory buildings and driveway construction thereof.
§ 107B-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, BOROUGH § 107B-10
107B:653
§ 107B-10. Implementation.
§ 107B-11. Fees.
Application and inspection fees shall be as established in Chapter 51, Land
Use Procedures. If the project for which application has been made under
this chapter is included in a site plan or major subdivision, no additional
application or inspection fees will be charged.
§ 107B-12. Enforcement.
If at any time the Engineer finds existing conditions not as stated in the
applicant's approved plan, the Planning Board or its designated agent shall
order cessation of all work and request the Borough to seek to enjoin the
violation or take such steps as may be necessary and lawful to enforce
compliance with the plan.
§ 107B-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in any court authorized by law
to hear and determine the matter, be fined such sum not exceeding $500
as such court in its discretion may impose or, if the party so convicted is a
natural person, such person may be imprisoned for such term not exceeding
90 days as such court in its discretion may impose or be fined such sum not
A. Critical impact areas and other areas to be left undisturbed shall be
physically marked with survey stakes or protected by a temporary snow
fence prior to any land disturbance.
B. The Planning Board shall require the construction and/or installation of
surface water management improvements in accordance with the
schedule of sequence of installation as approved.
C. The applicant shall bear full and final responsibility for the installation
and construction of all required surface water runoff control measures
according to the provisions of the approved plan and this chapter. The
Borough Engineer shall inspect the site during its preparation and
development and certify that all surface water management measures
have been constructed in accordance with the provisions of the
applicant's approved plan. During the 12 months subsequent to the
date of completion, the Engineer shall periodically inspect the site to
ascertain that the provisions of the applicant's approved plan are
complied with, including limit of contract for areas to be left
undisturbed. The Engineer shall give the applicant, upon request, a
certificate indicating the date on which the required measures were
completed and/or accepted.
D. Bonding. The Board shall provide for the posting of performance
guaranties and maintenance bonds, in accordance with the
recommendations of the Borough Engineer.
§ 107B-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107B-13
107B:654
exceeding $500 as such court in its discretion may impose or such natural
person may be both imprisoned and fined not exceeding the maximum limits
set forth herein, as such court in its discretion may impose.
Chapter 107C
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL: FEEDING OF
WILDLIFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 10.
Dogs, pets, animals and kennels — See Ch. 26.
Playgrounds, parks, open spaces and
recreation areas — See Ch. 73.
State stormwater management control — See
Ch. 107A.
Borough stormwater management — See Ch.
107B.
§ 107C-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife,
including pigeons, in any open space, public property, or recreation area
owned or operated by the Borough of Rutherford, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and so as to contribute to the overall
enforcement of Borough's stormwater management control rules and
regulations.
§ 107C-2. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, provide, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
OPEN SPACES — Those public lands owned by the Borough of Rutherford,
devoted to the general public of the Borough of Rutherford, known as
Williams Center Plaza, Lincoln Park, Sunset Park, Van Winkle Park,
Firefighter's Memorial, Waterfront Park, and Lincoln Woods.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All public lands and buildings owned or operated by
the Borough of Rutherford, including, but not limited to, all public streets,
§ 107B-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL: § 107C-2
107C:655
all public sidewalks, all public rights-of-way, any easement areas given in
favor of the Borough, the Borough Hall property, the Borough Hall Annex
property, the Borough Department of Public Works property, the Borough
library property, Borough firehouse properties, the Kip Center property, the
Borough parking lots and garages, and all public school properties under
the title or control of the Borough of Rutherford Board of Education.
RECREATION AREAS — Those public lands owned by the Borough of
Rutherford, devoted to active or passive recreation, known as Memorial
Park, Tamblyn Field, Tryon Field, and Harold Wall Field, and the
playgrounds, picnic areas, fields, courts, buildings, and parking lots
adjacent to or part of these designated places.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated,
including pigeons.
§ 107C-3. Feeding wildlife prohibited.
No person shall feed or cause to be fed any wildlife in any open space,
public property, or recreation area. This prohibition does not apply to the
feeding of confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks
or rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education
centers).
§ 107C-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 107C-5. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this chapter.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Borough of Rutherford Health
Department.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
C. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$1,000 for each violation. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of this chapter. The
penalties herein prescribed shall apply to such separate and specific
offenses.
§ 107C-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107C-5
107C:656
Chapter 107D
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT, MISCELLANEOUS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 37.
State stormwater management control — See
Ch. 107A.
Borough stormwater management — See Ch.
107B.
Stormwater management control: feeding of
wildlife — See Ch. 107C.
§ 107C-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL: § 107C-5
107C:657

ARTICLE I
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 3-27-2012 by Ord. No. 3251-12]
§ 107D-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Rutherford so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 107D-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Rutherford or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 107D-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
§ 107D-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL: § 107D-3
107C:659
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with any existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 107D-4. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 107D-3 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard, see § 107D-4C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 107D-4 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under the grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 107D-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 107D-4
107C:660
§ 107D-5. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Department of Public Works and
the Construction Code Official; each shall have enforcement authority
coterminous with but separate from the other.
§ 107D-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subjected to a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each storm drain inlet
that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
§ 107D-4 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL: § 107D-6
107C:661
Chapter 108
STREETS AND SCHOOL SAFETY
§ 108-1. Authorization for temporary street closing.
The Mayor of the Borough of Rutherford is hereby authorized, if he shall
find that a safety problem exists for ingress and egress to any public or
private school or for the provision of recreational facilities for children
attending such school, or both, due to the lack of suitable area surrounding
the school, to close by regulation any portion of any street within the block
upon which such school is located, to the use of through traffic during such
time as he shall determine, not to exceed one hour between 7:30 and 10:00
a.m., two hours between 11:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and one hour between
2:30 and 4:30 p.m., on any days upon which such school is in session and to
permit the use of said portion of said street, during said hours, for ingress
and egress to such school and for the use by the pupils of such school for
recreational purposes, under proper supervision, and to provide adequate
police facilities for such supervision and for the control of traffic upon such
portion of said street.
§ 108-2. Signs required.
Proper warning signs shall be posted in said street indicating that the street
is so closed and the purpose thereof during the time when the same is so
closed.
§ 108-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-3-1965 by Ord. No.
1948-65]
Any person, association of persons or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or any regulations promulgated hereunder shall
be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 108-4. When effective. [Amended 11-3-1965 by Ord. No. 1948-65]
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication of this chapter
according to law.
§ 107D-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 108-4
108:662
Chapter 109
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 12.
Commercial property maintenance — See Ch.
21A.
Land subdivision and site plan
regulations — See Ch. 50.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 51.
Littering — See Ch. 21 and Ch. 53.
Placement of dumpsters — See Ch. 56.
Newspaper vending machines — See Ch. 62.
Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 91.
Skateboards, bicycles, roller skates and
scooters — See Ch. 98.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 107.
Closing of streets for school safety — See Ch.
108.
Closing of streets for events — See Ch. 110.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 113.
Towing — See Ch. 117.
Trees and shrubbery Shade — See Ch. 120.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 125.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 126.
Zoning — See Ch. 131.
§ 108-4 STREETS AND SCHOOL SAFETY § 108-4
108:663

ARTICLE I
Regulation of Streets and Sidewalks
[Adopted 4-2-1946 by part of Ord. No. 1475, effective 4-2-1946]
§ 109-1. Regulation of width.
Upon the opening of a street or avenue to its full width, each sidewalk being
a part of such street or avenue shall be 1/5 of the entire width of such
street or avenue, or such width as the Mayor and Council may direct in
an ordinance authorizing the opening of such street or avenue; provided,
however, that where 1/5 of the street or avenue shall contain a fractional
part of a foot, then such fraction shall be placed in the roadway.
§ 109-2. Grading.
All streets and avenues shall be graded to their full width, including
sidewalks and slopes, and the grade of all streets and avenues shall be the
elevation of the top of the curb, unless otherwise specified in an ordinance
authorizing such grading.
§ 109-3. Regulations governing construction and maintenance.
[Amended 6-5-1956 by Ord. No. 1707; 11-23-2010 by Ord. No.
3214-10]
The owner of lands abutting upon any street or avenue which is in use by
the public as a thoroughfare or laid down upon a map and about to be
opened for use by the public as a thoroughfare shall construct, maintain
and keep in repair a concrete or bluestone sidewalk in the area specified
and allotted for sidewalks at the sole cost and expense of said owner;
provided, however, that when approved by resolution of the Mayor and
Council alternative surfaces may be utilized; provided, however, that a
driveway consisting of a hard-top material other than concrete or bluestone
may be constructed in that portion of the sidewalk area not in use for
a sidewalk; and provided further, that in a business or industrial district,
as delineated in the ordinances concerning zoning,195 a concrete sidewalk
may be constructed in the entire area allotted to sidewalks, or such part
thereof as the Mayor and Council shall approve upon written application
being made for the same; and provided further, that a hard-top material
other than concrete or bluestone may be used in the portion of the sidewalk
area between the space thereof specified and allotted for sidewalks and
the property line when the land adjacent thereto is used for an automobile
service station or a public or private parking lot and the land surface
thereof, not occupied by a building or buildings, is covered or paved with
a similar material; and further provided that the sidewalk area not in use
for a sidewalk shall not be covered with any hard-top material other than
as heretofore provided in this section without prior approval therefore from
the Mayor and Council.
195. Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Zoning.
§ 109-1 STREETS AND SCHOOL SAFETY § 109-4
108:665
§ 109-4. Driveway construction. [Added 7-2-1957 by Ord. No. 1722;
amended 12-1-1998 by Ord. No. 2877-98]
All driveways extending through that portion of a sidewalk area not in
use for a sidewalk shall be covered with a hard-top material. No person,
firm, partnership, association or corporation shall construct a driveway or
resurface an existing driveway unless such work is authorized by a written
permit issued by the Building Department.
§ 109-4.1. Application for driveway permit; required information.
[Added 2-1-1998 by Ord. No. 2877-98]
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation desiring a permit
for construction of a driveway or resurfacing of an existing driveway shall
make application therefor to the Building Department, upon forms provided
for that purpose, for each such driveway. A separate application shall be
made and a separate permit issued for each driveway to be constructed or
resurfaced by the permittee.
§ 109-5. Standards for sidewalk grades.
The grade of a sidewalk shall be according to the standard established by
the Borough Engineer.
§ 109-6. Construction standards.
When bluestone curb is used, the depth of a gutter shall not exceed six
inches where a sixteen-inch curb is used, and where the volume of water
requires a deeper gutter than six inches, a twenty-inch curb shall be used.
When concrete curb is used, it shall be 20 inches deep and in accordance
with standards set up by the Borough Engineer.
§ 109-7. Grades required.
Before commencing the work of constructing curbs, paving gutters or laying
sidewalks, the lines or grades for the same must first be obtained from the
Borough Engineer.
A. The application shall show or include the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property for whom the work is to be performed.
(3) The location of the property at which the work is to be performed.
(4) The extent and nature of the work to be performed.
(5) An accurate survey of the property on which shall be depicted the
proposed driveway, including dimensions of same.
§ 109-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 109-8
108:666
§ 109-8. Additional construction standards.
The construction of curbs, paving of gutters and the laying of sidewalks,
together with the materials of the same, shall be in accordance with the
standards set by the Borough Engineer, and said construction shall be under
the direction of said Borough Engineer.
§ 109-8 STREETS AND SCHOOL SAFETY § 109-8
108:667

ARTICLE II
Use of Streets
[Adopted 11-19-1946 by Ord. No. 1484, effective 11-19-1946]
§ 109-9. Maintenance required.196
Every owner, occupant or person having charge and control of property in
the Borough of Rutherford on any street that is opened shall maintain and
be responsible for the proper upkeep of that part of the street between
the property line and the curb which abuts the property, including corner
areas adjacent to corner lots, whether within or without the property line,
and such upkeep shall include the proper maintenance and repair of the
sidewalk.
§ 109-10. Sewer connections required.197
Every owner, occupant or person having charge and control of property in
the Borough of Rutherford shall be responsible for the proper installation,
repair and upkeep of all connections between their property and the main
sanitary sewer line, the main storm drain line or the gutter into which said
connections discharge.
§ 109-11. Litter prohibited; advertising restricted.198
No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall throw, put,
place or cause to be thrown, put or placed into, upon or within any street,
road, avenue or public place within the Borough of Rutherford any article
or material whatsoever whereby the safe, free and unobstructed use of the
same by the public may be anywise impeded or interfered with, or shall put,
deposit or leave any paper, advertising matter, circulars, rubbish, refuse or
other material in or upon any of the streets, roads, avenues or public places
within the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 109-12. Obstruction prohibited; exception.
No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, in the performance
of his or its customary work, shall encumber or obstruct any street, road,
avenue or public place within the Borough of Rutherford with any article or
material whatsoever, unless such encumbrance or obstruction is authorized
by a written permit issued by the Borough Clerk, as hereinafter provided.199
196. Editor's Note: Former § 109-9, Violations and penalties, was repealed 10-31-1995 by Ord.
No. 2744-95. This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 109-10
through 109-15 as §§ 109-9 through 109-14, respectively.
197. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 91, Sanitary Sewers.
198. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 21, Clean Environment, and Ch. 53, Littering.
199. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 56, Materials, Deposit and Removal of; Ch. 62, Newspaper
Vending Machines; and Ch. 114, Telephone Booths.
§ 109-9 STREETS AND SCHOOL SAFETY § 109-13
108:669
§ 109-13. Street opening prohibited; exception. 200 [Amended
10-31-1995 by Ord. No. 2744-95]
No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall remove,
excavate, dig up or in any way disturb the surface of any street, road,
avenue or public place within the Borough of Rutherford or any sidewalk,
gutter or pavement or pavement thereon, for any purpose whatsoever,
unless such work is authorized by a written permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of § 109-20 of this chapter.
§ 109-14. Regulations governing vehicles and sidewalks.
No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall drive, or
cause to be driven, any vehicle over or upon the sidewalk of any street, road,
avenue or public place within the Borough of Rutherford, except over an
established driveway, without permission for this purpose first having been
obtained, in writing, from the Borough Clerk, as hereinafter provided.
§ 109-15. (Reserved)201
§ 109-16. Permits issued by Clerk. [Amended 12-1-1998 by Ord. No.
2877-98; 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 3130-07202]
The Borough Clerk is authorized to issue permits for the following types of
work:
§ 109-17. Permits issued by Building Department. [Added
12-1-1998 by Ord. No. 2877-98; amended 3-27-2007 by Ord. No.
3130-07]
The Borough of Rutherford Building Department is authorized to issue
permits for the following types of work:
§ 109-18. Permit fees. [Amended 2-19-1952 by Ord. No. 1599;
12-2-1958 by Ord. No. 1760; 12-18-1962 by Ord. No. 1874;
A. Road openings.
B. Right-of-way excavations.
A. Construction of driveways.
B. Resurfacing of existing driveways.
C. Sidewalk replacement.
200. Editor's Note: For additional restrictions, see Ch. 91, Sanitary Sewers, § 91-6.
201. Editor's Note: Former § 109-15, Applications referred to Superintendent of Public Works,
as amended, was repealed 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 3158-08.
202. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 109-16, Applications referred to
Mayor and Council, as amended, and provided for the renumbering of former §§ 109-17
and 109-17.1 as §§ 109-16 and 109-17, respectively.
§ 109-13 RUTHERFORD CODE § 109-18
108:670
1-21-1964 by Ord. No. 1910; 10-31-1995 by Ord. No. 2744-95;
3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 3130-07]
The following permit fees shall be paid to the Borough of Rutherford before
the permits are issued:
A. Sidewalk repairs:
(1) Twenty-five percent or less of existing: $25.
(2) New or greater than 25% of existing: $50.
B. Construction of driveways:
(1) New driveway: $50.
(2) Resurfacing existing driveway: $25.
C. Road openings:
(1) Repair: $45.
(2) New installation: $100.
D. For digging between curb and property line if a street opening permit is
not needed: $30.
§ 109-18 STREETS AND SCHOOL SAFETY § 109-18
108:671

ARTICLE III
Street Openings
[Adopted 10-31-1995 by Ord. No. 2744-95]
§ 109-19. Definitions.
Whenever used in this article, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context, the following terms shall have the following meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person, firm or entity who makes application for permit.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Rutherford.
CLERK — The Borough Clerk of Rutherford or her duly authorized
representative.
CROSS TRENCH — Any opening at 90º to the center line of the street.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence
of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to a person or property.
MAJOR PERMIT — An opening exceeding 20 square yards.
MATERIALS — Includes pipes, fittings and appurtenances, as well as the
excavation or backfill.
MINOR PERMIT — An opening of 20 square yards or less.
PERMITTEE — Any person, firm or entity who has been issued a permit and
has agreed to fulfill all the terms of this article.
ROADWAY — The cartway or paved area only.
STREET — The improved portion of the right-of-way of any public street,
public highway, public way, public road or public easement within the
borough, including that portion of the right-of-way improved with curbs and
sidewalks.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works or his duly
authorized representative.
UTILITY — Any utility, public, private or government.
§ 109-20. Permit required; restrictions.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall open or cause to be opened, by
cutting or excavating, the surface or soil of any street, roadway or other
public property for any purpose whatsoever without first obtaining
therefor from the Clerk a written permit; provided, however, that any
person maintaining pipes, lines or other underground facilities in or
under the surface of any street may proceed with an opening without a
permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done
immediately, provided that the permit could not reasonably and
practically have been obtained beforehand. The person shall thereafter
apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the
borough is open for business.
§ 109-19 STREETS AND SCHOOL SAFETY § 109-20
108:673
§ 109-21. Notice of work.
The permittee shall not begin or carry on any part of the work provided to
be done, except in the event of an emergency, without first notifying the
Clerk not less than 24 hours in advance and obtaining her approval therefor.
§ 109-22. General considerations.
B. It is not intended to require a permit for the opening or excavating
within any county or state road for which a permit has been acquired
from the proper authority.
C. A permit shall be valid for an effective period not to exceed 30
consecutive calendar days. Such effective period may be extended, if so
requested by the permittee prior to the expiration thereof, for an
additional period not to exceed 30 days. An additional extension for a
final period not to exceed 30 days may be requested and granted. A
permit may not be extended for a period in excess of 90 days from the
date the original permit was issued.
D. No work shall proceed between November 15 and March 15 unless
emergency circumstances exist.
E. No work provided to be done under a permit shall be performed on
Saturdays, Sundays or holidays except with prior approval of the Clerk
or in the event of an emergency. Any work regulated hereunder shall be
performed between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. unless an
emergency exists.
A. In all cases, full consideration is required to be given to the adoption
and implementation of measures reflecting sound engineering
principles and economic factors necessary to preserve and protect the
integrity and visual quality of the roadway, its maintenance and
efficiency and vehicular and pedestrian traffic safety.
B. Utility lines are to be located to permit servicing such lines with
minimum interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Efforts must
be made to minimize the construction of chambers or vaults in the
roadway area and to avoid their location at street intersections.
C. Ground-mounted utility facilities shall be of a design compatible with
the visual quality of the roadway section being traversed.
D. New roadways or roadways resurfaced with a bituminous concrete
surface course shall not be opened for a period of two years unless an
emergency exists.
E. If any subsequent borough facility necessitates the moving or adjusting
of utility facilities located by permit, then such utilities shall bear all
costs and expenses of the required move or adjustment unless the cost
and expense of said move or adjustment is otherwise provided for by
law.
§ 109-20 RUTHERFORD CODE § 109-22
108:674
§ 109-23. Application for permit; required information.
Any person desiring a permit for street opening shall make application
therefor to the Clerk for each such opening upon forms provided for that
purpose. Applications for a street opening permit for work to be performed
for a utility shall be made by the utility, and such permit shall be issued to
the utility and not to the contractor. A separate application shall be made
and a separate permit issued for each street to be opened by the permittee.
F. Utility line designs and construction are subject to minimum safety
standards and construction requirements prescribed by the respective
national or industry standard codes.
A. Except to the extent waived by the Clerk in the case of any emergency,
the application shall show or include the following information for a
minor street opening:
(1) The name, address and twenty-four-hour telephone number(s) of
the applicant. The applicant shall also provide the Police
Department with at least two emergency contact telephone
numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at the
construction site prior to the start of any work.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property in front of which or for whom the work is to be performed.
(3) The location of the property.
(4) The extent and nature of the work to be done.
(5) The date or dates when the work is to be done.
(6) Evidence that all materials, labor and/or equipment which are
needed to complete such undertaking as authorized by the permit
are available.
(7) The signed statement by the applicant that he agrees to perform
the work for which the permit is granted strictly in accordance with
the conditions of the permit and this article.
(8) A list of all federal, state or local government agencies having
jurisdiction thereover and, if such agencies require approval, a
statement whether such approval has been obtained and
attachment of a copy of such approval.
(9) A signed statement by the applicant that the borough is to be saved
harmless by the applicant from any loss, injury or damage arising
out of the granting of the permit or from any negligence or fault of
such applicant, his servants or agents in connection with any of the
work done under or in connection with such permit.
(10) Certificate of insurance.
§ 109-22 STREETS AND SCHOOL SAFETY § 109-23
108:675
§ 109-24. Action of Clerk on application.
§ 109-25. Permit fee; deposits.
Every person obtaining a permit shall:
(a) A certificate of insurance stating that 10 days' written notice
shall be given to the borough before a policy covered thereby
shall be changed or cancelled, indicating that the applicant is
insured against all hazards and risks of loss which may arise
from or out of the performance of the work, whether such
performance be by himself, his subcontractor or anyone
directly or indirectly employed by him, and shall include
protection against liability arising from completed operations.
This insurance shall be written in comprehensive form, and the
liability limits shall not be less than the following:
[1] Bodily injury: $1,000,000 each person; $3,000,000 each
occurrence.
[2] Property damage: $1,000,000 each occurrence.
(b) With the approval of the Clerk, public utilities subject to
regulation by the Board of Public Utilities may furnish a selfinsurance
certificate in lieu of a liability insurance certificate.
(c) Certificates of insurance required pursuant to this article shall
name the borough as an additional insured.
B. The application for a major street opening permit shall require the
items in Subsection A(1) through (10), both inclusive, and, in addition
thereto, three sets of plans and specifications, a traffic control plan in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and/or
a detour plan as required by the Clerk.
A. The Clerk will have a minimum of five working days to review the
application prior to issuing a street opening permit.
B. When the Clerk approves an application, she shall at that time advise
the applicant of the amount of deposit necessary to cover the work
proposed in said application.
C. The Clerk will also state the probable inspection costs that may be
incurred and advise the applicant of such costs.
D. Once the applicant meets all the requirements of this article, the Clerk
will grant the permit.
A. Pay a permit fee for the issuance of an excavation permit which shall be
in addition to all other fees for permits or charges relative to any
proposed construction work in an amount as set forth in this article.
B. Pay an inspection fee as set forth in this article.
§ 109-23 RUTHERFORD CODE § 109-25
108:676
§ 109-26. Conditions for permit.
In granting any permit under this article and to prevent danger to public
or private property or to prevent the operation from being conducted in
a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to create a
nuisance, the following conditions will apply:
C. Make a deposit as required by § 109-27 of this article.
A. Only rubber-tired equipment shall be used unless approved by the
Borough Engineer.
B. Routes upon which materials may be transported are to be approved by
the borough before the permit is issued.
C. Disposal of excavated materials within the Borough of Rutherford is
subject to Chapter 102, Soil Removal, of the Borough Code.
D. Dust resulting from construction procedures is to be kept to a
minimum.
E. Excessive noise shall be prohibited.
F. Roadways and sidewalks are to be kept clear for pedestrian and
vehicular traffic. All operations shall be planned with full regard to
safety and to keep traffic interference to an absolute minimum. No
trench shall remain open beyond the hours of work. Gas companies,
however, shall be permitted to leave open small openings for the
purpose of adequately venting natural gas, provided that said small
openings are adequately protected with traffic control devices and that
proper notice is given to the borough. Said openings shall be
maintained for no longer than 48 hours. The Clerk may permit other
small openings in circumstances where work cannot be completed
during normal working hours, provided that said openings are properly
plated so as not to interfere with the flow of traffic or to endanger the
public.
G. Construction equipment and materials shall not be left on the street
overnight unless special permission is given, in writing.
H. Traffic shall be controlled in accordance with the appropriate sections
of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, which manual
includes information regarding the furnishing and erecting of traffic
control devices necessary to move pedestrians and vehicular traffic
safely through or around the work area.
I. Construction shall be performed in accordance with the latest edition of
the New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction.
J. Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless
approved by the Rutherford Police Department (Traffic Bureau).
§ 109-25 STREETS AND SCHOOL SAFETY § 109-26
108:677
§ 109-27. Required deposit. [Amended 12-13-2011 by Ord. No.
3241-11; 5-21-2012 by Ord. No. 3258-12]
The amount of deposit for street openings shall be $5,000 or shall be
computed in accordance with the following unit prices for pavements or
other areas to be disturbed or work to be done, as determined by the Clerk,
whichever is greater:
§ 109-28. Form of deposit; approval.
The deposit may be in the form of cash, a certified treasurer's or cashier's
check or surety bond made payable to the borough and meeting the
approval of the Clerk. The surety bond must be written by a reputable
surety company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, and the
bond shall be conditioned upon the payment of all charges required by this
article. Such bond must be approved by the Borough Attorney as to form.
The borough shall have the right to require the submission of the deposit in
any of the above specified forms.
§ 109-29. Use of deposit.
§ 109-30. Insufficient deposit.
If the deposit made is less than sufficient to pay all fees and costs, the
permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the borough an amount equal to
the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such deficiency
upon demand, the borough may recover the same by action in any court
K. Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction sites when
determined by the Rutherford Police Department (Traffic Bureau) that
same is necessary to provide for the safety and expeditious movement
of traffic. In the event that it is determined that traffic directors are
required, uniformed Rutherford police shall act as traffic directors, and
the cost of providing uniformed police shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
A. Paved streets (all types): $750 per square yard.
A. The amount of deposit shall be retained by the borough for the duration
of the period of maintenance, as defined hereunder.
B. Upon failure or default by the permittee of any of the terms,
agreements, covenants and conditions of the permit on the permittee's
part to be done or performed, said deposit may be used by the borough
for any expense incurred by the borough by reason of such failure or
default on the part of the permittee.
C. Any balance left after the expense of such failure or default, as
determined and certified by the Clerk, has been paid and deducted from
the amount of the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee.
§ 109-26 RUTHERFORD CODE § 109-30
108:678
of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, additional
permits shall not be issued to such permittee.
§ 109-31. Annual deposits.
Whenever any public utility or municipal authority maintaining
underground facilities shall contemplate more than one street opening or
excavation per calendar year, it may post a surety bond in the amount of at
least $50,000 for the calendar year or part thereof to cover the estimated
fees and cost of any and all work. Said bond must be written by a reputable
surety company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey or other
approved surety, and the bond shall be conditioned upon the payment of all
charges estimated to be required by this article during the term of the bond.
Such bond must be approved by the Borough Attorney as to form.
§ 109-32. Maintenance period; costs.
§ 109-33. Notice to adjoining property owners or tenants.
If the work to be undertaken by the permittee is such that it will affect
the use of properties abutting or adjoining the project, the permittee shall,
in writing, notify by hand delivery or mail the affected property owners or
tenants of the proposed work to be done. The permittee shall submit a list
of the names and addresses of the owners and/or tenants of such properties
to the Clerk along with a copy of the notification.
§ 109-34. Notice to police and fire officials.
The permittee shall notify the Borough Police and Fire Departments of any
street opening or excavation which affects the flow of traffic in the streets
within the borough. Such notification shall state the nature of the work to
be done and the location of such project. He shall also notify the Police
A. The period of maintenance shall be construed as a period of two years
after the date of final completion, as determined by the Borough
Engineer, of the work to be done pursuant to the terms of the permit;
except, however, that in the event that the termination of said two-year
period shall fall between November 1 and April 1, inclusive, then and in
that event, the period of maintenance shall be considered as extending
until the 15th day of May next thereafter.
B. The permittee shall be responsible for the entire work and shall keep
every portion of said work in perfect order and repair during the entire
period of maintenance, and should said permittee fail to make needed
repairs to the work or to adequately maintain surfaces disturbed by said
permittee, the Clerk reserves the right, and without prior notice to the
permittee, to cause such repairs to be made or such surfaces to be
maintained by the borough's own forces or by contract or otherwise, in
which case all expenses incurred by the borough shall be deducted from
the deposit as herein otherwise provided for.
§ 109-30 STREETS AND SCHOOL SAFETY § 109-34
108:679
and Fire Departments when any openings or excavations have been closed,
permitting traffic to flow thereon.
§ 109-35. Exhibit of permit.
Any person receiving a permit as provided in this article shall cause the
same to be kept in the possession of the person in charge of the work, who
shall exhibit the same to any official or police officer in the borough on
demand.
§ 109-36. Permission of Borough Engineer required.
Except in the case of emergency, no work shall be performed by the
permittee unless the Borough Engineer shall be present or permission
has been given by the Borough Engineer to proceed in his absence. Such
permission should not be unreasonably denied.
§ 109-37. Inspections.
The Superintendent or Borough Engineer shall periodically inspect all road
openings and the repair and resurfacing thereof for the purpose of
determining compliance with the conditions imposed on the issuance of the
permit and the specifications. The Borough may, upon the recommendation
of either of them:
§ 109-38. Permit not required of borough.
Street opening permits will not be required for any contracts proposed
by the borough. All guarantees are provided for within plans and/or
specifications so provided by the borough.
§ 109-39. Performance of additional work.
A. Order a temporary stop to any road opening.
B. Order that the applicant perform or correct work in accordance with
the directions of the borough.
C. Order a stop to any work and revoke the permit, in which event the
Borough of Rutherford shall complete the work or cause it completed
and either declare the applicant's deposit forfeited or notify the
applicant's surety of an intent to file claim on the bond.
D. Authorize the correction of any work after notification to the permittee
and after the neglect or the refusal of the permittee to make sure
corrections within 24 hours and, after completion of the same, either
declare the permittee's deposit forfeited or notify the permittee's surety
of an intent to file a claim on the bond.
E. Take any other action deemed reasonable under the circumstances to
protect the borough's interests.
§ 109-34 RUTHERFORD CODE § 109-39
108:680
§ 109-40. Time period for commencement of work; renewal of
permit.
§ 109-41. Nontransferability.
Permits issued under this article are not transferable from one person to
another, and the work shall be carried out only at the location specifically
designated in the permit.
§ 109-42. Notification to owner of pipes, conduits or other
structures.
It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify any company whose pipes,
conduits or other structures are laid in the street in which any work is to
be done by the permittee not less than 72 hours before commencing such
opening or work. The permittee doing such work shall, at its own expense,
carefully support, maintain in operation and protect from injury such pipes,
conduits or other structures and, in case of injury, shall restore the same at
its own expense or allow the company to whom the pipes, conduits or other
structures belong, at its option, to make the necessary repairs, and costs
thereof sustained by said company thereby shall be paid by said permittee
to said company upon presentation of a bill.
§ 109-43. Excavation specifications; notice of blasting.
A. No person to whom a permit has been granted under the provisions of
this article shall perform any of the work authorized by such permit in
any amount or quantity greater than that specified in the permit, except
that, upon the approval by the Borough Engineer and payment of the
additional fee, additional work may be done under the provisions of the
permit in an amount not greater than 10% of the amount specified in
the permit.
B. Any deposit and bond posted in connection with the original permit
shall be deemed to cover any such additional work as may be approved
pursuant to this section within the limits mentioned herein.
A. Work for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this article shall
commence within 30 days after the issuance of the permit therefor and
shall be carried out as expeditiously as possible.
B. If not so commenced or proper time extension granted, the permit shall
be automatically terminated and the permit fee, inspection fee and any
cash deposit shall be refunded to the permittee, with the exception of
the application fee.
C. Permits thus terminated may be renewed upon the payment of an
additional application fee and the required permit and inspection fees
as defined within this article.
§ 109-39 STREETS AND SCHOOL SAFETY § 109-43
108:681
§ 109-44. Other minimum requirements to be met.
§ 109-45. Inspection required before backfilling.
No backfilling shall be done by the permittee until the work being done
under the permit shall have first been inspected and the backfilling
authorized by the Borough Engineer. In case of nonconformity with this
requirement, the Borough Engineer shall have the right to require that the
work be uncovered by the permittee at the latter's own expense so that
property inspection may be made.
§ 109-46. Backfilling methods and materials.
A. Trenches shall be cut to have vertical faces, where soil and depth
conditions permit, with a maximum width of two feet, plus the outside
diameter of the pipe to be installed. Trenches shall be braced as
necessary in accordance with all applicable federal, state, county and
municipal laws and regulations.
B. Pipe bedding shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
or industry standard instructions for the pipe or conduit being used.
C. Prior to the excavation of the trench, the existing pavement shall be cut
by pneumatic or hydraulically operated hand-held equipment or by saw
cut. In no case shall large impact-type equipment be used.
D. The integrity of the remaining pavement structure, shoulders and
slopes shall be of primary concern, and construction methods shall be
utilized which will keep the damages to the existing pavement and
other areas to a minimum.
E. All blasting shall be conducted in accordance with applicable state and
federal laws and regulations. Prior to proceeding with blasting, twentyfour-
hour notice shall be given to the Borough Engineer, owners of
utilities within 50 feet and adjacent property owners.
A. Utility installations must meet the minimum requirements of the
national or industry associations, institutes or codes which recommend
methods of installation and utilization.
B. Wherever possible, the depth of bury for pipelines and conduits shall be
a minimum of three feet. Sufficient vertical and horizontal clearance
between pipelines or structures of another utility facility shall be
provided to permit the proper maintenance of the pipeline or structure.
A. Backfilling must be done with a pervious material placed in two stages.
The first stage includes the fill to a level of one-foot above the top of the
pipe, and the second stage includes the remaining portion of the trench
to finished grade. Backfill for the first stage shall be carefully deposited
and compacted in six-inch layers without in any way injuring or
disturbing the completed pipe or structure. The remaining portion of
the trench shall be backfilled and compacted in twelve-inch layers.
§ 109-43 RUTHERFORD CODE § 109-46
108:682
§ 109-47. Temporary pavement restoration.
§ 109-48. Permanent pavement.
B. Backfilling must be accomplished with select material. Backfilling
necessitated by an emergency opening during the period from
November 15 to March 15, inclusive, shall not be made with frozen
material. In the event that backfilling is made with frozen material, it
shall be removed by the permittee and replaced with stone dust or
backrun sand.
C. Compacting shall be accomplished by approved mechanical or vibratory
means to achieve 95% of maximum density based on the modified
proctor test.
A. Immediately after backfilling the excavation, the permittee shall place
thereon an acceptable temporary pavement as provided herein below.
Such temporary pavement shall be maintained even with the roadway
surface until the permanent restoration is placed.
B. The temporary pavement shall consist of three inches of bituminous
concrete. Mix 1-5 or approved equal, when the opening was made in an
existing pavement, and six inches of quarry process stone in all other
cases, except that, where topsoil, seeded areas or sod have been
disturbed by the excavation, the permittee shall restore the ground
surface to its original condition.
A. Permanent restoration of the pavement surface over the street opening
shall be made within two months, weather permitting, or within the
same construction season if so noted on the permit, from the date the
temporary pavement was installed.
B. Prior to the installation of the permanent pavement, the subgrade shall
be properly prepared and the existing pavement neatly cut back a
minimum of six inches from the edge of the trench or pavement damage
in a straight line, with vertical faces free of foreign matter. A tack coat
shall be applied to the vertical faces of the existing pavement prior to
the placement of the patch material.
C. The permanent pavement shall consist of a bottom course of bituminous
stabilized base, Mix 1-2, placed at a compacted thickness of four inches,
and a surface course of bituminous concrete, Mix 1-5, placed at a
compacted thickness of two inches.
D. All pavement restoration, both temporary and permanent, shall be
constructed in accordance with the applicable specifications of the New
Jersey State Highway Department.
E. The top or surface course of the permanent patch shall be flush with the
grade of the surrounding pavement when it is compacted. The joint
between the patch and the existing pavement shall be sealed with an
asphalt emulsion.
§ 109-46 STREETS AND SCHOOL SAFETY § 109-48
108:683
§ 109-49. Cleanup; restoration; letter of release.
§ 109-50. Revocation of permit.
Any permit issued under this article may be revoked by the Clerk, after
notice, for:
§ 109-51. Petition for deviation from provisions.
Deviations from the provisions of this article may be issued by the borough
upon review and approval of a written petition by the permittee which shall
include, in detail, the reason why such a deviation is being requested.
§ 109-52. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm, partnership, association or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 and, in default of the payment
thereof, may be sentenced to the county jail for a term not exceeding
30 days. Every day during which such violation continues after notice in
writing shall have been served by the borough shall constitute a separate
offense.
F. For lateral trenches over 100 feet in length, the top or surface course of
pavement shall extend from the curbline or edge of pavement to a point
three feet beyond the edge of the bottom course; however, such width
shall not be less than 10 feet. If cross trenches are located less than 250
feet apart, the entire roadway shall be resurfaced.
A. The permittee shall clean up and remove promptly from the site of the
work, upon completion thereof, all surplus excavated material and
debris and shall leave the site of the work in a neat and orderly
condition on a daily basis.
B. Where concrete curb, asphalt berm, sidewalk or landscaped areas are
disturbed in the course of the work, the permittee shall restore such
surface to its original condition. A letter of release shall be furnished to
the Borough of Rutherford from the affected property owner prior to
the release of the deposit or bond.
A. Violation of any condition of the permit.
B. Violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable
ordinance or law relating to the work.
C. The existence of any condition or the doing of any work constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or property of others.
§ 109-48 RUTHERFORD CODE § 109-52
108:684
Chapter 110
STREET CLOSINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 68.
Public exhibitions and entertainment — See
Ch. 80.
Recreation Department — See Ch. 83.
Closing of streets for school safety — See Ch.
108.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 109.
§ 110-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Street Closings
Ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford."
§ 110-2. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing municipal roadway, which is shown
upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, which is on a plat duly
filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer or which is
approved by official action as provided by the Borough Code, and includes
the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and
may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and
other areas within the street lines.
§ 110-3. Permission required to close streets for certain events.
No person or persons, association, firm or corporation shall cause or permit
a municipal street to be closed for the purpose of conducting a street fair,
sidewalk sale or block party without first having procured permission from
the Mayor and Council.
§ 110-4. Information to be submitted.
The Mayor and Council shall not consider any application for the closing of
a municipal street unless and until the person or persons, association, firm
or corporation requesting such permission shall first file with the Borough
Clerk an application requesting such permission, stating the location of the
proposed street closing and the period of such closing, which period shall
not exceed 48 continuous hours, together with the purpose of such street
closing and the name, address and telephone number of the individual,
group or organization applying for such street closure, and a map of the
street or section thereof to be closed, showing the proposed method of
§ 109-52 STREET CLOSINGS § 110-4
110:685
effecting the street closing and the location of the barriers to be used in
restricting the flow of vehicular traffic through the closed street.
§ 110-5. Granting of permission.
If, after examining the application and the map provided for in § 110-4
hereof, the Mayor and Council shall be of the opinion that the proposed
street closing will not create conditions inimical to the public health,
welfare and safety, permission to close the street shall be granted. Such
permission shall be effective for a period of time not to exceed 48
continuous hours.
§ 110-6. Responsibilities.
If permission to close the street shall be granted, the person or persons,
association, firm or corporation requesting such closing shall conduct the
operation so that there shall be minimum inconvenience to the general
public and in such a manner that, upon the expiration of the permitted
street closing period, such street is reopened free of any debris, refuse or
other material interfering with the safe and free passage of pedestrians and
vehicles.
§ 110-7. Insurance requirements.
Each applicant, prior to receipt of a permit, shall provide the borough with
a certificate or certificates of insurance indicating to the satisfaction of the
borough that policies of the general liability insurance and excess umbrella
liability insurance have been issued and are in force at the time of the
street closing. Said policy shall contain limits of liability in an amount to
be determined by the Mayor and Council at the time permission is granted
for the street closing. The Mayor and Council may waive the provisions and
requirements of this section when deemed appropriate.
§ 110-8. Liability.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of any applicant to agree to save the
borough, its officers, employees and agents harmless from any and all costs,
damages and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason
of the street closing. The acceptance of any permit under this chapter shall
constitute such agreement whether the same is expressed or not.
§ 110-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, association, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $200, or, if
the party so convicted is a natural person, such person may be imprisoned
for such term not exceeding 90 days, as such court, in its discretion, may
impose. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 110-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 110-10
110:686
§ 110-10. Severability.
If any portion of the within chapter shall be declared to be unconstitutional,
invalid or inoperable, in whole or in part, by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining portion not declared to be unconstitutional,
invalid or inoperable shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 110-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon final passage and publication in
accordance with the provisions of law.
Chapter 111
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 131.
§ 110-10 SWIMMING POOLS § 110-11
111:687

ARTICLE I
Swimming Pool Code
[Adopted by the Board of Health 1-28-1963]
§ 111-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating and controlling the location and construction, alteration
and operation of swimming pools; the issuance of permits to locate and
construct, alter or operate swimming pools; and declaring and defining
certain swimming pools as nuisances; and fixing penalties for violations is
hereby adopted, pursuant to Chapter 188, P.L. 1950 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to
26:3-69.6). A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 111-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this article is described and
commonly known as the "Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1955)."
§ 111-3. Filing.
Three copies of the said Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1955) have
been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of this Board of Health upon the
introduction of this article and will remain on file in said office for the use
and examination of the public.
§ 111-4. Permits required.
No person shall locate and construct, alter or operate a swimming pool until
permits therefor shall have been issued by this Board of Health.
§ 111-5. Fees.
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
§ 111-6. Annual renewal required; dates.
Permits issued for the operation of a swimming pool shall expire annually
on December 31 of each year, and application for renewal thereof shall be
submitted together with the required fee prior to May 1 of each year.
§ 111-7. Suspensions or denials; provision for hearing.
A. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct a swimming pool,
$25.
B. For the issuance of a permit to alter a swimming pool, $25.
C. For the issuance or renewal of a permit to operate a swimming pool,
$200.
§ 111-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 111-7
111:689
§ 111-8. Violations and penalties.
§ 111-9. Repealer.
All ordinances, codes or parts of same inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this article and the code established hereunder are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 111-10. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this article or code
shall be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such declarations shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions.
§ 111-11. When effective.
This article and the code herein established shall take effect 30 days after
the first publication of the chapter in accordance with the provisions of c.
188, P.L. (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6).
A. Permits required by this article or code may be denied or suspended by
this Board of Health for failure to comply with this article or code.
B. This Board of Health shall afford the person whose permit to locate and
construct, alter or operate has been denied or suspended an
opportunity to be heard in public hearing; and following this, to be
informed of the Board's decision as hereafter provided by Section 2 of
the code.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article or the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey
(1955) made a part hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty
of not less than $2 nor more than $100 for each violation.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 111-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 111-11
111:690
ARTICLE II
Private Swimming Pools
[Adopted by the Borough of Rutherford Council 9-17-1963]
§ 111-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOT — All contiguous property of the same ownership.
PERMANENT PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — A private swimming pool
constructed of permanent materials at or below ground level.
PERSON — Any person, association of persons or corporation.
PORTABLE PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — A private swimming pool which
is not a permanent private swimming pool.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Includes any swimming or bathing pools or
tanks, whether permanently installed, portable or otherwise, constructed or
placed on any lot by any person for the use of himself, the members of his
family or guests of himself or his family.
§ 111-13. Locations.
No private swimming pool shall be constructed, installed or placed or
maintained on any lot except in the following manner:
§ 111-14. Prohibited location.
No private swimming pool shall be constructed, installed, placed or
maintained in the front yard area of any lot as defined in the Zoning
Ordinance.206
A. The distance from any lot line to the nearest inside face of the pool wall
shall not be less than five feet.
B. The distance from any street line to the nearest inside face of the pool
shall not be less than the front yard and side yard setback requirements
as prescribed in the Zoning Ordinance.203
C. The pool shall be located in the rear or side yard of the lot as defined in
the Zoning Ordinance.204
D. A dwelling as defined in the Building Code205 shall have been
constructed and shall be occupied as such upon the lot.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any existing permanent
private swimming pool, but they shall apply to any alteration thereof.
203. Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Zoning.
204. Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Zoning.
205. Editor's Note: See Ch. 18, Building Code.
§ 111-12 SWIMMING POOLS § 111-15
111:691
§ 111-15. Accessory buildings.
All buildings and structures accessory or appurtenant to a private
swimming pool shall be subject to the provisions and requirements of the
Building Code and the Zoning Ordinance and their several supplements and
amendments.207
§ 111-16. Enclosure required.
Every permanent private swimming pool shall be enclosed with a fence of
durable construction of not less than four feet in height or by a wall of a
building or structure. A fence of similar construction and height erected
on the lot lines which, with additional fencing of any open areas, will
completely enclose the pool area shall be deemed a sufficient enclosure
for the purpose of this section. The enclosure shall be provided with one
or more substantial gates or doors of at least the height of the fence
and the said enclosure and gates or doors thereof shall be so designed
and constructed as to reasonably prevent any person from gaining access
beneath, through or over the same. Every gate or door of such fence shall
be kept securely locked at all times when the pool is not in use.
§ 111-17. Lighting regulations.
All outside lights for illumination of a private swimming pool shall be
installed and maintained so as to eliminate glare and annoyance to
adjoining properties. All such illumination shall be extinguished at 11:00
p.m. or when the pool is not in use.
§ 111-18. Private use and ownership.
The maintenance or use of a private swimming pool is hereby restricted
to the owners, lessees, sublessees or occupants of the dwelling on the
lot on which the pool is situated or to the members of their families and
their guests. It shall be unlawful for any such owner, lessee, sublessee or
occupant to permit or to extend the privilege of the pool to any person
who is required, as a prerequisite to such use, to become a member of
any club, association or organization, whether or not such membership is
conditioned or dependent upon the payment of any fee, dues, contribution
or other consideration.
§ 111-19. Permits.
No person shall construct or alter a permanent private swimming pool
without first having obtained a permit from the Building Inspector. The
application for a permit and the fee for the same shall be in accordance with
the form and amount contained in the Building Code for the construction
and alteration of buildings.208 Upon finding that the proposed pool or
206. Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Zoning.
207. Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 131, Zoning.
208. Editor's Note: For current provisions, see Ch. 22, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 111-15 RUTHERFORD CODE § 111-19
111:692
alteration of a pool complies with the provisions of this article, the Building
Code and the Zoning Ordinance, and upon payment of the fee, the Building
Inspector shall issue the permit.
§ 111-20. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for
any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining
portions of this article.
§ 111-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a fine not exceeding $200 for each offense or be
imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 111-22. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon publication according to law.
§ 111-19 SWIMMING POOLS § 111-22
111:693
Chapter 112
TAXES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land subdivision and site plan
regulations — See Ch. 50.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 51.
§ 111-22 RUTHERFORD CODE § 111-22
111:694
ARTICLE I
Exemption of Household Property and Personal Effects
[Adopted 2-7-1961 by Ord. No. 1821]
§ 112-1. Exemption of property, personal effects.
All tangible household personal property and personal effects located within
the Borough of Rutherford shall not be assessed and taxed.
§ 112-2. Application.
This article shall apply to taxes on tangible household personal property
and personal effects due and payable in the year 1962 and thereafter so
long as this article shall be in effect and shall not affect the obligation,
lien or duty to pay any taxes, interest or penalties which have accrued or
may accrue by virtue of any assessment made or which may be made with
respect to taxes levied for any year prior to the year 1962, nor shall this
article affect the legal authority to assess and collect taxes which may be
or have been due and payable prior to January 1, 1962, together with such
interest and penalties as would have accrued thereon under any provisions
of law amended or repealed hereby, nor shall this article invalidate any
assessments or affect any proceedings for the enforcement thereof pending
upon the effective date of this article or upon January 1, 1962, or during the
period between said dates.
§ 112-3. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 112-4. Filing with state agencies.
A certified copy of this article shall be filed with the Division of Taxation
in the Department of the Treasury of the State of New Jersey and with the
County Board of Taxation of Bergen County.
§ 112-5. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its final passage and
publication required by law, subject to the provisions herein contained.
§ 112-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 112-5
111:695

ARTICLE II
Exemption Based on Age and Income
[Adopted 6-20-1961 by Ord. No. 1832]
§ 112-6. Exemptions allowed.
Every person who is a citizen and resident of the State of New Jersey for
a period of three years immediately preceding October 1 of the pretax
year, of the age of 65 or more years, having an income not in excess of
$5,000 per annum and residing in a dwelling house owned by him which
is a constituent part of his real property, shall be entitled, on proper claim
being made and allowed therefor, to exemption from taxation on such real
property to an assessed valuation not exceeding $800 in the aggregate, but
no such exemption shall be in addition to any other exemption to which said
person may be entitled.
§ 112-7. Borough economy unimpaired.
The financial position of the Borough of Rutherford for the year 1961 will
not be impaired by the exemption so claimed.
§ 112-8. Reduction of taxable valuation.
The exemption claimed and to be allowed for the year 1961 shall operate
to reduce the taxable valuations of real property for the year 1961 in the
Borough of Rutherford.
§ 112-9. Application procedure for exemption.
All applications for exemption under this article for the tax year 1961
may be filed on or before July 1, 1961, and all applications for exemption
in subsequent tax years may be filed on or before November 1 of the
pretax year. Such applications shall be on forms prescribed by the Director,
Division of Taxation, in the Department of the Treasury of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 112-10. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
article are hereby repealed.
§ 112-11. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon its final passage and
publication as required by law, subject to the provisions herein contained.
§ 112-6 SWIMMING POOLS § 112-11
111:697

ARTICLE III
Exemption for Residential Improvements
[Adopted 6-3-1980 by Ord. No. 2280-40]
§ 112-12. Exemption established. [Amended 8-4-1987 by Ord. No.
2479-87; 3-2-1993 by Ord. No. 2674-93]
The Mayor and Council hereby provides for tax abatement on residential
improvements, pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1991, c. 441,209 as
amended and supplemented, providing for the exemption from real property
taxation of improvements at a level not to exceed the first $15,000 in
the Assessor's full and true value of home improvements in any dwelling
unit more than 20 years old and shall regard such improvements as not
increasing the value of such property for a period of five years from the date
of approval, by the Assessor, of a proper application as provided by law.
§ 112-13. Filing of application. [Amended 12-27-1995 by Ord. No.
2750-95]
All applications for exemption under § 112-12 shall be filed no later than
December 31, 1995, excepting those applications filed on or before June
30, 1996, for which building permits have been issued prior to January 1,
1996. No applications for exemptions under this article shall be accepted by
the Borough of Rutherford after said date, it being the determination of the
borough to repeal the tax abatement program on residential improvements
effective January 1, 1996. All tax exemptions approved by the Assessor prior
to the expiration date shall remain in effect for a period of five years from
the date of approval.
209. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 112-12 SWIMMING POOLS § 112-13
111:699

ARTICLE IV
Tax Lien on Fire-Damaged Property
[Adopted 3-15-1983 by Ord. No. 2336-83]
§ 112-14. Lien established.
The Mayor and Council hereby provides for tax liens on fire-damaged
properties, pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1978, c. 184 (N.J.S.A. 17:36-8
through 17:36-13), as amended and supplemented, prohibiting the payment
to a claimant by any insurance company of any claim in excess of $2,500
for fire damages on any real property located within the borough pursuant
to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the adoption of this
article until such time as all taxes and assessments and all other municipal
liens or charges due and payable appearing on an official certificate of
search shall have been paid, either by the owner of such real property or
by the insurance company pursuant to the provisions of said statute, or the
borough submits to the insurance company a copy of a resolution adopted
by the governing body of the borough authorizing the owner to pay said
municipal liens in installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19.210
210. Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Exemption for Commercial and Industrial Improvements,
adopted 10-3-1995 by Ord. No. 2740-95, which previously followed this section, was
repealed 7-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2939-00.
§ 112-14 SWIMMING POOLS § 112-14
111:701

ARTICLE V
Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 8-26-2003 by Ord. No. 3026-03]
§ 112-15. Hotel and motel room occupancy tax established.
A. Purposes. It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of
P.L. 2003, c. 114, which authorizes the governing body of a municipality
to adopt an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not
to exceed 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1,
2003, but before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent
for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a
hotel or motel subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section
3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3) which shall be in addition to any
other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or
resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel
room.
B. There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in
the Borough of Rutherford which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage
rate of 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel
room in the Borough of Rutherford on or after July 1, 2003, but before
July 1, 2004, and 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel
or motel room in the Borough of Rutherford on or after July 1, 2004, of a
room or rooms in a hotel or motel subject to taxation pursuant to
Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (State
sales tax).
C. The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any
other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or
resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel
room.
D. In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
(1) All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
(2) A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this
article.
(3) A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any
person or to the public in general, in any manner, directly or
indirectly, that the tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor,
that the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the
customer or that the tax will be refunded to the customer.
(4) Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be
deemed a separate offense, and each representation or
advertisement by a vendor for each day that the representation or
advertisement continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 112-15 SWIMMING POOLS § 112-15
111:703
(5) The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be a fine
not exceeding $1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof, for each offense.
E. The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the
Borough by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel
customer. Each person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall
be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be
collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the same right in
respect to collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax were a part of
the rent and payable at the same time, provided that the Chief Financial
Officer of the Borough shall be joined as a party in any action or
proceeding brought to collect the tax.
§ 112-15 RUTHERFORD CODE § 112-15
111:704
ARTICLE VI
Fee for Redemption Calculations
[Adopted 7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 3205-10]
§ 112-16. Fees for redemption calculations provided by the office of
tax collector.
A. Each party entitled to redeem a tax certificate shall receive two free
redemption calculations per calendar year. There shall be a fee of $50
for each redemption calculation thereafter within the calendar year.
B. Third-party lien holders and others requesting a redemption calculation
shall be charged a fee of $50 for each redemption calculation.
C. Any and all requests for redemption calculations shall be made in
writing to the tax collector.
§ 112-16 SWIMMING POOLS § 112-16
111:705
Chapter 113
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 126.
§ 113-1. License required.
No person, firm, partnership, association or corporation shall operate a
taxicab within the Borough of Rutherford without first having obtained a
license to operate said taxicab from the Mayor and Council.
§ 113-2. Application procedure; information required. [Amended
5-2-1967 by Ord. No. 1973]
§ 113-3. Consideration by Mayor and Council.
All applications received by said Borough Clerk shall be presented by him
to the Mayor and Council at its next regular meeting, and said Mayor and
Council shall consider the same or may adjourn action thereon to a later
A. All applications for licenses shall be in writing on forms furnished by
the Borough of Rutherford, signed by the applicant or the agent of the
applicant and presented to the Borough Clerk.
B. Applications to conduct a taxicab business shall set forth the name of
the applicant, the correct name under which the business is being
operated, the residence of the applicant and such other pertinent
information as may be considered necessary to properly consider the
application.
C. Applications to operate a taxicab shall state the name of the applicant
and the residence of the applicant and shall provide that the applicant
be fingerprinted. A fingerprint check shall not be required when
applying for the renewal of an existing taxi-driving license. [Amended
12-6-1994 by Ord. No. 2720-94]
D. The operator of each taxicab shall present the certificate of a physician
showing that he has been examined within 60 days and he is of sound
physique, with good eyesight, and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart
trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which might render him
unfit for the safe operation of a taxicab.
E. All new applicants for driver's licenses shall present evidence of being a
licensed driver for a period of at least three years, or two years if a
holder of either a driver's education certificate or a defensive driver's
course certificate, to be entitled to the issuance of a taxi driver's
license. [Amended 6-5-1979 by Ord. No. 2260-79]
§ 112-16 RUTHERFORD CODE § 113-3
111:706
meeting, and at the meeting at which the same is considered the Mayor and
Council may grant or refuse said application.
§ 113-4. Issuance.
If said application is approved, the Council shall order the Borough Clerk
to issue the license upon payment to him of the license fee as hereinafter
provided.
§ 113-5. Expiration date. [Amended 12-6-1994 by Ord. No. 2720-94]
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire one year from the
date of issuance.
§ 113-6. Fees. [Amended 2-19-1952 by Ord. No. 1594-52; 4-17-1979
by Ord. No. 2254-79; 10-3-1989 by Ord. No. 2553-89; 12-6-1994 by
Ord. No. 2720-94]
The following nonrefundable fees shall be paid to the Borough Clerk:
§ 113-7. Display of license required. [Amended 12-6-1994 by Ord.
No. 2720-94]
§ 113-8. Fares established. [Amended 2-16-1965 by Ord. No. 1933;
3-17-1970 by Ord. No. 2040; 9-4-1974 by Ord. No. 2152-74;
6-5-1979 by Ord. No. 2260-79; 6-17-1980 by Ord. No. 2282-80;
9-5-1984 by Ord. No. 2378-84; 6-5-1986 by Ord. No. 2441-86;
11-19-1996 by Ord. No. 2778-96]
The following listed metered fares shall be the maximum charge for
conveying passengers within the Borough of Rutherford:
A. One hundred dollars upon issuance of a taxicab license.
B. Twenty-five dollars upon the filing of an annual application for a taxidriving
license, to cover the cost of investigation. [Amended
2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 3105-06]
C. A fee for providing State of New Jersey fingerprint checks at the rate
permitted by State of New Jersey law at the time said request is made.
A fingerprint check shall not be required when obtaining a renewal of
an existing taxi-driving license.
A. All licenses issued hereunder shall be exhibited in a prominent place
inside the vehicle.
B. The taxi-driving license issued by the Borough shall have affixed
thereto, at time of issuance, a photograph of the driver. Said
photograph shall be a print 1 1/2 inches by 2 inches, with a head size of
not less than one inch, taken against a light background.
§ 113-3 SWIMMING POOLS § 113-8
111:707
§ 113-9. Number of passengers restricted. [Added 2-16-1965 by
Ord. No. 1933]
The number of passengers being conveyed at any one time in one taxicab
shall not exceed five, exclusive of the operator thereof.
§ 113-10. Display of identification required.
Every vehicle licensed hereunder shall have posted on the inside thereof,
where the same may be easily read by passengers, a printed card in a frame
showing the rates of fare, the name of the owner, the name of the driver, his
badge number and a photograph of the driver. Said photograph shall be a
print 2 inches x 3 inches, with a head size of not less than one inch, taken
against a light background.
§ 113-11. Markings on vehicle required. [Added 2-16-1965 by Ord.
No. 1933]
Every vehicle licensed under the ordinance of which this section is
supplementary shall be clearly marked on each side thereof, which said
marking shall include the word "taxi" and an identifying number in letters
and numbers at least three inches in height.
§ 113-12. Record or log required. [Added 2-16-1965 by Ord. No.
1933; 2-7-1989 by Ord. No. 2526-89]
The owner of any taxicab licensed to operate the same in the Borough
of Rutherford shall keep a record or log wherein notations shall be made
setting forth the dates and times of operation of said taxicab and the names
of the operators thereof during said periods of operation. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of any taxicab licensed to operate the same in
the Borough of Rutherford to ensure that all operators of said taxicab or
taxicabs shall have obtained a taxi-driving license in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 113-13. (Reserved)211
A. A metered fee of $2 for the first 1/10 mile and $0.35 for each additional
1/10 mile for conveying a passenger from one pickup point within the
Borough of Rutherford to one destination within the Borough of
Rutherford. [Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 3105-06]
B. A waiting time fee of $1 may be charged for up to the first five minutes
and $0.15 per minute thereafter, with a maximum waiting time fee of $9
per hour. [Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 3105-06]
C. Fares are to be posted on the outside of the vehicle on both the
passenger's side and the driver's side.
211. Editor's Note: Former § 113-13, Badge required, as amended, was repealed 12-6-1994 by
Ord. No. 2720-94.
§ 113-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 113-14
111:708
§ 113-14. (Reserved)212
§ 113-15. Business regulation.
The soliciting of taxi business shall be carried on only by licensed operators
and for taxicabs which are immediately available.
§ 113-16. Availability of vehicles.
All licensed vehicles shall be available for at least eight hours a day and six
days a week.
§ 113-17. Passenger restrictions.
No person other than passengers for hire shall be permitted to ride in any
licensed taxicab while it is in service.
§ 113-18. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held to be unconstitutional, the decision of the court
respecting such provision or provisions shall not affect the validity of any
other provisions which can be given effect without such invalid provision or
provisions.
§ 113-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-7-1989 by Ord. No.
2526-89]
§ 113-20. Insurance; amount. [Added 5-5-1992 by Ord. No.
2646-92213; amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 3105-06]
A. Any operator of a taxicab operating within the Borough of Rutherford
violating the provisions of this chapter relating to the obtaining of a
taxi-driving license shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
not exceeding $50 and, in default of the payment thereof, may be
sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding
30 days. Every day on which said violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. [Amended 12-6-1994 by Ord. No. 2720-94]
B. Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this chapter, excepting those persons covered under
Subsection A of this section, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a fine of not exceeding $500 and, in default of the payment thereof,
may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 30 days. Every day on which such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
212. Editor's Note: Former § 113-14, Taxicab stands, was repealed 10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
3122-06.
213. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 113-20, Fees
for autocab insurance certificates, as § 113-21.
§ 113-14 SWIMMING POOLS § 113-20
111:709
§ 113-21. Fees for autocab insurance certificates. [Added 12-4-1979
by Ord. No. 2271-79; 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 3200-10]
The fee for the issuance of an autocab insurance certificate by the Borough
Clerk, required under N.J.S.A. 48:16-17, shall be $50, plus $1 for each
additional certificate which may be requested for filing in any other
municipality.
Chapter 114
TELEPHONE BOOTHS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Newspaper vending machines — See Ch. 62. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 109.
§ 114-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person responsible for placing and maintaining a pay
telephone.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Rutherford.
PAY TELEPHONE — Any self-service or coin- or credit-card-operated
telephone or bank of such telephones placed adjacent to each other, located
in or over a public sidewalk or street.
PERSON — An individual, business, firm, corporation, association,
partnership or other organization or group of persons.
SIDEWALK — That area dedicated to public use for pedestrian traffic.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, which is
on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer
A. No approval by the Mayor and Council for the issuance or renewal of a
taxicab license shall become effective until the owner of the taxicab
shall have filed with the Borough Clerk an insurance policy of a
company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of
this state. The Mayor and Council's approval shall become effective and
operation thereunder shall be permitted only so long as the insurance
policy shall remain in force to the full and collectible amounts as stated
herein.214
214. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which contained specific minimum amounts of
insurance coverage, and which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 3182-09.
§ 113-20 RUTHERFORD CODE § 114-1
114:710
or which is approved by official actions as provided by municipal ordinance,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks,
parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
§ 114-2. Permit required; permit fee; commissions.
§ 114-3. Indemnity and insurance.
§ 114-4. Telephone rates to be posted; emergency calls.
A. No person, association, partnership or corporation may place or
maintain any pay telephone on or above any public street or sidewalk
without having first obtained a permit as provided in this chapter.
Permits shall be issued by the Borough Clerk subject to approval of the
location and means of installation of the pay telephone as set forth
hereinafter. Permits or denial thereof, with reasons set forth in the
event of denial, shall be issued within 20 working days of application for
such permits.
B. Before installation, a plan or sketch of the pay telephone shall be
prepared by the applicant and furnished to the Borough Clerk in
sufficient detail to describe the size, location, equipment and means of
installation.
C. The fee for a permit shall be $200 for the first year and $50 for each
year thereafter.
D. The Borough of Rutherford shall receive any commissions paid by the
distributor arising out of the use of the pay telephones located on
municipal property. Said commissions shall be payable on a annual
basis at the time of the renewal of the permit.
A. Before receiving a permit, an applicant shall execute an indemnification
agreement substantially as follows:
"The applicant and any other persons on whose behalf the application
is made agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Borough of
Rutherford against liability for all claims for damage to property, or
injury to or death of persons, arising out of or resulting from the
issuance of the permit or the control, maintenance or ownership or
use of each pay telephone."
B. Before receiving a permit, an applicant shall file with the Borough Clerk
evidence of a general liability insurance policy of $1,000,000 for bodily
injury and $100,000 for property damage, naming the Borough of
Rutherford as additional insured against any injury, loss or damage that
may result from placing or maintaining the pay telephone on or above
the sidewalk.
§ 114-1 TELEPHONE BOOTHS § 114-4
114:711
§ 114-5. Standards for maintenance, installation and operation.
Pay telephones installed within the Borough of Rutherford shall comply with
the following standards:
A. Pay telephones shall permit the following calls to be placed without
charge except as may be otherwise provided by applicable tariffs filed
with the New Jersey Board of Regulatory Commissioners:
(1) Calls to the 911 emergency number.
(2) Emergency calls placed through operator assistance to the police
and fire departments.
(3) Calls for emergency purposes placed through operator assistance
to the police and fire departments by members thereof.
B. Current local coin-call initial rates shall be posted on the pay telephone
or on the pay telephone booth.
A. No booth surrounding a telephone shall exceed eight feet in height, four
feet in width or four feet in depth.
B. Each coin-operated pay telephone shall be equipped with a coin-return
mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an
immediate refund when applicable. The coin-return mechanism shall be
maintained in good working order.
C. Each pay telephone shall have affixed to it, in a place visible to everyone
using the pay telephone, the name and address of the distributor and
the telephone number of a working telephone service to report a
malfunction or secure a refund.
D. Pay telephones shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, a pay telephone shall be served and maintained so that:
(1) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
(3) Any clean plastic or glass parts are unbroken and reasonably free
of cracks, dents, graffiti, blemishes and discoloration.
(4) Any paper or cardboard parts or inserts are reasonably free of
tears, peeling or fading.
(5) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
(6) The telephone receiver is attached to the telephone.
§ 114-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 114-5
114:712
§ 114-6. Location and placement.
E. Any distributor who fails to maintain its pay telephone in working
condition may be given a ten-day written notice to repair the pay
telephone by the Borough Clerk or her agent. If the pay telephone is not
in working condition at the end of the ten-day period, the Borough Clerk
may revoke the permit and order the removal of the pay telephone by
the distributor, or the Borough of Rutherford in default thereof.
F. Each pay telephone shall, upon written request of the Borough Clerk,
be capable of being restricted to outgoing calls only within 10 days of
the request.
A. No pay telephones shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any street
or sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles;
(2) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
(3) Interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals, hydrants or
mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
B. Pay telephone shall be placed, or otherwise secured, so as to prevent
their being blown down or around the street or sidewalk, but shall not
be chained or otherwise secured to any traffic or street signs, signals,
hydrants or mailboxes.
C. No pay telephones shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within four feet of any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within four feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalks.
(3) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facilities.
(4) Within four feet of any driveway.
(5) Within four feet of any public area improved with a lawn, flowers,
shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
(6) At any location whereby the clear space for the passage way of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet.
(7) Within three feet of any building unless written permission is
secured from the property owner and filed with the application.
D. In the event that a particular pay telephone does not meet the
requirements set forth herein, an applicant may nevertheless be
entitled to a permit upon a showing that the issuance of such permit is
reasonable under the circumstances present. The issuance of such a
§ 114-5 TELEPHONE BOOTHS § 114-6
114:713
§ 114-7. Removal.
No person shall remove a pay telephone without having first notified the
Borough Clerk.
§ 114-8. Revocation.
permit shall be at the sole discretion of the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Rutherford.
E. Pay telephones shall not be placed in sidewalks in front of street
addresses where there appears to be continued criminal activity.
Continuous criminal activity means reports to the police of more than
four criminal incidents at an address within a two-month period prior to
the date of the application or more than 12 reported criminal incidents
in a year prior to the application, which incidents have resulted in
convictions.
F. No pay telephone shall be installed on the street or sidewalk of any
property located within a residential district.
G. No pay telephone shall be placed within 300 feet of any other pay
telephone on the same side of the street and within line of sight of such
other pay telephone on a sidewalk within a business district as
described in the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford.215
H. No pay telephone shall be placed within 1/4 of a mile of any other pay
telephone on the same side and within the line of sight of such other pay
telephone on a state highway in the Borough of Rutherford.
A. Upon receipt of a written complaint by a citizen or an authorized
representative of the Police Department that the location and use of a
pay telephone constitutes a threat to the health, safety and welfare of
the community, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford
shall conduct a hearing after providing written notice of same at least
10 days in advance thereof to all affected parties to ascertain whether
the location and use of the pay telephone constitutes a threat to the
health, safety and welfare of the community. If the Mayor and Council
find that the location and use of the pay telephone constitutes a threat
to health, safety and welfare of the community, the Mayor and Council
shall revoke any permit issued by the Borough Clerk for the use of the
pay telephone. The Mayor and Council may also order such other relief
as they deem fair, including requiring the pay telephone to be restricted
to outgoing calls only.
B. Upon removal of the pay telephone as provided for in this section, the
distributor shall take all necessary steps to ensure that the sidewalk on
which the removed pay telephone was located shall be restored to a
215. Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Zoning.
§ 114-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 114-8
114:714
§ 114-9. Applicability to existing pay telephones.
All existing pay telephones located on or above sidewalks within the
Borough of Rutherford which were installed in accordance with the
provisions of the Code of the Borough of Rutherford shall be deemed
"grandfathered"; provided, however, that any distributor desiring that its
pay telephones be "grandfathered" must notify in writing the Borough Clerk
within 30 days of the location of all of said distributor's pay telephones
existing on the date of adoption of this ordinance. All pay telephones not
so identified shall not be entitled to "grandfathered" status. The provisions
of this ordinance shall, however, apply to all future pay telephones and all
illegally installed pay telephones located on or above sidewalks within the
Borough of Rutherford.
§ 114-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm, partnership, association or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000
and, in default of the payment thereof, may be sentenced to imprisonment
in the county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each noncomplying pay
telephone violation shall constitute a separate offense. Every day on which
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 116
TENT CATERPILLAR CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees and shrubbery — See Ch. 120.
§ 116-1. Tent caterpillars and nests prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lands within the limits
of the Borough of Rutherford to permit to exist within the trees or shrubbery
on such premises, tent caterpillars or the nests of tent caterpillars.
§ 116-2. Inspection; removal; costs. [Amended 8-6-1991 by Ord. No.
2616-91]
The Borough of Rutherford and/or its agents may from time to time make an
inspection of the trees and shrubbery within the Borough of Rutherford and
may remove therefrom tent caterpillars, and, for that purpose, the Borough
of Rutherford and/or its agents shall have the right to enter upon any and
condition similar to that which existed prior to the installation of said
pay telephone.
§ 114-8 TENT CATERPILLAR CONTROL § 116-2
116:715
all lands in the Borough of Rutherford. The cost of operations shall be paid
by the property owners.
§ 116-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, persons or corporation who shall permit tent caterpillars in any
trees or shrubbery on his, her, their or its lands or premises or lands or
premises occupied by him, her, them or it, after notification, shall be subject
to and pay a penalty of $25 for each offense. The Judge, however, before
whom conviction is had, may fix the amount of said penalty not in excess of
the maximum provided for herein.
Chapter 116A
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 68.
§ 116A-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health,
safety and welfare of minors by prohibiting the sale of tobacco and nicotine
delivery products within the Borough of Rutherford to persons under the
age of 21.
§ 116A-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. As used in
this chapter, the following shall have the meanings indicated:
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Rutherford Health Department.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Rutherford Health Officer and/or his or her
authorized representative.
NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCT — Any product that is designed to deliver
nicotine or vapor, including, but not limited to, what are commonly known
as "e-cigarettes" or other types of electronic smoking devices, or any
cartridge or other component of such device, or related products including
but not limited to any substances used in such devices, such as liquids or
powders or other forms of tobacco, but excluding United States Food and
Drug Administration approved nicotine patches or nicotine chewing gum.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any
other legal entity.
§ 116-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 116A-2
116:716
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person or entity that operates a store, stand,
booth, concession, or place at which sales of tobacco or nicotine delivery
products are made to purchasers for consumption or use. The term shall
also mean any person or entity that owns, operates, or uses a tobacco
vending machine and/or a tobacco vending machine location as defined
herein.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE — Any automated, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens, or other form of payment, dispenses
nicotine delivery products, cigarettes, or other tobacco products.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE LOCATION — The room, enclosure, space
or area where a tobacco vending machine is installed and operated.
§ 116A-3. Retail sale of tobacco products.
A. No person shall sell tobacco or nicotine delivery products in the
Borough of Rutherford unless an employee of the establishment
controls the sale of such products. A person may only sell tobacco or
nicotine delivery products in a direct, face-to-face exchange between
the retailer and the consumer. Self-service displays and vending
machines of tobacco or nicotine delivery products shall be prohibited.
B. No person shall sell, distribute, or give tobacco or nicotine delivery
products to any person under the age of 21 years.
C. Tobacco retailers shall conspicuously post and reasonably maintain
signs having a minimum size of six inches by eight inches where
tobacco or nicotine delivery products are displayed and at all checkout
counters notifying customers that proof of age is required to purchase
tobacco or nicotine delivery products.
D. Any person selling tobacco or nicotine delivery products shall verify by
means of government-issued photographic identification containing the
bearer's date of birth that no person purchasing the tobacco- or
nicotine-containing products is younger than 21 years of age. No such
verification is required for any person over the age of 26. No clerk shall
sell tobacco or nicotine delivery products to a person less than 21 years
of age who has a note or any form of communication from any person,
including an adult.
E. No person or tobacco retailer selling tobacco or nicotine delivery
products shall allow an employee to sell or distribute such products
until the employee has read the provisions of this chapter and state
laws pertaining to the sale or distribution of tobacco and nicotine
delivery products and has signed a statement that the employee has
read such ordinances and state laws. Such form statement will be
supplied by the Health Department and the signed original statement
§ 116A-2 TENT CATERPILLAR CONTROL § 116A-3
116:717
§ 116A-4. Enforcement.
§ 116A-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 116A-6. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances contrary to or inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict
or inconsistency.
shall be filed with the Health Department and a copy shall be kept on
file by the tobacco retailer for the length of time that the person is
employed and made available for review by the Health Department.
A. The enforcement authority for this chapter shall be the Rutherford
Health Officer or his/her designee.
B. The Health Officer may, after giving proper identification, inspect any
matter, thing, premises, place, person, record, vehicle, incident, or
event as necessary to execute his or her official duties in a manner
prescribed by law.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer in his/her enforcement
of this chapter, and the Health Officer may request the assistance of the
Rutherford Police Department or other police agency or peace officer
when necessary to execute his or her official duties in a manner
prescribed by law.
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this chapter.
A. A person who violates the provisions of this chapter, including any
employee of a retail dealer licensee under P.L. 1948 c. 65 (N.J.S.A.
54:40A-1 et seq.) who actually sells or otherwise provides tobacco
product to a person under 21 years of age, shall be liable to a civil
penalty of not less than $250 for the first violation, not less than $500
for the second violation, and not less than $1,000 for the third and each
subsequent violation. Complaint shall be made in the municipal court of
Rutherford or before such other judicial officer having authority under
the laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. Each sale of tobacco and/or nicotine delivery product to any person
under the age of 21 shall constitute a separate violation.
C. In addition to the penalties set forth in Subsection A above, the
Rutherford Board of Health may suspend the retail food establishment
license of any person convicted of violation of this chapter, for a period
of not more than three days, pursuant to the authority of the Board of
Health to license and regulate food establishments as provided by
N.J.S.A. 26:3-31(c).
§ 116A-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 116A-7
116:718
§ 116A-7. Severability.
If any section or provision of the chapter be adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional, preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction, the same shall not affect the validity of
the chapter as a whole or any other section or provision hereof.
§ 116A-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect 20 days following its passage and publication,
or as otherwise provided by law.
Chapter 117
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 125. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 126.
§ 117-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
APPLICANT — Any person, persons, partnership or corporation submitting
an application for a license to furnish towing service in the Borough.
BASIC TOW — Private property towing and other nonconsensual towing
as defined in this section and other ancillary services that include the
following: arriving at the site from which a motor vehicle will be towed;
15 minutes waiting time; hooking a motor vehicle to, or loading a motor
vehicle onto, a tow truck; transporting a motor vehicle to a storage facility;
unhooking or unloading a motor vehicle from the tow truck; and situating
the motor vehicle in the space in which it will be stored. "Basic tow" also
includes issuing documents for the release of a motor vehicle to its owner
or other person authorized to take the motor vehicle; issuing an itemized
bill; three trips to the motor vehicle in storage, which, if applicable, include
making a vehicle available to an insurance appraiser or adjuster; issuing
documents for the release of a motor vehicle to its owner or other person
authorized to take the motor vehicle; and retrieving a motor vehicle from
storage during the hours in which the storage facility is open.[Added
9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 3432-17]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Rutherford in the County of Bergen, State of
New Jersey.
CRUISING — Driving an unengaged tow truck on a street or highway within
the Borough for the purpose of soliciting business.
§ 116A-7 TENT CATERPILLAR CONTROL § 117-1
116:719
GARAGE — A building wherein 10 motor vehicles towed for the Borough
of Rutherford can be sheltered or stored, located within an area permitted
under the Zoning Ordinance of the municipality. 216
HIGH-FREQUENCY POLICE RADIO RECEIVING SET — A radio receiving
set capable of receiving any message sent out by any Rutherford police
communications system.
LICENSEE — Any person, persons, partnership or corporation licensed by
the Borough to furnish towing service in the Borough in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
MOTOR VEHICLE — All vehicles propelled otherwise than by muscular
power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks and
motorized bicycles.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Borough of Rutherford Police Department as
established by Chapter 76 of the Code of the Borough.
STORAGE AREA — Any lot, area or place wherein a minimum of 20 motor
vehicles towed for the Borough of Rutherford can be placed and/or stored,
surrounded entirely by an adequate fence and lighting and located in an
area permitted under the Zoning Ordinance of the municipality.
TOWER — Any person, persons, partnership or corporation issued a license
to provide towing services.
TOWING SERVICE — The towing, transporting, conveying and/or removal
of damaged, disabled and abandoned motor vehicles from the streets or
highways within the Borough.
TOW TRUCK — A vehicle employed for the purpose of towing, transporting,
conveying and removing any damaged, disabled abandoned motor vehicles
from the streets or highways within the Borough at the request of the owner
or the Police Department.
WINCHING — The process of moving a motor vehicle by the use of chains,
nylon slings or additional lengths of winch cable from a position that is not
accessible for direct hook-up for towing a motor vehicle. Winching includes
recovering a motor vehicle that is not on the road and righting a motor
vehicle that is on its side or upside down, but does not include pulling a
motor vehicle onto a flatbed tow truck.[Added 9-25-2017 by Ord. No.
3432-17]
WRECKER — A public vehicle employed for the purpose of towing,
transporting and/or conveying or removing all kinds of vehicles which are
unable to be and/or are actually not operated under their own power, for
which service a charge or fee is exacted.
§ 117-2. License required.
No person, persons, partnership or corporation who or which wishes to
engage in municipal police towing shall engage in the business of operating
216. Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Zoning.
§ 117-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 117-2
116:720
wreckers or tow trucks for the aforementioned purpose within the Borough
without first obtaining a license therefor.
§ 117-3. Application for license.
§ 117-4. Qualifications of licensee.
Each licensee shall meet the following standards and qualifications:
A. Applicants for a license under this chapter must meet all the
qualifications set forth in § 117-4 and shall file with the Borough Clerk,
in duplicate, a sworn application in writing, on a form furnished by the
Borough Clerk, which must contain the following information:
(1) The full name and address of the applicant. If the application is
made for a corporation, it shall state the names and addresses of
the shareholders, officers and directors thereof, the address of the
registered office and the name of the registered agent; if made by a
partnership, the name and address of the partners.
(2) The year, make and type of each tow truck and/or wrecker to be
used in the towing service, its serial number, license plate number
and the name of the registered owner.
(3) The address where the tow trucks and/or wreckers are regularly
garaged, available telephone numbers, 24 hours per day, seven
days per week, and the names, addresses and serial numbers of the
motor vehicle drivers' licenses of all operators.
(4) The address of the garage or storage area.
B. The application for license shall be accompanied by a certificate of
insurance for the required coverage issued by a company in good
standing certified to do business in New Jersey, and each certificate
must contain an endorsement providing for 30 days' notice of
cancellation or nonrenewal stating that the Borough and licensee shall
receive, in writing, 30 days' notice of cancellation or nonrenewal by
certified mail, return receipt requested. The Borough shall be named as
an additional insured under the liability portion of the insurance
coverage.
C. Each applicant shall execute an indemnification/hold harmless
agreement in the form provided by the Borough Clerk, which shall be
attached to the application for a license.
A. The licensee must have a garage and storage area which, if not located
within the Borough of Rutherford, shall be located within the Borough
of Rutherford or towns west of the Hackensack River, but not more than
one mile from the boundaries of the Borough of Rutherford.
B. The licensee must deposit with the Borough Clerk the following
insurance policies: [Amended 11-19-1996 by Ord. No. 2782-96]
§ 117-2 TENT CATERPILLAR CONTROL § 117-4
116:721
(1) The licensee shall carry workers' compensation insurance in
accordance with the requirements of the laws of the State of New
Jersey. He shall also carry public liability and property damage
contingent liability insurance to indemnify the Borough and the
public against any loss due to injuries, accidents or damage of any
nature or character whatsoever, when such damage is the result of
any omission of the licensee, his agents or employees in or due to
the execution of the work called for under the license in an amount
not less than $250,000.
(2) Comprehensive general liability coverage with a limit of not less
than $1,000,000 combined single limit, to include contractual
liability coverage. At the licensees option, a garage liability policy
in lieu of a comprehensive general liability policy will be
acceptable, if there is evidence from the carrier that they are aware
of this contract and will hold the Borough of Rutherford harmless.
(3) A $2,000,000 umbrella liability policy.
(4) Automobile liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit.
(5) Garage liability coverage at a limit of liability of not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit and garage keepers' liability
coverage, on a direct primary basis, in the amount of $250,000,
with a maximum deductible of $500.
(6) Certificates of insurance showing that both the licensee is named
insured and the Borough of Rutherford is an additional insured.
(7) The licensee shall defend and hold harmless the Borough of
Rutherford for liability from any and all obligations, liabilities,
judgments, claims and demands for personal injuries and damages
to property which may arise out of the performance of this
agreement. The licensee shall save harmless the Borough from all
actions at law for any infringements of patent rights of tools,
equipment, apparatus or methods used by him.
C. The licensee must meet all the requirements of Title 39 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes, motor vehicle rules and regulations.
D. The licensee must own or lease and have operating at all times and
ready to go to a call at a location within the boundaries of the Borough
of Rutherford when dispatched by the Rutherford Police Department,
pursuant to the terms of the license and for the full term of the contract:
(1) At least three one-ton tow trucks with one-ton chassis and four-ton
crane and wheel lifts.
(2) At least two wreckers/tow trucks with a boom rating of at least 25
tons, of such construction and capacity that they will be able to tow
§ 117-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 117-4
116:722
§ 117-5. Investigation of applicant; denial or issuance of license.
any type of vehicle, one of which shall have twenty-five-thousandpound
underreach wheel lifts.
(3) One flatbed-type tow truck which is at least 26 feet, measured
bumper to bumper.
(4) In addition to the vehicle required in the preceding Subsection
D(3), a flatbed trailer and truck (for the removal of heavily
damaged trucks, buses, etc.) with a gross vehicle weight (GVW) of
80,000 pounds or have a subcontractor on twenty-four-hour call
with such equipment.
(5) An air cushion recovery system with a minimum of two air cushions
available.
(6) A forklift for unloading cargo or cleaning up cargo spilled on
roadway with a minimum rating of 7,000 pounds, or have a
subcontractor on twenty-four-hour call with such equipment.
(7) Equipment for jump starts, the changing of flat tires and portable
heavy-duty lighting.
(8) Personnel certified in heavy recovery and handling hazardous
materials.
(9) One large broom and shovel in each vehicle.
(10) Portable safety lights to be installed on rear of towed vehicle if
necessary.
(11) Steering wheel lock for towing vehicles from the rear.
(12) Tow-sling-type tow bar to prevent any part of the crane metal from
touching towed vehicles.
(13) Safety flares for night work.
(14) At all times, at least three employees with articulated driver's
licenses available to operate the above equipment, 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, including holidays.
E. The licensee must have a security device to ensure nontampering of
motor vehicles held for evidence and/or processing by the Police
Department. Any vehicle being held for such purpose(s) shall be stored
indoors.
F. The licensee must provide a telephone number where the licensee may
be reached 24 hours per day, seven days per week.
A. Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred by the
Borough Clerk to the Chief of Police, who shall cause to be made an
investigation of the qualifications and facilities of the applicant. The
§ 117-4 TENT CATERPILLAR CONTROL § 117-5
116:723
§ 117-6. Identification card.
Upon the issuance of the license, each licensee and his employees shall
be issued an identification card, signed by the Chief of Police, renewable
annually with the license. Such identification card shall not be transferable
and must be carried by each person to whom issued. The bearer of each
identification card shall exhibit the same upon request of any person at any
time when providing towing service.
§ 117-7. Duration of license; annual fee; renewal. [Amended
11-19-1996 by Ord. No. 2782-96]
Each license issued shall be for a period of one year commencing January 1
and terminating on December 31 of each year. The fee for any such license
shall be prorated according to the effective date of such license and based
on the annual fee of $750, which shall be paid to the Borough Clerk. All
licensees seeking to renew their license shall submit an application for
Chief of Police shall also investigate the driving record of the applicant
and all persons employed by the applicant as drivers or operators of
towing vehicles and the moral character of the applicant as he deems
necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare and safety. As
part of said investigation, the Chief of Police shall conduct a fingerprint
identification and criminal history record check with the State Bureau
of Identification.217 [Amended 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 2672-93]
B. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's qualifications are
found to be unsatisfactory or it is found that the issuance of a license to
the applicant would present a danger to the public health, welfare or
safety, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application his
disapproval and his reasons for the same and return the application to
the Borough Clerk, who shall notify the applicant, in writing, that his
application is disapproved and the reasons.
C. If, as a result of such investigation, the qualifications of the applicant
are found to be satisfactory and it is found that the issuance of a license
to the applicant will not present a danger to the public health, welfare
and safety, the Chief of Police shall endorse his approval on the
application, return the application to the Borough Clerk, who shall,
upon payment of the prescribed fee, execute and deliver to the
applicant his license, which shall be posted at his place of business for
public inspection. Such license shall contain the signature of the
Borough Clerk and the Seal of the Borough and shall show the name
and address of the applicant, the date of issuance and the length of time
the same shall be operative. The Borough Clerk shall keep a record of
all licenses issued and of all complaints received, if any, concerning
such licensee. The Borough Clerk shall send a copy of the license to the
Police Department for filing.
217. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 32, Fingerprint Identification and Criminal History Record
Checks.
§ 117-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 117-7
116:724
renewal of license on the form provided by the Borough Clerk, together with
the annual license fee.
§ 117-8. Licenses nontransferable.
The licensee shall not assign, transfer, convey, sublet or otherwise dispose
of the license to any other person or legal entity. Violation of this provision
shall be sufficient cause for cancellation of the contract and revocation of
the license.
§ 117-9. Duties and responsibilities of licensee.
By making application to be licensed as a tower by the Borough and by
accepting such employment, the licensee and its operators or agents agree
to the following:
A. The licensee shall be available 24 hours a day, seven days per week.
B. The wrecker/tow truck shall have a passenger seat to transport the
driver of the vehicle to be towed, under appropriate circumstances, at
no additional cost to the owner of the vehicle.
C. Any person, company or corporation requesting this license must have
had a towing business for a minimum of one year and must be of known
good reputation in the field of wrecking and towing.
D. Wreckers/tow trucks shall have two-way radio capabilities with their
dispatching center on a twenty-four-hour basis.
E. Calls must be answered within 15 minutes of the Rutherford Police
Department notice to licensee to respond to a call, unless a mutually
agreed time is approved.
F. The licensee shall provide each wrecker/tow truck with a shovel, broom
and other equipment necessary to clean up broken glass and debris
from the scene of an accident to which it is summoned. The driver of
such wrecker/tow truck shall be responsible for such cleanup.
G. All wreckers/tow trucks used and employed in towing of vehicles shall
be kept in a clean, good working condition, and the name, address and
telephone number of the licensee shall be conspicuously displayed on
each vehicle.
H. All licensees shall be required to comply with all state and local laws
and be licensed, as required.
I. The licensees shall, when performing under this license, follow the
lawful directions of the officers of the Rutherford Police Department,
agents or representatives of the Borough of Rutherford.
J. A person retrieving his vehicle shall be able to transact all business,
including the pick up of the vehicle and payment of fees, at the same
location. Such vehicles shall be available for pick up between the hours
§ 117-7 TENT CATERPILLAR CONTROL § 117-9
116:725
§ 117-10. Towing rates; fee cards; invoicing. [Amended 12-17-2002
by Ord. No. 3017-02]
of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. or upon special request of the Police
Department.
K. There shall be no piling of vehicles.
L. Vehicles shall be towed and stored in a safe manner so as to prevent any
damage to such vehicles.
M. The licensee shall provide a clean waiting room for the public with a
rest room and access to a public telephone.
N. The licensee shall accept at least one major credit card.
O. The licensee shall provide the Police Department with the following
information on vehicles unclaimed over 10 days: [Amended
2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 2672-93]
(1) The year, make, color and vehicle identification number.
(2) The owner's name and address if available.
(3) The Police Department CD number for the incident resulting in the
towing of the subject vehicle.
P. The licensee shall be responsible for any valuables left in or on motor
vehicles in his custody.
Q. The licensee shall post in a conspicuous place at the storage area both
the state and Borough towing rates.
A. No fees shall be charged or collected by any towing operator, owner,
driver, or employee for any tow occurring in the Borough of Rutherford
except as permitted under this section. Permissible towing rates and
other charges shall be as follows:218 [Amended 4-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 3226-11; 9-25-2017 by Ord. No. 3432-17; 8-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 3508-19]
(1) Basic towing rates.
(a) Motorcycles or motor scooters: $150.
(b) Light duty (up to 10,000 pounds), hookup: $150.
(c) Medium duty (10,001 to 16,000 pounds): $250 per hour.
(d) Heavy duty (16,001 pounds and above): $500 per hour.
(e) Decoupling fee (if tow is not performed): 1/2 of basic charge.
218. Note: After the first hour, all hourly billable rates will be charged in half-hour increments.
§ 117-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 117-10
116:726
(2) In cases of a motor vehicle involved in an accident, the following
fees shall apply to additional services, if actually performed:
(a) Waiting time (after the first 15 minutes): $15 per fifteen-minute
increments.
(b) Brush cleaning (sweep roadway): $30.
(c) Site clean-up (speedy dry): $20 per bag.
(d) Winching.
[1] Light/medium duty (10,001 to 16,000 pounds): $350 per
hour.
[2] Heavy duty (16,001 pounds and above): $600 per hour.
(e) Window wrap (collision wrap): $75.
(f) Tarping/wrapping vehicle: $90 per car; $250 per truck.
(g) Transmission disconnect: $50.
(h) Flatbed fee (If a vehicle can only be transported by flatbed):
$65.
(3) Special equipment (Equipment other than the first tow truck to
recover a motor vehicle that cannot be recovered by winching or
pieces of a motor vehicle that cannot be moved by hand):
(a) Labor:
[1] Accident minor cleanup and disposal of debris: $75 per
hour, one hour minimum, plus absorbent materials used.
[2] Recovery Supervisor and/or Level III Recovery Specialist:
$225 per hour.
[3] Certified towing operator: $125 per hour per person.
[4] Manual laborers: $100 per hour per person.
(b) Equipment: [Amended 10-15-2019 by Ord. No. 3513-19]
[1] Rotator/crane recovery unit: $1,200 per hour.
[2] Tractor with landoll trailer or detach trailer: $450 per
hour.
[3] Tractor/transport hauler only: $250 per hour.
[4] Refrigerated trailer with tractor: $450 per hour.
[5] Box trailer with tractor: $400 per hour.
[6] Air cushion unit: $1,000 per hour.
§ 117-10 TENT CATERPILLAR CONTROL § 117-10
116:727
[7] Light tower: $250 per hour.
[8] Pallet jack: $200 flat rate.
[9] Rollers: $200 flat rate.
[10] Any other specialized equipment: $250 per hour.
[11] Loader/backhoe/telescopic handler/bulldozer/bobcat®:
$300 per hour.
[12] Forklift: $300 per hour.
[13] Dump truck/dump trailer with tractor: $350 per hour.
[14] Roll-off with container: $350 per hour plus disposal.
[15] Recovery Supervisor vehicle: $150 per hour.
[16] Scene safety equipment, communication equipment,
traffic management equipment, etc.: $250 per hour each
type used.
[17] Recovery support vehicle/trailer additional recovery
equipment: $350 per hour.
(4) Mileage fees. There shall be no mileage fees for medium-duty and
heavy-duty vehicles charged to an owner or driver for any mileage
within the borders of the Borough of Rutherford or for any mileage
within the borders of the Borough of Rutherford to the tow
operator's facility. Mileage fees are permitted for light-duty
vehicles at the rate of $6 per loaded mile.
(5) Storage rates (Storage fees are calculated per twenty-four-hour
period or any part of).
(a) Cars/light trucks, ten-foot-by-twenty-foot space: $45 per day.
(b) Trucks (dual wheels) single axle: $90 per day.
(c) Tractor/dump truck/tractor and trailer combo/trailers: $125
per unit per day.
(d) Buses: $150 per day.
(e) Roll-off: $125 per day for each.
(f) Cargo/accident debris/load storage/vehicle components tenfoot-
by-twenty-foot space: $45 per space used per day.
(g) Rental of any tow-company-supplied trailer post incident: $500
per day.
(6) Road service. [Amended 10-15-2019 by Ord. No. 3513-19]
(a) Cars (light): $125 per hour plus parts.
§ 117-10 RUTHERFORD CODE § 117-10
116:728
§ 117-11. Prohibited activities.
The practice of cruising with a tow truck is forbidden. Furthermore, no
person shall pay any emolument to any third person not involved in the
accident or to any police officer for information as to the location of any
accident or soliciting the employment of the licensees for any accident or
soliciting the employment of the licensees service nor give any gratuities,
fees or other compensation or gifts to any members of the Police
Department. No solicitation for automobile repairs shall be made by a
licensee at the scene of an accident or within 48 hours of the release of the
automobile owner from any hospital.
(b) Trucks (medium/heavy): $175 per hour plus parts.
(7) Additional services.
(a) Fuel/hazmat/cargo spills cleanup and disposal: time and
material.
(b) Hazmat and trash recovery: subcharged 10%.
(c) Subcontractor markup: 10%.
(d) Administrative charge only after third visit to vehicle, cars
only: $50.
(e) After-hours release: $75.
(f) Notification documentation fee: $50.
(g) Fuel surcharge: reserved for future need.
B. Towing service to a location other than the licensee's storage area when
requested by the motor vehicle owner or driver shall be at a rate agreed
upon by both the licensee and the motor vehicle owner or driver, but
shall be limited to reasonable fees and charges.
C. Fee cards. Each tow truck operator or driver shall present a fee card to
each driver or owner of any vehicle to be towed or serviced at the time
the tow is performed or the services are rendered. Each fee card shall
clearly display the maximum rates for towing, mileage, storage, and
service as permitted under this section.
D. Invoice. Each tow truck operator or driver shall present an itemized
invoice for services rendered to each driver or owner of any vehicle to
be towed or serviced at the time the tow is performed or the services
rendered, if that driver or owner is present at the scene. The driver or
owner shall be required to sign the invoice. The police officer at the
scene, if any, shall be required to initial the invoice after the owner or
driver has signed it. Nothing herein shall prevent invoicing of additional
charges to the driver or owner of the vehicle for additional services
rendered after the initial invoice has been signed.
§ 117-10 TENT CATERPILLAR CONTROL § 117-12
116:729
§ 117-12. Administration; choice of towers.
§ 117-13. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 117-14. Appeal.
Any licensee aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the Borough
Clerk in the denial of an application for a license as provided in § 117-13
shall have the right of appeal to the Mayor and Council. Such appeal shall
be taken by filing with the Mayor and Council, within 14 days after notice
of the action complained of has been mailed to the licensee's last known
A. The governing body hereby designates the Police Department generally
and the Chief of Police in particular as its agent to supervise the
enforcement of the terms and provisions of this chapter and the rules
and regulations adopted hereunder.
B. No individual owner or operator of a wrecker shall respond to the scene
of an auto accident except upon notification by the officer in charge of
police headquarters or upon request of the driver or owner of the
vehicle involved.
C. The officers investigating accidents which require a wrecker shall get
authorization, whenever feasible under traffic safety guidelines, from
the drivers or owners of cars as to who is to do the towing.
D. In order to amplify and expedite the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter, the Chief of Police shall maintain a revolving list of
licensed towers to provide service where needed and instruct all onduty
officers to call those listed in alphabetical order on a rotational
basis. All owners or operators of disabled vehicles must first be advised,
whenever feasible under traffic safety guidelines, that they have a right
to call a tower of their own choosing and direct the towing vehicle to
remove the damaged vehicle to a garage or storage area of their own
choosing.
E. Each rotational shift, as referenced above, shall commence on Monday
at 12:01 a.m. and end on the following Sunday at 12:00 midnight.
A. Licenses issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
Chief of Police for violations of any terms or conditions of this chapter
or for good cause.
B. Notice of hearing for suspension or revocation of a license shall be
given in writing, setting forth the grounds of complaint and the time
and place of hearing. Such notice shall be served personally upon the
licensee or mailed by registered letter to the licensee at his last known
address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
C. In the event of a suspension or revocation of a license, the Chief of
Police shall report his findings and reasons therefor to the Mayor and
Council.
§ 117-12 RUTHERFORD CODE § 117-14
116:730
address, a written statement setting forth fully all the facts why the action
of the Chief of Police or Borough Clerk was improper. The Mayor and
Council shall set a time and place for hearing on such appeal, and notice of
such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided
in § 117-13B. The decision and order of the Mayor and Council on such
appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 117-15. Applicability; payment of charges.
§ 117-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment in
the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; and each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
and each day there is a violation thereof shall be deemed and taken to be a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 117-17. Severability.
If, for any reason, any section or part of a section, paragraph or provision
of this chapter shall be held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such holding
shall not affect any other section, any part of a section, paragraph or
provision of this chapter.
A. This chapter shall not apply to towers not providing towing service for
the Police Department.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the owner or the operator of an
automobile from contacting a tower of his own choice to remove his
vehicle from the public streets or highways of the Borough after it has
become disabled or otherwise inoperable by virtue of accident or other
reason. Said owner or operator shall have a reasonable time within
which to select a tower of his own choice to remove the vehicle from the
public roadways of the Borough. After expiration of a reasonable period
of time, the Police Department shall have the motor vehicle removed.
C. All charges made by any licensee shall be paid by the owner or operator
or any person, firm or corporation claiming the right to possession of
any vehicle towed or stored by the licensee as provided for herein, and
the Borough shall not be liable for the payment of any sum to the
licensee which may be due on account of any towing or storage.
§ 117-14 TENT CATERPILLAR CONTROL § 117-17
116:731
Chapter 119
(RESERVED)
Chapter 120
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 21 and Ch. 53.
Collection of vegetative waste — See Ch. 40.
Playground and recreation areas — See Ch.
73.
Tent caterpillar control — See Ch. 116.
§ 120-1. Protection of trees and shrubbery. [Amended 8-6-1991 by
Ord. No. 2617-91]
No person, firm, corporation or individual connected with such firm or
corporation shall do or cause to be done by others, either purposely,
carelessly or negligently, without the written permit of the Borough of
Rutherford and/or its agents, any of the following acts: cut, prune, break,
climb, injure or remove any living tree, shrub or plant; or cut, disturb or
interfere in any way with the roots of any trees, shrub or plant; or place
any rope, sign or poster or other fixture on any tree or guard; or injure,
misuse or remove any device placed to protect such tree, shrub or plant,
upon any highway, public place or park under the supervision or control of
the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 120-2. Regulations governing planting; costs; exception.
[Amended 4-14-1959 by Ord. No. 1-59; 8-6-1991 by Ord. No.
2617-91]
A. No shade or ornamental tree, shrub or plant shall be planted in any of
the parks, public places or highways until such tree, shrub or plant shall
have first been approved and the place where it is to be planted
designated by the Borough of Rutherford and/or its agent and a permit
granted therefor.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, the initial cost of all trees planted by
the Borough of Rutherford and/or its agents, the cost of planting the
same and the cost of posts, boxes and guards used for the protection
thereof shall be a charge upon the real estate, in front of which such
tree or trees shall be planted, as an improvement thereof. Such costs,
unless paid directly to the Borough of Rutherford, shall be certified by it
to the Collector of Taxes of the Borough of Rutherford.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a planting to replace a
tree or trees theretofore planted by the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 117-17 RUTHERFORD CODE § 120-3
119:732
§ 120-3. Protection of roots; spacing.
§ 120-4. Protection of trees during construction.
§ 120-5. Use of salt restricted.
No person shall place salt or pour salt water upon any public highway or
park in such a manner as to injure any tree, shrub or plant growing thereon.
§ 120-6. Attachment of electrical or other wires. . [Amended
8-6-1991 by Ord. No. 2617-91]
No person shall, without the written permit of the Borough of Rutherford
and/or its agent, attach or fasten any electric, telephone, telegraph or other
wire or insulator, or any device for holding any of the foregoing, to any tree
growing or planted in any park or public highway.
§ 120-7. Regulations governing wires.
Every person, firm or corporation having or maintaining any electric,
telephone, telegraph or other wires running through a public highway or
park shall securely fasten and maintain such wires in such a manner as will
A. No person, firm or corporation shall, without the written permit of the
Shade Tree Commission,219 place or maintain upon the ground in any
park or public highway any stone, cement, building material or other
matter or substance which shall impede the free passage of water, air
and fertilizer to the roots of any tree, shrub or plant in such highway or
park.
B. An open space of not less than two feet outside the trunks of trees at
their bases on all sides must be maintained on all trees on public
highways.
A. In the erection, alteration or repair of any building or structure, the
owner and contractor thereof shall place such guards around all nearby
trees in public highways and parks as will effectually prevent injury to
such trees.
B. No person shall pile any building material or make or mix any mortar or
cement within six feet of any highway trees or shrubs.
C. No person, firm, corporation or individual shall do any excavating
within two feet of any growing tree or shrub without the written
permission of the Shade Tree Commission.
D. Steam shovels and all other implements, machines and tools shall be
used or operated in such a manner as not to damage or destroy any
tree, shrub or plant in any public highway or park.
219. Editor's Note: The Shade Tree Commission was abolished by Ord. No. 2614-91. Permission
is required from the Borough of Rutherford or its agent.
§ 120-3 TREES AND SHRUBBERY § 120-7
120:733
safeguard the trees and shrubs against any damage therefrom and shall
make periodic adjustments whenever necessary to prevent damage to trees
and shrubs growing in any public highway or park.
§ 120-8. Interference with officials prohibited. [Amended 8-16-1991
by Ord. No. 2617-91]
No person, firm or corporation shall prevent, delay or in any manner
interfere with the Borough of Rutherford and/or its agents in the
performance of their lawful duties.
§ 120-9. Compliance with park signs required.
No person shall enter upon any portion of the lawn or ground within a public
park when notified by a sign placed in such park or by a police officer not to
enter upon such lawn or ground.
§ 120-10. Regulation of recreation in parks. [Amended 8-6-1991 by
Ord. No. 2617-91]
No person shall, except at such time and under such regulations as may
be designated by the Borough of Rutherford and/or its agents, play at any
game in a public park.220
§ 120-11. Littering prohibited.221
No person shall leave or deposit any paper or other waste materials in any
public park, except in such receptacles as may be provided therein for that
purpose.
§ 120-12. Regulations governing structures or vehicles in parks.
[Amended 8-6-1991 by Ord. No. 2617-91]
No person shall, without the written permit of the Borough of Rutherford
and/or its agents, place any booth, stand or other structure or any station
wagon or other vehicle in any public park.
§ 120-13. Sales and advertising in parks prohibited.
No person shall offer any article for sale, display any advertising device or
distribute any circulars or cards in a public park.
§ 120-14. Payment for damage required. [Amended 4-14-1959 by
Ord. No. 1-59]
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who shall willfully, carelessly
or negligently damage or destroy a tree, shrub or plant in a public highway,
street or park shall be required to pay the cost of remedying said damage.
220. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 73, Playgrounds and Recreation Areas.
221. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 21, Clean Environment, and Ch. 53, Littering.
§ 120-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 120-15
120:734
§ 120-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-14-1959 by Ord. No.
1-59]
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not
exceeding $200 for each violation.
§ 120-16. Repealer.
All prior ordinances or parts of ordinances concerning the Shade Tree
Commission are hereby repealed.
§ 120-17. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
Chapter 123
UNFIT DWELLINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boardinghouses and lodging houses — See
Ch. 14.
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 22.
Fire safety — See Ch. 34A.
Housing Code — See Ch. 47.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 78.
§ 123-1. Enabling legislation.
The terms and provisions of c. 112, P. L. 1942, being an act entitled "An
Act Authorizing Municipalities to Adopt Ordinances Relating to the Repair,
Closing and Demolition of Buildings Unfit for Human Habitation or
Occupancy or Use; and Providing for the Remedies and Procedure in
Connection with Action Taken Under Such Ordinances," as amended by c.
197, P.L. 1956, are hereby made applicable to buildings within the Borough
of Rutherford which are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use.222
§ 123-2. Administration by Building Inspector.
The Building Inspector of the Borough of Rutherford is hereby designated
and appointed as the public officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this
chapter.
222. Editor's Note: For current provisions, see N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq.
§ 120-15 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 123-3
123:735
§ 123-3. Administration procedures; notice and hearing.
Whenever a petition is filed with the aforementioned Building Inspector
by a public authority, as defined in the aforesaid statute, or by at least
five residents of the Borough of Rutherford, charging that any building, as
defined in the aforesaid statute is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use or whenever it appears to the said Building Inspector (on his own
motion) that any such building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, the said Building Inspector shall, if his preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner of and parties in interest, as defined in the aforesaid statute, in such
building, a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a
notice that a hearing will be held before the said Building Inspector (or
his designated agent) at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor
more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint; that the said owners
and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the
place and time fixed in the complaint; that the rules of evidence prevailing
in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings before the said Building
Inspector.
§ 123-4. Order to owner.
If, after such notice and hearing, the said Building Inspector determines
that the building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support
of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the said
owner thereof and parties in interest an order:
§ 123-5. Compliance required.
If the owner fails to comply, with an order to repair, alter or improve or, at
the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the said Building
Inspector may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or to
be vacated and closed, and the Building Inspector may cause to be posted,
at the main entrance of any building so closed, a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the
use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
A. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be
made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order or at the option of the owner to vacate or have the
said building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the
said building within a reasonable time as specified in the said order or
removal.
§ 123-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 123-6
123:736
§ 123-6. Provisions for removal.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Building Inspector may cause such building to be removed or
demolished.
§ 123-7. Disposition of costs.
The amount of such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements,
vacating or closing, or removal or demolition shall be a municipal lien
against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. A detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed with
the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax liens,
and a copy of the detailed statement shall be forthwith forwarded to the
owner by registered mail. If the building is removed or demolished by the
Building Inspector, he shall sell the materials of such building and shall
credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of removal or demolition,
and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
Building Inspector, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed
by such court, and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment
of the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or
judgment of such Court; provided, however, that nothing in this section
shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Borough
of Rutherford to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal
or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party
in interest may, within 60 days from the date of the filing of the lien
certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest
the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in
the municipal lien certificate.
§ 123-8. Enumeration of defects.223
The said Building Inspector may determine that a building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use if he finds conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents of the Borough of Rutherford; such conditions may include the
following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein
increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural
defects; and uncleanliness.
§ 123-9. Service of notice.
Complaints or orders issued by the Building Inspector pursuant to this
chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by the Building Inspector in the exercise of
223. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 89, Sanitary Code, § 89-75.
§ 123-6 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 123-9
123:737
reasonable diligence, and the Building Inspector shall make an affidavit
to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such
persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the Borough
of Rutherford or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and
published in the county and circulated in the Borough of Rutherford in
which the buildings are located. A copy of such complaint or order shall
be posted in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or
order. A copy of such complaint shall be duly recorded or lodged for record
with the county recording officer of the county in which the building is
located.
§ 123-10. Powers of Building Inspector.224
The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes
and provisions of this chapter, including the following powers in addition to
others herein granted.
§ 123-11. Legislation regarding nuisances.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to impair in any way
the power of the Borough of Rutherford to define and declare nuisances and
to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise,
or to repeal, modify or amend any ordinance of the Borough of Rutherford in
relation thereto. The powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition
and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other ordinance of the
Borough of Rutherford or any law of the State of New Jersey.225
A. To investigate the building conditions in the Borough of Rutherford in
order to determine which buildings therein are unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. With the approval of the Mayor and Council, to appoint and fix the
duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. With the approval of the Mayor and Council, to delegate any of his
functions and powers under this chapter to such officers and agents as
he may designate.
224. Editor's Note: For enumeration of powers of Health Officer in this connection, see Ch. 47,
Housing Code, § 47-3.
225. Editor's Note: In addition to material heretofore noted in this chapter see Ch. 64,
Nuisance Code; Ch. 89, Sanitary Code, Article II, Nuisances.
§ 123-9 RUTHERFORD CODE § 123-12
123:738
§ 123-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 123-13. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect after publication in the manner provided by
law.
Chapter 125
VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
New and used car lots — See Ch. 20.
Littering — Ch. 21 and Ch. 53.
Nuisance Code — Ch. 64.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 78.
Towing — See Ch. 117.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 126.
§ 125-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby determined and declared that the abandonment or storage
out of doors of any motor vehicle not currently in use for transportation
and not currently licensed or registered, on any public streets or on any
private lands within the Borough of Rutherford, is contrary and inimical
to the public welfare in that such vehicles so abandoned or stored attract
or may attract persons of tender years who, being so attracted, may play
in and about them and be injured in so doing, and in that such vehicles
so abandoned or stored out of doors, exposed to the elements, deteriorate
and in themselves are unsightly and, deteriorating, become more unsightly
and are detrimental to and depreciate the value of properties in the
neighborhood where they are located and in the Borough as a whole.
§ 125-2. Definitions.
A. The following terms, phrases and words used in and for the purpose of
this chapter shall be deemed to have the following meanings:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — Any vehicle as defined in this section which:
Has been continuously parked in any public street or on any public
land for a period of five days;
(1)
Is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic, and the
driver or person owning or in charge thereof neglects or refuses to
move the same to a place where it will not obstruct traffic;
(2)
§ 123-12 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 125-2
123:739
§ 125-3. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
JUNK AUTOMOBILE or JUNK AUTOMOBILE BODY — Any vehicle as
defined in this section which is no longer in actual use as a motor
vehicle, or which is wholly unfit, without rebuilding or reconditioning
for use in highway transportation, or which has been discarded for use
as a motor vehicle or otherwise abandoned.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or entity of any kind, being the owner of such
vehicle, or owner of the property on which the vehicle is located, or
having any legal right in, of or to the motor vehicle or other vehicle as
herein defined.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Borough of
Rutherford.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Includes all nonpublic residential and
commercial real property within the Borough of Rutherford, including
residential lots, multifamily dwellings, condominiums and townhouses,
retail establishments, office buildings and commercial/industrial
buildings.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — All property devoted to public use, including
public roads, rights-of-way and property whereon public buildings are
erected.
VEHICLE — With respect to private property, the term "vehicle" shall
be defined to mean passenger automobiles, motorcycles, and
commercial automobiles, as defined in the Motor Vehicles and Traffic
Regulations of the State of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq. "Vehicle"
shall also include all parts, tools, tires and other vehicle accessories and
equipment. With respect to public property, the term "vehicle" shall be
defined to mean every device in, upon or by which a person or property
is or may be transported upon a highway, including trailers, as these
terms are defined in the Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations of the
State of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
Is so in need of repair as to render the same incapable of being
readily operated under its own power and is allowed to remain in
such condition for a period of five days, except where such storage
is specifically authorized by Chapter 131, Zoning, of the Code of
the Borough of Rutherford; or
(3)
(4) Is found without one or more tires.
B. As used in this chapter, the terms "motor vehicle," "omnibus," "road
tractor," "trailer," "truck," and "truck-tractor" are intended to have the
meanings stated and defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
A. No person shall park, abandon, leave, keep or otherwise store any
vehicle on private property in the Borough of Rutherford, for a period of
§ 125-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 125-3
123:740
§ 125-4. Junked vehicles.
No person shall place, keep or store any junk automobile or junk automobile
body, as heretofore defined in this chapter, on any public or private property
within the Borough of Rutherford, unless same is in an enclosed garage,
barn or other building.
§ 125-5. Exceptions.
more than 30 days, except in an enclosed garage, barn or other
building.
B. No person shall park, store, abandon or otherwise keep any motor
vehicle on public lands, except as expressly permitted by parking
regulations or as authorized by an officer of the Rutherford Police
Department.
C. Any owner of a property located within the Borough of Rutherford who
allows or causes an abandoned vehicle to remain on his/her property in
violation of this chapter shall be subject to the same fines and penalties
as the owner of said vehicle, as set forth below.
A. The prohibition on the on the outdoor storage of vehicles on private
property, as set forth in § 125-3A, shall be subject to the following
exceptions:
(1) Vehicles that have a current registration and display proper license
plates such as to be operable on the public highways in the State of
New Jersey.
(2) Vehicles stored in an enclosed garage, barn or other building.
(3) Vehicles properly registered as historic vehicles pursuant to the
rules and regulations of the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles.
B. New or used automobile dealers that are licensed by the State of New
Jersey for the purpose of displaying vehicles for sale to the general
public and have received zoning approval will be exempt from this
chapter as long as they hold a current dealer's license and do not retain
vehicles on their lot that are not salable vehicles.
C. Licensed service stations (repair garages) and auto body repair shops
will also be exempt from the provisions of this chapter as long as they
are licensed by the State of New Jersey for the type of business they are
conducting and have received zoning approval for the area where they
are operating, and parking on the site is limited to those vehicles of
employees, those vehicles which are involved in repairs or servicing at
the station and those commercial vehicles accessory and necessary to
the operation of the service station per § 131-34G of the Borough Code.
No other parking shall be permitted, nor shall parking be permitted on
unpaved areas, per § 131-34G of the Borough Code. Such service
stations and shops shall maintain a neat and orderly lot and limit the
§ 125-3 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 125-5
123:741
§ 125-6. Impoundment of vehicles.
§ 125-7. Sale of impounded vehicles.
Whenever any vehicle impounded by the Police Department shall remain
unclaimed by the owner or person entitled thereto for a period of 90 days,
or if the cost of removal, storage, fine and/or court costs remain unpaid, the
Chief of Police may cause the vehicle to be sold or disposed of, as provided
by N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq. The address of the owner as shown on the
records of the State Division of Motor Vehicles shall be deemed sufficient
for the purpose of this chapter.
§ 125-8. Violations on public property.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs on Borough property or any
public roads or rights-of-way within the Borough of Rutherford,
enforcement of this chapter shall be exclusively by the Rutherford Police
Department, in accordance with the following standards:
number of vehicles that are being kept on the lot for repairs according
to the size of the available space.
A. Whenever any officer of the Police Department of the Borough of
Rutherford finds any vehicle, as defined in § 125-2, which has been
abandoned, kept or stored contrary to the provisions of this chapter on
any public property, such member of the Police Department shall
remove same or secure the removal of the vehicle to a storage place
designated by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Rutherford.
Such vehicle shall first be retained in impoundment until the person
owning the same shall first pay the reasonable cost of the removal and
storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle. The abandonment of any vehicle shall be
without liability to the Borough of Rutherford.
B. Whenever any vehicle is impounded as provided in this section, the
Chief of Police or some member of the Police Department acting for him
or her shall, within five days of the date of the impoundment, notify the
registered owner in writing by registered mail at the last known
address of the owner of the removal of such vehicle, the reason for its
removal and the location of the vehicle.
A. If a vehicle constitutes or may constitute a traffic hazard to the public, it
may be removed by a licensed towing operator to the place of business
of the tow operator until the owner shall come to claim it.
B. If a vehicle is parked on public property due to it becoming
mechanically disabled during operation, the owner/operator shall be
afforded a reasonable opportunity to arrange for its removal by a
towing service of the owner's choice, provided the owner timely alerts
the Rutherford Police Department when the vehicle becomes
inoperable, and the same is not creating a hazard.
§ 125-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 125-8
123:742
§ 125-9. Violations on private property.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs on private property within the
Borough of Rutherford, enforcement of this chapter shall be by the Zoning
Officer and/or the Construction Code Official.
§ 125-10. Penalties.
§ 125-11. Declaration of nuisance.
A continuance of a violation or a noncompliance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed a nuisance, and the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Rutherford shall have the right to apply to the courts of this
state for injunctive relief or other relief, in addition to the penalties imposed
herein.
C. The owner or person entitled to possession of any vehicle removed from
public property shall be responsible for all reasonable costs of removal
and storage in conjunction with recovering possession of the vehicle.
D. Enforcement as set forth in this section with respect to violations on
public property shall be in addition to the authority of the Police
Department to issue summonses for any applicable violations of the
motor vehicle laws of the State of New Jersey.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of the restrictions on the
parking and storage of vehicles on private property, as set forth in this
chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the following
penalties:
(1) A fine of not more than $100 for a first offense.
(2) For a second offense, the fine shall be not less than $100 nor
exceed $500.
(3) For a third and subsequent offense, the fine shall be $1,000 or
imprisonment for a term of not more than 30 days, or both.
B. Any owner of a property located within the Borough of Rutherford who
allows or causes an abandoned vehicle to remain on his/her property in
violation of this chapter shall be subject to the same fines and penalties
as the owner of said vehicle as set forth above.
C. The imposition of a penalty or penalties for any violation shall not
excuse or be deemed to permit to continue, and all such persons
convicted shall be required to correct or remedy, such violations within
a reasonable time. If said violations are not corrected within 10 days
following conviction, the prohibited condition shall be deemed a
separate offense hereunder.
§ 125-8 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 125-12
123:743
§ 125-12. Effect on other provisions; severability.
This chapter shall not be deemed to limit any other remedy or enforcement
of remedy provided by state statute or local ordinance. If any section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
Chapter 126
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Chapter 126 — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Bicycles — See Ch. 12.
Municipal parking lots — See Ch. 61.
Lighting regulations for parking areas — See
Ch. 66.
Regulation of parking and traffic in parking
areas — See Ch. 66A.
Speed limits in parks and recreation
areas — See Ch. 73.
Skateboards, bicycles, roller skates and
scooters — See Ch. 98.
Closing of streets for school safety — See Ch.
108.
Driving on sidewalks — See Ch. 109, § 109-14.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 113.
§ 125-12 RUTHERFORD CODE § 125-12
123:744
ARTICLE I
Prohibited Parking and Standing
§ 126-1. Parking prohibited in certain areas.
A. No person or persons, firm or corporation shall park any automobile,
bus, truck or other vehicle in the following designated areas of the
following streets:
(1) West side of Milton Court commencing at the intersection with
Elliot Place and running northerly a distance of 168 feet.
[Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(2) West side of Kip Avenue commencing at a point 245 feet southerly
from the intersection with Ames Avenue and running southerly a
distance of 45 feet. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(3) North side of Cooper Place between Springfield Avenue and
Jackson Avenue.226 [Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 3346-14]
(4) South side of Donaldson Avenue beginning at the intersection of
the same with Park Avenue and running westerly a distance of 210
feet. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(5) East side of Ettrick Terrace for its entire length.
(6) North side of West Passaic Avenue beginning at the northwest
corner of Wood Street and West Passaic Avenue and running in a
westerly direction for a distance of 45 feet. [Amended 5-28-2019
by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(7) North side of West Passaic Avenue beginning at the northeast
corner of Wood Street and West Passaic Avenue and running in an
easterly direction for a distance of 45 feet. [Amended 5-28-2019
by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(8) Along the easterly terminus of East Passaic Avenue. [Amended
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(9) Along the north side of Pierrepont Avenue beginning at a point
distant 335 feet northwesterly from the intersection of the same
with the northwest side of Ridge Road to a point 12 feet
northwesterly therefrom. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(10)West side of Kip Avenue commencing at a point 245 feet southerly
from the intersection with Ames Avenue and running southerly a
distance of 45 feet. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
226. Editor's Note: Former entry for northeast side of Ames Avenue was repealed 12-16-1975 by
Ord. No. 2182-75.
§ 126-1 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-1
123:745
(11) Southeast side of Kip Avenue between Franklin Place and Ames
Avenue.
(12) Northeast side of Ames Avenue beginning at a point 490 feet
southeast of the intersection of the same with the southeast side of
Chestnut Street and running southeasterly a distance of 50 feet.
[Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(13) Southeast side of Ames Avenue beginning at the intersection of the
same with the southeast side of Kip Avenue and running
southeasterly a distance of 178 feet, except emergency vehicles
and authorized vehicles. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(14) 227Both sides of Darwin Avenue beginning at the intersection with
Monona Avenue on the west side running northerly to its northerly
terminus and on the east side commencing at a point 105 feet
northerly from the intersection with Monona Avenue and running
northerly to its northerly terminus. [Added 9-23-2019 by Ord.
No. 3512-19]
(15) (Reserved)228
(16) East side of Mortimer Avenue between West Pierrepont Avenue and
Riverview Avenue, except for emergency vehicles and authorized
vehicles. [Amended 9-5-1985 by Ord. No. 2413-85; 5-28-2019
by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(17) Southeast side of Belford Avenue between Cooper Place and Union
Avenue.
(18) (Reserved)229
(19) (Reserved)230
(20) (Reserved)231
(21) East side of The Terrace commencing at a point 165 from the
northeasterly intersection of Sylvan Street and running southerly
to its terminus with East Passaic Avenue. [Amended 5-28-2019
by Ord. No. 3501-19]
227. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(14), regarding the east side of Park Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
228. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(15), regarding the northeast side of Rutherford
Avenue, was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
229. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(18), regarding the northeast side of Union Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
230. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(19), regarding the southwest side of Union Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
231. Editor's Note: Former entry for the northwest side of Chestnut Street was repealed
12-5-1978 by Ord. No. 2243-78.
§ 126-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-1
123:746
(22)West side of Ettrick Terrace from the intersection of Spring Dell
with Ettrick Terrace for a distance of 185 feet.
(23) Southeast side of Wells Place beginning at the intersection of Wells
Place with the northeast corner of Union Avenue for a distance of
108 feet.
(24) (Reserved)232
(25) (Reserved)233
(26) (Reserved)234
(27) (Reserved)235
(28) (Reserved)236
(29) Southwesterly side of Franklin Place between Chestnut Street and
Home Avenue. [Amended 12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75]
(30) (Reserved)237
(31) Northwesterly side of Springfield Avenue between Francisco
Avenue and Union Avenue.
(32) (Reserved)238
(33) (Reserved)239
(34) (Reserved)240
(35)Westerly side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 224 feet from
the intersection of Donaldson Avenue and thence running northerly
a distance of 67 feet. [Amended 8-6-1991 by Ord. No. 2611-91]
(36) (Reserved)241
232. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(24), regarding the southeast side of Jackson Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
233. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(25), regarding the northwest side of Jackson Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
234. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(26), regarding the northeast side of Union Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
235. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(27), regarding the northwest side of Jackson Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
236. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(28), regarding the southeast side of Jackson Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
237. Editor's Note: Former entry for the southeasterly side of Belford Avenue was repealed
12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75.
238. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(32), regarding the both sides of Erie Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
239. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(33), regarding the easterly side of Erie Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
240. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(34), regarding the westerly side of Erie Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
241. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(36), regarding the northeasterly side of Union Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-1 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-1
123:747
(37) (Reserved)242
(38) (Reserved)243
(39) (Reserved)244
(40) 245West side of Preble Place for its entire length. [Added
7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 3233-11; amended 8-28-2012 by Ord.
No. 3266-12; 7-9-2013 by Ord. No. 3299-13; 5-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 3501-19]
(41) 246 South terminus of Preble Place. [Added 7-26-2011 by Ord.
No. 3233-11]
(42) 247East side of Preble Place commencing 525 feet from the
intersection of West Gouverneur Avenue and running southerly for
a distance of 135 feet. [Added 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 3233-11;
amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(43) (Reserved)248
(44) (Reserved)249
(45) (Reserved)250
(46) (Reserved)251
(47) (Reserved)252
(48) (Reserved)253
(49) (Reserved)254
242. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(37), regarding the southwest side of Union Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
243. Editor's Note: Former entry for the northwest side of Riverside Avenue was repealed
12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75.
244. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(39), regarding the both sides of Jackson Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
245. Editor's Note: Former entry for the northeasterly side of Spring Dell was repealed
12-5-1978 by Ord. No. 2243-78.
246. Editor's Note: Former entry for the east side of Erie Avenue was repealed 12-5-1978 by
Ord. No. 2243-78.
247. Editor's Note: Former entry for the southwesterly side of Ames Avenue was repealed
12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75.
248. Editor's Note: Former entry for the southeasterly side of Home Avenue was repealed
12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75.
249. Editor's Note: Former entry for the southerly side of Highland Cross was repealed
12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75.
250. Editor's Note: Former entry for the northerly side of Highland Cross was repealed
12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75.
251. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(46), regarding the westerly side of Meadow Road, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
252. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(47), regarding the westerly side of Meadow Road, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
253. Editor's Note: Former entry for the southerly side of Highland Cross was repealed
12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75.
§ 126-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-1
123:748
(50) (Reserved)255
(51) North side of Hollister Avenue between Montross Avenue and
Carmita Avenue.
(52) (Reserved)256
(53) (Reserved)257
(54) (Reserved)258
(55)West side of Ivy Place for its entire length.
(56) (Reserved)259
(57) Sixty-three feet on the northerly side of West Passaic Avenue from
its intersection with the northwest corner of Wood Street
commencing at a point in a westerly direction from said
intersection a distance of 314 feet. [Amended 12-16-1975 by
Ord. No. 2182-75]
(58) Twenty-five feet on the northerly side of West Passaic Avenue from
its intersection with Montross Avenue in an easterly direction for a
distance of 292 feet.
(59) (Reserved)260
(60) Southwest side of Fairview Avenue commencing at a point being
125 feet from the intersection of the southwest side of Fairview
Avenue and the southwest side of Mortimer Avenue and running
southeasterly along said southwest side of Fairview Avenue for a
distance of 75 feet. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(61) Northeast side of Fairview Avenue commencing at the intersection
of said northeast side of Fairview Avenue with the northwest side of
Maple Street and running northwesterly along said northeasterly
side of Fairview Avenue for a distance of 90 feet.
(62) North side of West Pierrepont Avenue commencing at the
northwesterly intersection of West Pierrepont Avenue and
254. Editor's Note: Former entry for the northerly side of Highland Cross was repealed
12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75.
255. Editor's Note: Former entry for Station Square was repealed 12-16-1975 by Ord. No.
2182-75.
256. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(52), regarding the west side of Erie Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
257. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(53), regarding the east side of Erie Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
258. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(54), regarding the east side of Erie Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
259. Editor's Note: Former entry for the west side of Ayer Place was repealed 4-9-2013 by Ord.
No. 3286-13.
260. Editor's Note: Former entry for the west side of Park Avenue was repealed 7-2-1985 by
Ord. No. 2408-85.
§ 126-1 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-1
123:749
Mortimer Avenue and running westerly for a distance of 101 feet,
except emergency vehicles and authorized vehicles. [Amended
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(63) (Reserved)261
(64) (Reserved)262
(65) (Reserved)263
(66) East side of Park Avenue from a point 35 feet from the intersection
of Donaldson Avenue commencing at a point 262 feet and thence
running northeasterly a distance of 25 feet. [Added 12-16-1975
by Ord. No. 2182-75]
(67) (Reserved)264
(68) (Reserved)265
(69) (Reserved)266
(70) (Reserved)267
(71) (Reserved)268
(72) North side of Donaldson Avenue commencing at a point 107 feet
westerly from the intersection of Park Avenue, and running
westerly for a distance of 116 feet. [Added 11-7-1984 by Ord.
No. 2390-84; amended 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 3183-09;
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(73)Westerly side of Chestnut Street commencing 146 feet from the
intersection of Union Avenue and Chestnut Street running
southwesterly for a distance of 15 feet. [Added 10-1-1985 by
Ord. No. 2417-85; amended 6-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2469-87]
(74) North side of Spring Dell commencing at a point 144 feet from the
intersection of Sylvan Street and Spring Dell and running in an
261. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(63), regarding the east side of Meadow Road, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
262. Editor's Note: Former entry for the northerly side of West Passaic Avenue was repealed
12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75.
263. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(54), regarding the west side of Erie Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
264. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(67), regarding the southwest side of Union Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
265. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(68), regarding the northeasterly side of Union Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
266. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(69), regarding the both sides of Union Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
267. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(70), regarding the westerly side of Erie Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
268. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(71), regarding the northwesterly side of Ridge Road,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-1
123:750
easterly direction for a distance of 128 feet. [Added 10-15-1985
by Ord. No. 2418-85]
(75) East side of Milton Court commencing at a point 85 feet from the
intersection of Elliott Place and Milton Court and running in a
northerly direction for a distance of 65 feet. [Added 10-15-1985
by Ord. No. 2418-85; amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(76) (Reserved)269
(77) (Reserved)270
(78)Westerly side of the aisle of the Borough of Rutherford Park N'
Ride. [Added 2-18-1986 by Ord. No. 2429-86]
(79)Westerly side of Jackson Avenue between Erie Avenue and Union
Avenue. [Added 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 2531-89]
(80) (Reserved)271 [Added 9-5-1990 by Ord. No. 2580A-90]
(81) East side of Agnew Place between Union Avenue and West Erie
Avenue. [Amended 10-16-1990 by Ord. No. 2585-90;
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(82) South side of West Park Place commencing at a point 88 feet from
the intersection of Park Avenue and West Park Place and running in
a westerly direction for a distance of 15 feet. [Added 4-7-1992 by
Ord. No. 2640-92]
(83) The perimeter of the Municipal Access Parking Lot as shown on the
attached site plan which is made a part of this chapter.272 [Added
4-21-1992 by Ord. No. 2645-92]
(84) South side of Highland Cross commencing at a point 70 feet from
the intersection of Veterans Boulevard and thence running
southeasterly a distance of 57 feet. [Added 7-7-1992 by Ord. No.
2656-92]
(85) South side of Highland Cross commencing at a point 159 feet from
the intersection of Veterans Boulevard and thence running
southeasterly a distance of 50 feet. [Added 7-7-1992 by Ord. No.
2656-92]
(86) (Reserved)273
269. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(76), regarding the easterly side of Erie Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
270. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(77), regarding the easterly side of Erie Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
271. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(80), regarding the north side of Rutherford Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
272. Editor's Note: The site plan is attached to Ord. No. 2645-92 and on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk.
§ 126-1 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-1
123:751
(87) (Reserved)274
(88) (Reserved)275
(89) (Reserved)276
(90)West side of Wood Street commencing at a point 162 feet from the
intersection of Union Avenue and thence running southwesterly for
a distance of 14 feet. [Added 3-19-1996 by Ord. No. 2757-96]
(91) Northwesterly side of Ridge Road beginning at the northwest
corner of Highland Cross and Ridge Road and running in a
northerly direction for a distance of 80 feet. [Added 3-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 2931-00]
(92) Northeasterly side of Ridge Road beginning at the northeast corner
of Highland Cross and Ridge Road and running in a northerly
direction for a distance of 62 feet. [Added 3-21-2000 by Ord. No.
2931-00]
(93) Southeasterly side of Ridge Road beginning at the southeast corner
of Highland Cross and Ridge Road and running in a southerly
direction for a distance of 75 feet. [Added 3-21-2000 by Ord. No.
2931-00]
(94) Southwesterly side of Ridge Road beginning at the southwest
corner of Highland Cross and Ridge Road and running in a
southerly direction for a distance of 75 feet. [Added 3-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 2931-00]
(95) Northwesterly side of West Passaic Avenue beginning at the
northwest corner of Mortimer Avenue and West Passaic Avenue and
running in a westerly direction for a distance of 60 feet. [Added
4-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2932-00]
(96) Northeasterly side of West Passaic Avenue beginning at the
northeast corner of Mortimer Avenue and West Passaic Avenue and
running in an easterly direction for a distance of 55 feet. [Added
4-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2932-00]
(97) Southeasterly side of West Passaic Avenue beginning at the
southeast corner of Mortimer Avenue and West Passaic Avenue and
running in an easterly direction for a distance of 59 feet. [Added
4-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2932-00]
273. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(86), pertaining to part of Park Avenue, added
10-19-1993 by Ord. No. 2687-93, was repealed 12-28-1994 by Ord. No. 2721-94.
274. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(87), pertaining to part of Park Avenue, added
10-19-1993 by Ord. No. 2687-93, was repealed 12-28-1994 by Ord. No. 2721-94.
275. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(88), regarding the northeasterly side of Orient Way,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
276. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(89), regarding the both sides of Darwin Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-1
123:752
§ 126-2. Prohibited stopping or standing. 278 [Added 5-1-1979 by
Ord. No. 2255-79]
(98) Southwesterly side of West Passaic Avenue beginning at the
southwest corner of Mortimer Avenue and West Passaic Avenue
and running in a westerly direction for a distance of 75 feet.
[Added 4-18-2000 by Ord. No. 2932-00]
(99) (Reserved)277
A. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time in the following
designated areas of the following streets:
(1) Along both sides of Barrows Avenue from the westerly curbline of
Orient Way to a point 80 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Along both sides of Park Avenue commencing at the northerly
curbline of Rutherford Avenue and running northerly for 485 feet
on the west side of Park Avenue and 372 feet on the east side of
Park Avenue. [Added 9-5-1990 by Ord. No. 2580A-90;
amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(3) Along the north side of Spring Dell from the easterly curbline of
Park Avenue to a point 220 feet easterly therefrom. [Added
10-19-1993 by Ord. No. 2687-93; amended 9-7-1994 by Ord.
No. 2709-94; 5-2-1995 by Ord. No. 2729-95]
(4) Along the south side of Franklin Place from the westerly curbline of
Park Avenue to a point 92 feet westerly therefrom. [Added
10-19-1993 by Ord. No. 2687-93; amended 9-7-1994 by Ord.
No. 2709-94; 12-28-1994 by Ord. No. 2721-94; 10-15-1996 by
Ord. No. 2774-96; 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3010-02]
(5) Along the south side of Spring Dell from the easterly curbline of
Park Avenue to the northwesterly curbline of Sylvan Street.
[Added 12-28-1994 by Ord. No. 2721-94; amended 5-2-1995
by Ord. No. 2729-95]
(6) Along the west side of Park Avenue from the southerly curbline of
Franklin Place to a point 160 feet southerly therefrom. [Added
12-28-1994 by Ord. No. 2721-94; amended 10-15-1996 by
Ord. No. 2774-96; 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(7) Along the east side of Park Avenue from the northerly curbline of
Spring Dell to a point 110 feet therefrom. [Added 12-28-1994 by
Ord. No. 2721-94; amended 10-15-1996 by Ord. No. 2774-96;
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
277. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(99), regarding the north side of Riverside Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
278. Editor's Note: Former § 126-2, Violations and penalties, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord.
No. 2243-78.
§ 126-1 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-2
123:753
(8) Both sides of Highland Cross from the easterly curbline on State
Highway 17 to its easterly terminus, except for emergency and
authorized vehicles on the south side between Veterans Boulevard
and its easterly terminus. [Added 3-5-1996 by Ord. No.
2754-96; amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(9) West side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 43 feet northerly
from the intersection with The Terrace and running southerly a
distance of 191 feet. [Added 3-19-1996 by Ord. No. 2757-96;
amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(10) Along the north side of Franklin Place from the westerly curbline of
Park Avenue for a distance of 46 feet in a westerly direction.
[Added 10-15-1996 by Ord. No. 2774-96; amended 7-23-2002
by Ord. No. 3010-02]279
(11) Along the west side of Jackson Avenue, commencing at the
Intersection of River Oaks Drive and Jackson Avenue and running
northerly for a distance of 90 feet. [Added 11-21-2000 by Ord.
No. 2953-2000]
(12) Along the north side of Franklin Place from a point 150 feet west of
the westerly curb of Park Avenue to Chestnut Street. [Added
7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3010-02]
(13) North side of Borough Street commencing at the intersection with
State Highway 17 and running easterly a distance of 370 feet.
[Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(14) South sides of Borough Street between Veterans Boulevard and its
easterly terminus. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(15) Both sides of Altman Drive, also known as "Howmedica Way,"
commencing at a point 330 feet easterly from the intersection with
Veterans Boulevard and running easterly to its easterly terminus.
[Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(16) Both sides of Industrial Drive commencing at a point 290 feet
westerly from the intersection with Veterans Boulevard and
running westerly to its westerly terminus. [Added 5-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 3501-19]
(17) Both sides of Veterans Boulevard commencing at the intersection
with the North Service Road aka "Thomas E Dunn Memorial
Highway," running a distance on the east 50 feet and on the west
side 95 feet. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(18) Along the south and east side of Veterans Boulevard commencing
at southeasterly corner at the intersection with Veterans Boulevard
and Altman Drive, aka "Howmedica Way," and running a distance
279. Editor's Note: Former § 126-2A(11) and (12), added 11-19-1996 by Ord. No. 2779-96,
which previously followed this subsection, were repealed 2-4-1997 by Ord. No. 2787-97.
§ 126-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-2
123:754
southerly 60 feet and westerly 50 feet. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 3501-19]
(19) Northeasterly side of Orient Way commencing at the intersection
with North Service Road aka "Thomas E Dunn Memorial Highway"
and running northerly for a distance of 85 feet. [Added 5-28-2019
by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(20) Northeast side of Rutherford Avenue between Ridge Road and
Riverside Avenue. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(21) Both sides of Jackson Avenue commencing at the northerly
intersection with Union Avenue and running a distance northerly
on the east side 90 feet and on the west side between Union Avenue
and Monona Avenue. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(22) Both sides of Jackson Avenue between Monona Avenue and the
East Rutherford Border. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(23) Both sides of Jackson Avenue commencing at the southerly
intersection with Union Avenue and running a distance southerly
on the west side 100 feet and on the east side 125 feet. [Added
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(24) Both sides of Union Avenue commencing at the westerly
intersection with Jackson Avenue and running a distance westerly
on the south side 265 feet and on the north side 160 feet. [Added
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(25) Both sides of Union Avenue on the south side between Jackson
Avenue and Springfield Avenue and on the north side between
Jackson Avenue and Wells Place. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(26) Both sides of Meadow Road between East Erie Avenue and State
Highway 17. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(27) Both sides of East Erie Avenue between Meadow Road and Orient
Way, except for permit-parking-only spots designated by ordinance.
[Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(28) Northeast side of West Erie Avenue between Park Avenue and
Jackson, except for permit-parking-only spots designated by
ordinance between Union Avenue and Chestnut Street. [Added
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(29)West side of West Erie Avenue commencing at a point 73 feet
southerly from the intersection of Union Avenue and running
southerly a distance of 250 feet. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
§ 126-2 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-2
123:755
(30) Both sides of West Erie Avenue between Vanderburg Avenue and
Maple Avenue. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(31) Both sides of Riverside Avenue commencing at the southerly
intersection of Rutherford Avenue and running northerly a distance
on the west side 630 feet and on the east side 580 feet. [Added
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(32) North side of Riverside Avenue beginning at the intersection of the
same with West Pierrepont Avenue and running southerly for a
distance of 89 feet. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(33) Southwest side of Union Avenue commencing at the Union Avenue
Bridge and running southeasterly a distance of 250 feet. [Added
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(34) Northeasterly side of Union Avenue commencing at the
intersection of the same with Riverside Avenue and running
southeasterly a distance of 66 feet. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 3501-19]
(35) Northeast side of Union Avenue commencing at a point 62 feet
southeasterly from the intersection with Wells Place and running
southeasterly a distance of 27 feet, except for emergency vehicles
and authorized vehicles. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(36) Northeast side of Union Avenue between Ayer Place and Carmita
Avenue. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(37) Southwest side of Union Avenue between Chestnut Street and
Carmita Avenue. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(38) Both sides of Chestnut Street commencing at the intersection with
south side of Union Avenue and running a distance on the west side
60 feet and on the east side 95 feet. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 3501-19]
(39) Northeast side of Union Avenue between West Erie Avenue and
Chestnut Street. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(40)West side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 43 feet northerly
from the intersection with The Terrace and running southerly a
distance of 191 feet. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
§ 126-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-2
123:756
ARTICLE II
Time Limit Parking; Restricted Parking
§ 126-3. Fifteen-minute parking.
A. No vehicle shall be permitted to park for a period exceeding 15 minutes
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. daily, except Sundays, in
the following designated areas of the following streets:
(1) From a point on the southeasterly curbline of Park Avenue, 35 feet
northeasterly from the intersection of Donaldson Avenue and Park
Avenue, distant thereon 237 feet and running along the
northeasterly curbline of Park Avenue a distance of 50 feet.
[Amended 12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75; 5-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 3501-19]
(2) Southwest side of West Passaic Avenue beginning 52 feet from the
northwesterly terminus of the radius turn constituting the
intersection of said southwest side of West Passaic Avenue with the
northwest side of Park Avenue and running northwesterly a
distance of 22 feet. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(3) Westerly side of Erie Avenue commencing at a point 25 feet
southerly from the intersection of the same with the southwesterly
side of Union Avenue and running southerly thereon a distance of
57 feet.
(4) Northwesterly side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 35 feet
northerly from the intersection of the same with the northeasterly
side of Riverview Avenue and running northerly thereon a distance
of 21 feet. [Added 11-19-1996 by Ord. No. 2779-96]
(5) Easterly side of Chestnut Street commencing at a point 95 feet
northerly from the intersection of the same with West Passaic
Avenue and running northerly thereon a distance of 22 feet.
[Added 4-7-1998 by Ord. No. 2835-98]
(6) Southwesterly side of Union Avenue commencing at a point 35 feet
westerly from the intersection of the same with Santiago Avenue
and running westerly a distance of 20 feet. [Added 6-2-1998 by
Ord. No. 2843-98]
(7) Northeasterly side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 42 feet
northerly from the intersection of the same with Glen Road and
running northeasterly for a distance of 21 feet. [Added 6-2-1998
by Ord. No. 2843-98]
(8) Northeasterly side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 40 feet
southeasterly from the intersection of the same with Spring Dell
Avenue and running southeasterly for a distance of 22 feet. [Added
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 2843-98]
§ 126-3 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-3
123:757
(9) West side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 39 feet
northwesterly from the intersection of same with Addison Avenue
and running northwesterly for a distance 23 feet. [Added
6-2-1998 by Ord. No. 2843-98; amended 5-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 3501-19]
(10)Westerly side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 224 feet
northwesterly from the intersection of same with West Park Place
and running northwesterly for a distance of 22 feet. [Added
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2866-98]
(11) Easterly side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 38 feet
southeasterly from the intersection of same with Highland Cross
and running southeasterly for a distance of 23 feet. [Added
11-10-1998 by Ord. No. 2866-98]
(12) 280West side of Park Avenue commencing 80 feet northerly from the
intersection of the same with Ames Avenue and running a distance
of 22 feet. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(13) Northeasterly side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 215 feet
from the intersection of Park Avenue with the northeasterly side of
Spring Dell and running northeasterly for a distance of 20 feet.
[Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 2916-99; amended 8-27-2002
by Ord. No. 3014-02]
(14) Northwesterly side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 293 feet
southwesterly from the intersection of same with Franklin Place
and running southwesterly for a distance of 22 feet. [Added
2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 2926-00]
(15) South side of Station Square commencing at a point 29 feet east
from the intersection of same with Park Avenue and running
easterly for a distance of 22 feet. [Added 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
2926-00]
(16) Southeasterly side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 27 feet
southeasterly from the intersection of same with Ridge Road and
running southeasterly for a distance of 22 feet. [Added 2-15-2000
by Ord. No. 2926-00]
(17) (Reserved)281
(18) Northeasterly side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 97 feet
southeasterly from Station Square and running southeasterly for a
distance of 21 feet. [Added 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 2945-00]
(19) (Reserved)282
280. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(12), regarding the northerly side of Spring Dell, added
10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 2916-99, was repealed 4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 3225-11.
281. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(17), regarding the northwesterly side of Park Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-3
123:758
§ 126-4. (Reserved)285
§ 126-5. Parking prohibited certain hours. [Amended 12-6-1977 by
Ord. No. 2218-77; 5-16-1978 by Ord. No. 2227-78; 12-5-1978 by
Ord. No. 2243-78; 10-1-1985 by Ord. No. 2417-85; 7-5-1989 by Ord.
No. 2541-89; 12-19-1989 by Ord. No. 2563-89; 4-17-1990 by Ord.
No. 2569-90; 6-6-1990 by Ord. No. 2572-90; 2-18-1992 by Ord. No.
2637-92; 11-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2717-94; 9-3-1997 by Ord. No.
2815-97; 3-3-1998 by Ord. No. 2830-98; 2-20-2001 by Ord. No.
2959-01; 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 3233-11; 5-2-2006 by Ord. No.
3111-06; 7-9-2013 by Ord. No. 3299-13; 8-26-2014 by Ord. No.
3334-14; 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 3401-16; 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(20) North side of Franklin Place commencing at a point 46 feet
westerly from the westerly curbline of Park Avenue and running
westerly for a distance of 18 feet. [Added 7-23-2002 by Ord. No.
3010-02]
(21) (Reserved)283
(22) Southwesterly side of Union Avenue commencing at a point 41 feet
easterly from the intersection of the same with Springfield Avenue
and running easterly for a distance of 22 feet. [Added 8-27-2002
by Ord. No. 3014-02]
(23) (Reserved)284
(24)Westerly side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 102 feet
northerly from the intersection of Park Avenue and Riverview
Avenue and running northerly for a distance of 22 feet. [Added
5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 3112-06]
(25) South side of Highland Cross commencing at a point 25 feet
easterly from the intersection of Highland Cross and Park Avenue
and running easterly for a distance of 20 feet. [Added 12-16-2008
by Ord. No. 3174-08]
(26)West side of Park Avenue commencing at a point 173 feet southerly
from the intersection of the same with Donaldson Avenue and
running southerly for a distance of 18 feet. [Added 4-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 3362-15]
282. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(19), regarding the northerly side of Chestnut Street,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
283. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(21), regarding the north side of Franklin Place, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
284. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(23), regarding the southwesterly side of West Passaic
Avenue, was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
285. Editor's Note: Former § 126-4, Thirty-minute parking, was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19.
§ 126-3 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-5
123:759
A. No vehicle shall be permitted to park, except in designated
handicapped spaces, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and
between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m., on school days only, in
the following designated areas of the following streets:
(1) South side of Ames Avenue between Chestnut Street and Home
Avenue.
B. No vehicle shall be permitted to park between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and school holidays, in the
following designated areas of the following streets:
(1) Pierrepont Avenue, southerly side, commencing at a point 35 feet
from the intersection of the same with the southeast side of Lincoln
Avenue and running easterly thereon a distance of 195 feet.
(2) Lincoln Avenue, easterly side, commencing at a point 39 feet
southerly from the intersection of the same with the southeast side
of Pierrepont Avenue and running southerly thereon a distance of
70 feet.
(3) Wood Street on the easterly side, commencing at a point 62 feet
southerly from the intersection of Wood Street with the southeast
side of Washington Avenue and running southerly thereon for a
distance of 170 feet.
(4) Washington Avenue on the southerly side, commencing at a point
35 feet from the intersection of Washington Avenue with the
southeast side of Wood Street and running easterly thereon for a
distance of 106 feet.
(5) Montross Avenue on the westerly side, commencing at a point 53
feet northerly from the intersection of Montross Avenue with the
northwest side of West Pierrepont Avenue and running northerly
thereof for a distance of 304 feet, with the exception of the
handicap parking space commencing 169 feet from West
Pierrepont Avenue and running northerly for a distance of 24 feet.
(6) Vreeland Avenue on the southerly side, commencing at a point 60
feet from the intersection of Vreeland Avenue with the southwest
side of Montross Avenue and running westerly thereon for a
distance of 80 feet.
(7) Sylvan Street on the easterly side, commencing at a point 35 feet
northerly from the intersection of Sylvan Street with the northeast
side of Highland Cross and running northerly thereon for a
distance of 106 feet.
(8) Highland Cross on the northerly side, commencing at a point 35
feet from the intersection of Highland Cross with the northeast side
of Sylvan Street and running easterly thereon for a distance of 235
feet.
§ 126-5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-5
123:760
§ 126-6. (Reserved)286
§ 126-7. Two-hour parking.287 [Added 12-6-1977 by Ord. No.
2218-77; amended 3-19-1996 by Ord. No. 2757-96; 5-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 3501-19]
§ 126-8. Three-hour parking. [Amended 12-16-1975 by Ord. No.
2182-75; 12-7-1976 by Ord. No. 2199-76; 12-6-1977 by Ord. No.
2218-77; 8-6-1985 by Ord. No. 2410-85; 8-4-1987 by Ord. No.
2480-87; 12-28-1988 by Ord. No. 2522-88; 10-17-1995 by Ord. No.
2743-95; 3-19-1996 by Ord. No. 2757-96; 9-3-1997 by Ord. No.
(9) East Van Ness Avenue on the northerly side, commencing at a point
35 feet from the intersection of East Van Ness Avenue with the
northwest side of Wilson Avenue and running westerly thereon for
a distance of 120 feet.
C. No vehicle shall be permitted to park between the hours of 10:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon, except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, in the
following designated areas of the following streets:
(1) Both sides of Montross Avenue between Fairview Avenue to Union
Avenue.
A. Vehicles shall not park for a period exceeding two hours between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., prevailing time, except Sundays and
holidays, nor shall any vehicle be allowed to be moved from parking
space to parking space in an attempt to circumvent the time limits
established in the areas where parking is permitted, in the following
streets and avenues:
(1) North side of Union Avenue between Ayer Place and Chestnut
Street and the south side of Union Avenue between Chestnut and
West Erie.
(2) Northeast side of Chestnut Street beginning 35 feet at its
intersection with West Passaic Avenue for a distance of 253 feet.288
(3) Both sides of Ames Avenue between Chestnut Street and Kip
Avenue.
(4) Both sides of Chestnut Street between Ames Avenue and Union
Avenue.
(5) West side of Agnew Place between Union Avenue and West Erie
Avenue.
286. Editor's Note: Former § 126-6, One-hour parking, was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19.
287. Editor's Note: Former § 126-7, Two-hour parking, was repealed 10-7-1975 by Ord. No.
2179-75.
288.
§ 126-5 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-8
123:761
2814-97; 2-20-2001 by Ord. No. 2959-01; 4-26-2005 by Ord. No.
3076-05; 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 3112-06; 10-25-2011 by Ord. No.
3239-11; 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
§ 126-9. Overnight parking prohibited. [Amended 12-6-1977 by Ord.
No. 2218-77; 2-6-1979 by Ord. No. 2250-79; 12-29-1986 by Ord. No.
2461-86; 6-7-1989 by Ord. No. 2537-89; 8-1-1989 by Ord. No.
2546-89; 10-3-1989 by Ord. No. 2555-89; 8-7-1990 by Ord. No.
2579-90; 12-4-1990 by Ord. No. 2591-90; 8-6-1991 by Ord. No.
2612-91]
A. Vehicles shall not park for a period exceeding three hours between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., prevailing time, except Sundays and
holidays, nor shall any vehicle be allowed to be moved from parking
space to parking space in an attempt to circumvent the time limits
established, in the areas where parking is permitted in the following
streets and avenues:
(1) (Reserved)
(2) (Reserved)
(3) (Reserved)
(4) (Reserved)
(5) (Reserved)
(6) Southeast side of Lincoln Avenue between Park Avenue and
Summit Cross.
(7) Northwest side of Lincoln Avenue between Park Avenue and East
Park Place.
(8) West Park Place between Park Avenue and Mortimer Avenue.
(9) East Park Place between Park Avenue and Lincoln Avenue.
(10) (Reserved)
(11) Chestnut Street between Union Avenue and West Erie Avenue.
(12) Darwin Avenue between Union Avenue and Hobart Avenue.
(13) Marginal Road from Stuyvesant Avenue to Park Avenue and Park
Avenue to East Gouverneur Avenue.
(14) Park Avenue between Gouverneur Avenue and Marginal Road.
(15) Ridge Road between Van Riper Avenue produced northwesterly
and Marginal Road.
A. No person or persons or firms or corporations shall park or cause to be
parked any vehicle of any kind between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m., prevailing time, in the following streets and avenues:
§ 126-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-9
123:762
§ 126-9.1. Commercial vehicle restrictions. [Added 12-29-1986 by
Ord. No. 2461-86; amended 2-3-1987 by Ord. No. 2462-87; 6-2-1998
by Ord. No. 2841-98; 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 2930-00; 5-16-2000 by
Ord. No. 2934-00; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 3036-03; 4-13-2015 by
Ord. No. 3359-15]
(1) Both sides of Park Avenue between Pierrepont Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(2) Northeast side of Union Avenue between Wells Place and Carmita
Avenue.
(3) Southwest side of Union Avenue between Springfield Avenue and
Carmita Avenue.
(4) Northeast side of Union Avenue between Chestnut Street and Ayer
Place.
(5) Southwest side of Union Avenue between Chestnut Street and Erie
Avenue.
(6) Station Square between Park Avenue and Orient Way.
(7) Both sides of Riverview Avenue between Park Avenue and
Mortimer Avenue. [Added 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(8) Both sides of Veterans Boulevard between Highland Cross and
North Service Road aka "Thomas E Dunn Memorial Highway."
[Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(9) Both sides of Borough Street between State Highway 17 and its
easterly terminus. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(10) Both sides of Altman Drive, also known as "Howmedica Way,"
between Veterans Boulevard and its easterly terminus. [Added
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(11) Both sides of Industrial Drive between Veterans Boulevard and its
westerly terminus. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
A. No person or persons, firm or corporation shall park any vehicle using
commercial license plates or having advertising affixed to its exterior
surfaces or trailers on any streets for more than one hour within the
limits of the Borough of Rutherford; except, however, those vehicles
parked to provide services and effect delivery to same or as provided in
§ 126-9.2 of this chapter. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(1) No person or persons, firm or corporation shall park an omnibus,
school bus (all types), school vehicle (all types), taxi, limousine,
commuter van, ambulance, recreational vehicle (RV) over 18 feet,
camper vehicles and vehicles altered for campers over 18 feet,
mobile home over 18 feet, any trailer coupled to a vehicle over 18
feet, any truck and/or coupled trailer, including, but not limited to,
§ 126-9 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-9.1
123:763
§ 126-9.2. Truck parking restricted: business districts. [Added
10-3-1995 by Ord. No. 2741-95; amended 3-21-2000 by Ord. No.
2930-00]
fire truck, garbage truck, truck tractor, tow truck, road tractor,
boom truck, pole trailer, double trailer, farm trailer, semitrailer, any
vehicle with more than two axles or dual rear wheels, any vehicle
with overhead or side equipment racks, dump body, any vehicle
using commercial license plates or having advertising affixed to
its exterior surfaces or trailers or any combination thereof on any
streets for more than one hour within the limits of the Borough
of Rutherford; except, however, those vehicles parked to provide
services and effect delivery to same or as provided in § 126-9.2 of
this chapter.
(2) No person or persons, firm or corporation at no time shall park any
uncoupled trailer of any type on any streets within the limits of the
Borough of Rutherford.
(3) Camping trailers, mobile homes or recreational vehicles in excess
of 18 feet in length may be parked on a street of a residential
district for 48 consecutive hours when said vehicle is being loaded
or unloaded in anticipation of or following active use. Said vehicle
shall be parked on that portion of the street immediately
contiguous to the property of the vehicle's owner or operator.
B. Any vehicle or trailer parked or standing in violation of this section shall
be deemed a nuisance and menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle or trailer. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the
removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
A. The parking of trucks using commercial license plates or having
advertising affixed to exterior surfaces, while providing services to local
commercial/business establishments, on any streets within the limits of
a business zone district by any person other than agents or employees
of the borough is hereby prohibited, unless:
(1) When any such vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to a
parking meter, the operator of said vehicle shall, upon entering the
said parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in
such parking meter the coin or coins of the United States of
America required for such parking, in accordance with the
directions for the same attached to said meter; or
(2) An application for a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be made
on forms approved and made available by the Borough Clerk, which
application shall include but not be limited to the following
information:
§ 126-9.1 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-9.2
123:764
§ 126-9.3. Permit fee. [Added 10-3-1995 by Ord. No. 2741-95;
amended 3-21-2000 by Ord. No. 2930-00]
A fee of $5 per day for each parking space shall be paid to the Borough
Clerk before any permit or renewed permit is issued pursuant to
§ 126-9.2A(2).
§ 126-9.4. Term of permit. [Added 10-3-1995 by Ord. No. 2741-95]
No permit shall be granted by the Borough Clerk for a term longer than
three consecutive days; although, for good cause shown, a permit previously
issued may be renewed for an additional three-day period.
§ 126-9.5. Public parking spaces for charging of electric vehicles.290
[Added 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 3481-18]
(a) The name and address of the applicant and the name and
address of the registered owner of the motor vehicle.
(b) The make, model number, year, vehicle identification number
and license plate number of the motor vehicle.
(c) The length of time the applicant plans to park said motor
vehicle at the parking meter, such time not to exceed three
consecutive days between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m.289
A. Definitions. As used herein, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
CHARGING STATION — A location that is fitted with charging station
equipment.
CHARGING STATION EQUIPMENT — The conductors, including
ungrounded and grounded, and the electric vehicle connectors,
attachment plugs, and all other fittings, devices, power outlets,
charging status or apparatus installed specifically for the purpose of
delivering electrical energy from the charging station to the electric
vehicle.
CHARGING STATION SPACE — A dedicated, marked parking space
that is fitted with charging station equipment and exclusively used for
the charging of electric vehicles.
ELECTRIC SCOOTER and/or ELECTRIC MOTORCYCLE — A two-wheel
or three-wheel electric vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical
energy stored in the vehicle's batteries.
289. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, as amended 5-16-2000 by Ord. No. 2934-00,
regarding the penalty for violation of Subsection A, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 3036-03.
290. Editor's Note: Former § 126-9.5, Permit Only Parking Zones, added 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
3221-11, was repealed 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 3354-15.
§ 126-9.2 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-9.5
123:765
ELECTRIC VEHICLE — A vehicle that operates, either partially or
exclusively, on electrical energy from a charging station or other
electrical energy source that is stored in the vehicle's battery for
propulsion purposes. "Electric vehicle" includes: a battery electric
vehicle; a plug-in hybrid electrical vehicle; a neighborhood electric
vehicle; and electric scooters or electric motorcycles.
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE — An electric vehicle that is a
low-speed vehicle, built to have a top speed of 25 miles per hour and to
have a maximum loaded weight of 3,000 pounds.
NONELECTRIC VEHICLE — A vehicle that does not meet the definition
of "electric vehicle" as provided herein.
PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLE or PHEV — An electric vehicle
that contains an internal combustion engine and also allows power to
be delivered to drive wheels by an electric motor; charges its battery
primarily by connecting to a charging station or other electrical source
not on board the vehicle; may additionally be able to sustain a battery
charge using an on-board internal-combustion-driven generator; and
has the ability to be propelled through the use of electricity.
B. The municipality has designated parking spaces at each of the following
locations for use as charging stations: two at the Borough Hall Parking
Lot; four at the Kip Center Parking Garage; and two at the Memorial
Field Parking Lot. Fees for use of the charging station spaces in the Kip
Center Parking Garage shall be in addition to any applicable parking
permit fees assessed for parking in these locations.
C. The following fees shall also apply to use of parking spaces in the
Borough Hall Parking Lot, Kip Center Parking Garage, and Memorial
Field Parking Lot that are identified as charging station spaces, as that
term is defined in § 126-9.5A of this chapter, 24 hours a day except for
fifteen-minute courtesy parking at Borough Hall and Memorial Field as
described in § 126-9.5C(2) and § 61-9D:
(1) For up to one hour of charging: $1.50.
(2) For more than one hour and up to two hours of charging: $3.
(3) For more than two hours and up to three hours of charging: $5.50.
(4) For more than three hours and up to four hours of charging: $8.
D. In addition to the above parking fees, the following fees shall also apply
to use of parking spaces in the Borough Hall Parking Lot, Kip Center
Parking Garage, and Memorial Field Parking Lot that are identified as
charging station spaces, as that term is defined in § 126-9.5A of this
chapter, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., seven days per
week: $1 per hour or part thereof.
E. Use of said charging station spaces shall be limited and restricted as
follows:
§ 126-9.5 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-9.5
123:766
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing a
vehicle in a stall or space in the Kip Center Parking Garage that is
designated as a charging station space unless the vehicle is an
electric vehicle as defined in this section and is connected for
electric charging purposes; and
(2) There will be allowed fifteen-minute courtesy parking of
nonelectric vehicles in designated charging station spaces within
the Borough Hall Parking Lot for those having business in the
Municipal Building or the Municipal Annex Monday through Friday,
8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. only. There will be allowed fifteen-minute
courtesy parking of nonelectric vehicles in designated charging
station spaces at the Memorial Field Parking Lot at any time for
pickup and dropoff only.
(3) Electric vehicles are authorized to park in spaces designated as
charging station spaces only during the time when the vehicles are
connected for electric charging purposes or up to four hours,
whichever is less. Within 15 minutes of the time the vehicle is no
longer charging, the owner or operator of said vehicle shall be
required to remove the vehicle from the charging station space. If
the owner or operator of said vehicle allows his or her vehicle to
remain in a charging station space while the vehicle is no longer
charging past the fifteen-minute grace period, then said owner or
operator shall be in violation of this section.
§ 126-9.5 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-9.5
123:767

ARTICLE III
Emergency Restrictions on Parking
§ 126-10. Parking during emergencies. [Amended 12-6-1977 by
Ord. No. 2218-77]
Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon the
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking signs
are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking police
officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting of
said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions, accidents, fires,
public celebrations or other facts or events are found to dictate or require
the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free
flow of traffic. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or
will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which
has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 126-11. Parking during snow emergencies. [Added 11-1-1994 by
Ord. No. 2717-94291]
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, an emergency shall exist, and no vehicle shall be
parked on the following streets or highways or portions thereof:
(1) Both sides of Orient Way between Station Square and Summit
Cross.
(2) Both sides of Ridge Road between Park Avenue and Summit Cross.
(3) Both sides of Union Avenue between Erie Avenue and Ayer Place.
(4) Both sides of Mortimer Avenue between Elliott Place and West
Pierrepont Avenue.
(5) Both sides of Ames Avenue in its entirety.
(6) Both sides of Franklin Place between Chestnut Street and Park
Avenue.
(7) Both sides of Kip Avenue in its entirety.
(8) North side of Glen Road in its entirety. [Amended 9-5-2000 by
Ord. No. 2946-00]
(9) South side of Spring Dell in its entirety. [Amended 9-5-2000 by
Ord. No. 2946-00]
(10) East side of Sylvan Street between Spring Dell and Highland Cross.
[Amended 9-5-2000 by Ord. No. 2946-00; 9-28-2015 by Ord.
No. 3377-15]
291. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 126-11 and
126-12 as §§ 126-12 and 126-13, respectively.
§ 126-10 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-11
123:769
(11) Both sides of The Terrace in its entirety.
(12) Both sides of Ettrick Terrace in its entirety.
(13) Both sides of Belford Avenue in its entirety.
(14) Both sides of Springfield Avenue in its entirety.
(15) Both sides of Grove Street in its entirety.
(16) Both sides of Elm Street in its entirety.
(17) (Reserved)292
(18) Both sides of Ivy Place in its entirety.
(19) Both sides of Wood Street between Washington Avenue and Union
Avenue.
(20) Both sides of Montross Avenue between Vreeland Avenue and West
Pierrepont Avenue.
(21) Both sides of Stuyvesant Avenue in its entirety.
(22) Both sides of Edgewood Place in its entirety.
(23) Both sides of West Gouverneur Avenue in its entirety.
(24) Both sides of Riverview Avenue between Park Avenue and
Mortimer Avenue.
(25) Both sides of East Passaic Avenue between Park Avenue and
Meadow Road.
(26) Both sides of Elliott Place between Home Avenue and Mortimer
Avenue.
(27) Both sides of East Pierrepont Avenue between Lincoln Avenue and
Ridge Road.
(28) Both sides of Wilson Avenue between Woodland Avenue and its
northerly terminus.
(29) Both sides of Highland Cross between Ridge Road and Mountain
Way.
(30) East side of Park Avenue in its entirety.
(31) North side of Union Avenue between Carmita Avenue and Wells
Place.
(32) East side of Mortimer Avenue between Elliott Place and Union
Avenue.
292. Editor's Note: Former § 126-11A(17), regarding Ayer Place, was repealed 10-1-1996 by
Ord. No. 2772-96.
§ 126-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-11
123:770
(33)West side of Chestnut Street in its entirety.
(34) North side of Hastings Avenue in its entirety.
(35)West side of Darwin Avenue between Carneer Avenue and Union
Avenue.
(36) North side of West Pierrepont Avenue in its entirety.
(37) East side of East Gouverneur Avenue in its entirety.
(38) North side of Donaldson Avenue between Park Avenue and
Mortimer Avenue.
(39) South side of East Newell Avenue in its entirety.
(40) North side of East Park Place in its entirety.
(41) South side of Roliver Street in its entirety.
(42) South side of Elizabeth Street in its entirety.
(43) South side of Fairview Avenue between Home Avenue and
Mortimer Avenue.
(44) North side of East Pierrepont Avenue in its entirety.
(45) North side of East Van Ness Avenue between Wilson Avenue and
Lincoln Avenue.
(46) East side of Lincoln Avenue between Highland Cross and Woodland
Avenue.
(47) East side of Home Avenue between Franklin Place and Ames
Avenue.
(48)West side of Beech Street between Union Avenue and Erie Avenue.
(49) East side of Lincoln Avenue between Park Avenue and Woodland
Avenue. [Added 10-1-1996 by Ord. No. 2772-96]
(50) Both sides of Hastings Avenue from Darwin Avenue heading
westerly to its terminus. [Added 10-1-1996 by Ord. No.
2772-96]
(51) Both sides of Jackson Avenue between Carneer Avenue and
Woodward Avenue. [Added 10-1-1996 by Ord. No. 2772-96]
(52)West side of Irving Place between Union Avenue and Fairview
Avenue. [Added 10-1-1996 by Ord. No. 2772-96]
(53)West side of Daniel Avenue between Woodland Avenue and
Marginal Road. [Added 10-1-1996 by Ord. No. 2772-96]
(54)West side of Prospect Place between Washington Avenue and Union
Avenue. [Added 10-1-1996 by Ord. No. 2772-96]
§ 126-11 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-11
123:771
(55) North side of Woodland Avenue between Delafield Avenue and Park
Avenue. [Added 10-1-1996 by Ord. No. 2772-96]
(56) Both sides of West Passaic Avenue from Park Avenue to Home
Avenue. [Added 10-1-1996 by Ord. No. 2772-96]
(57)West side of Wheaton Place between Woodland Avenue and
Marginal Road. [Added 10-1-1996 by Ord. No. 2772-96]
(58)West side of Hackett Place between Washington Avenue and Union
Avenue. [Added 10-1-1996 by Ord. No. 2772-96]
(59)West side of Ayer Place between Union Avenue and Washington
Avenue. [Added 4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 3284-13]
(60) Both sides of Cooper Place in its entirety. [Added 11-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 3345-14]
(61) North side of Highland Cross between Mountain Way and Eastern
Way. [Added 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 3347-14]
(62) North side of Marginal Road in its entirety. [Added 9-28-2015 by
Ord. No. 3377-15]
(63) North side of Arthur Drive in its entirety. [Added 9-28-2015 by
Ord. No. 3377-15]
(64) South side of East Van Ness Avenue in its entirety. [Added
9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 3377-15]
(65) South side of West Van Ness Avenue in its entirety.
(66) South side of Elliot Place between Wood Street and Milton Court.
[Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(67)West side of Milton Court between Elliot Place and Fairview
Avenue. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
B. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, an emergency shall exist, and no vehicle, except
vehicles owned or operated by members of the Rutherford Fire
Department responding to fire calls, shall be parked on the following
streets or highways or portions thereof: [Added 10-1-1996 by Ord.
No. 2772-96293]
(1) West side of Wells Place in its entirety.
C. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased, until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
293. Editor's Note: This ordinance required that former Subsection B be redesignated as
Subsection C.
§ 126-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-12
123:772
§ 126-12. Removal of vehicles. [Amended 11-1-1994 by Ord. No.
2717-94]
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 126-13. Erection of signs.294
The effectiveness of this article is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
294. Editor's Note: Former § 126-13, Violations and penalties, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord.
No. 2243-78. For current provisions, see § 126-65.
§ 126-12 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-13
123:773

ARTICLE IV
Permit-Only Parking Areas
[Added 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 3075-05295]
§ 126-14. Permit-only parking areas established.
A. Erie Park and Ride Commuter parking lot.296 [Added 4-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 3363-15]
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in the public
parking lot on the northerly side of West Erie Avenue unless a
permit to park has been secured before parking.
(2) (Reserved)297
(3) No vehicle shall be allowed to stand unmoved in the Erie Park and
Ride Commuter parking lot for a period exceeding 120 hours.
(4) Parking at the Erie Park and Ride parking lot is limited to motor
vehicles registered as passenger vehicles and commercial vehicles
not exceeding two tons.
B. Ettrick Terrace parking lot.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at any time in
the designated permit-only parking spaces in the public parking lot
on Ettrick Terrace unless a permit to park has been secured before
parking.
(2) A permit shall not be necessary for metered spaces in this facility.
(3) No vehicle shall be allowed to stand unmoved in the Ettrick Terrace
parking lot for a period exceeding 120 hours.
C. Kip Avenue parking lot.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle at any time in
the designated permit-only parking spaces in the public parking lot
at 67 Kip Avenue (Block 75, Lots 2 and 3B) unless a permit to park
has been secured before parking.
(2) A permit shall not be necessary for metered spaces in this facility.
(3) No vehicle shall be allowed to stand unmoved in the Kip Avenue
parking lot for a period exceeding 120 hours.
295. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. IV, Nighttime Parking in Public
Parking Lots, as amended.
296. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, regarding the Rutherford Avenue parking lot, was
repealed 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 3364-15.
297. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), regarding the need for a permit, was repealed
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-14 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-14
123:775
(4) Parking at the Kip Avenue parking lot is limited to motor vehicles
registered as passenger vehicles and commercial vehicles weighing
6,000 pounds or less.
(5) Kip Avenue senior permits. Within the Kip Avenue parking lot,
there shall be a designated permit-only parking area for permit
holders from Rutherford Senior Manor (senior housing). These
parking spaces shall be situated on the second level of the Kip
Avenue Parking Lot as shown on the attached site plan which is
made a part of this chapter. Vehicles displaying a valid Rutherford
Senior Manor permit may only park in designated Rutherford
Senior Manor parking spots and are not permitted to park in any
other permit or reserved spot within the parking garage.
[Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(6) 55 Kip Center permits. Within the Kip Avenue parking lot, there
shall be a designated permit-only parking area for permit holders
from 55 Kip Center. These parking spaces shall be situated on the
third level of the Kip Avenue Parking Lot as shown on the attached
site plan which is made a part of this chapter. Vehicles displaying a
valid 55 Kip Center permit may only park in designated 55 Kip
Center parking spots and are not permitted to park in any other
permit or reserved spot within the parking garage. [Added
9-10-2013 by Ord. No. 3306-13; amended 5-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 3501-19]
D. Erie Avenue permit-only parking area.
(1) It is hereby established that the following areas on Erie Avenue
shall be designated as areas where parking shall be prohibited by
all motor vehicles unless a permit to park has been secured before
parking. The designated permit-only parking areas are: [Amended
7-26-2005 by Ord. No. 3084-05; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
3363-15; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 3364-15]
(a) East Erie Avenue, north side, commencing 50 feet from the
intersection of Hackensack Street and extending 340 feet
westerly.
(b) West Erie Avenue, south side, commencing at the southwest
corner of Agnew Place and extending 680 feet westerly.
[Amended 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 3515-19]
(c) West Erie Avenue, north side, commencing 196 feet from the
northwest corner of Park Avenue and extending 632 feet
westerly.
(2) A permit shall not be necessary for any motor vehicle parking in the
Erie Avenue permit-only parking area between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
§ 126-14 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-14
123:776
§ 126-15. Applicable laws.
All other applicable laws and ordinances shall be applicable in all permitonly
parking areas.
§ 126-16. Issuance of permits.
All permits required under this article shall be issued by the Borough Clerk
upon written application therefor and upon payment of the fees herein
provided.
§ 126-17. Application for permit.
(3) No vehicle shall be allowed to stand unmoved in the Erie Avenue
permit-only parking area for a period exceeding 48 hours.
(4) Parking at the Erie Avenue permit-only parking area is limited to
motor vehicles registered as passenger vehicles.
E. Rutherford Avenue permit-only parking area. [Added 3-27-2017 by
Ord. No. 3417-17]
(1) It is hereby established that the following areas on Rutherford
Avenue shall be designated as areas where parking shall be
prohibited by all motor vehicles unless a permit to park has been
secured before parking. The designated permit-only areas are:
(a) Rutherford Avenue, north side, commencing 55 feet from the
intersection of Orient Way and extending 1,015 feet westerly to
Ridge Road.
(2) A permit shall not be necessary for any motor vehicle parking in the
Rutherford Avenue permit-only parking area between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
(3) No vehicle shall be allowed to stand unmoved in the Rutherford
Avenue permit-only parking area for a period exceeding 48 hours.
(4) Parking at the Rutherford Avenue permit-only parking area is
limited to motor vehicles registered as passenger vehicles.
A. The application shall be made on a form prepared by the Borough
Clerk. The application shall set forth the name and address of the
applicant, the name and address of the owner of the motor vehicle for
which the permit is to be issued, and the make, model, color and license
plate number for the motor vehicle for which the permit is issued, and
such other reasonable information as shall be required by the Borough
Clerk.
B. A copy of the valid motor vehicle registration for the permitted motor
vehicle shall be required to be submitted. [Amended 4-27-2015 by
Ord. No. 3363-15]
§ 126-14 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-17
123:777
§ 126-18. Form of permit. [Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
3363-15]
The permit shall be in the form of an identifiable placard or other paper
prepared by the Borough Clerk, and it shall set forth the information
contained in the application, and the permit-only parking area for which the
permit is issued.
§ 126-19. Placement of permit.
The permit shall be placed or attached to the rear-view mirror affixed to
the front windshield of the permitted vehicle, and shall be clearly visible
through the front windshield at all times while parking in a permit-only
area.
§ 126-20. Duration of permit; nontransferability. [Amended
4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 3363-15]
§ 126-21. Permit fees. [Amended 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 3093-05;
9-10-2013 by Ord. No. 3306-13; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 3363-15]
C. The Mayor and Council may, at their discretion, alter the terms of the
parking permit application set forth in Subsections A and B of this
section to accommodate their ability to market and sell parking permits
for special events. [Added 9-10-2013 by Ord. No. 3306-13]
A. The permits required under this article shall be issued for a time period
as requested by the applicant so long as all fees are paid in full.
B. One permit shall be issued per motor vehicle. Permits shall not be
altered, copied or reproduced in any manner.
A. Permit fees are nonrefundable.
B. The fee for a permit for parking at Ettrick Terrace parking lot shall be
$50 per month.
C. The fee for a permit for parking at the Kip Avenue parking lot shall be
$50 per month. There shall be no fee for the permit known as the
"Rutherford Senior Manor permit" or "55 Kip Center." [Amended
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
D. The fee for a permit for parking at the Erie Avenue and Erie Park and
Ride permit-only parking area shall be $100 per month for nonresidents
and $50 per month for residents of the Borough of Rutherford.
E. The fee for a permit for parking at the Rutherford Avenue permit-only
parking area shall be $100 per month for nonresidents and $50 per
month for residents of the Borough of Rutherford. [Added 3-27-2017
by Ord. No. 3417-17298]
298. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E as Subsection F.
§ 126-17 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-21
123:778
§ 126-22. Permit-only parking areas regulated. [Added 5-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 3501-19]
It is hereby established that the following areas shall be designated as areas
where parking shall be prohibited by all motor vehicles unless a permit to
park has been secured before parking. The Mayor and Council may from
time to time suspend or alter the public's ability to purchase daily and/or
monthly parking permits in the Borough of Rutherford under this section
at their discretion, with the exception of the handicapped parking spaces
designated by ordinance. At the discretion of the Mayor and Council or
the Rutherford Police Department, any permit parking area in whole or in
sections may be suspended or closed at any time.
F. The Mayor and Council may, at their discretion, suspend or alter the fee
for permit parking at the Kip Avenue parking lot set forth at Subsection
C for special events.
§ 126-21 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-22
123:779

ARTICLE V
Parking Meter Zones and Rates
§ 126-23. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING LOT — Any public place or area established by the Borough of
Rutherford for the parking of vehicles.
§ 126-24. Zones established. [Amended 12-7-1976 by Ord. No.
2199-76]
A. The establishment of zones, to be known as "parking meter zones," in
the following streets and parking lots is hereby authorized:
(1) Park Avenue, on both sides, from Erie Avenue to Park Place.
[Amended 12-6-1977 by Ord. No. 2218-77]
(2) Ames Avenue, on both sides, from Park Avenue to Chestnut Street.
[Amended 12-6-1977 by Ord. No. 2218-77; 5-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 3501-19]
(3) Franklin Place, both sides, from Park Avenue to Kip Avenue.
[Amended 12-6-1977 by Ord. No. 2218-77; 7-3-2002 by Ord.
No. 3010-02]
(4) Southeasterly side of Station Square from Park Avenue to Orient
Way.
(5) Orient Way from Station Square to Passaic Avenue. [Amended
7-26-2005 by Ord. No. 3084-05; 10-25-2005 by Ord. No.
3093-05]
(6) Spring Dell from Park Avenue to Orient Way.
(7) The Terrace from Park Avenue to Sylvan Street.
(8) Sylvan Street from Park Avenue to The Terrace.
(9) Glen Road from Park Avenue to Orient Way.
(10) Kip Garage Parking Lot located on the first level. [Amended
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(11) Southerly side of Ettrick Terrace. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 3501-19]
(12)Westerly side of Agnew Place between Union Avenue and West Erie
Avenue. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(13) Highland Cross from Park Avenue to Lincoln Avenue.
(14) Ridge Road from Park Avenue to East Passaic Avenue.
§ 126-23 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-24
123:781
(15) Northeast side of Union Avenue between Carmita Avenue and a
point 90 feet southeasterly from the intersection of the same with
Wells Place.
(16) Southwest side of Union Avenue between Carmita Avenue and
Springfield Avenue.
(17) Northwest side of Kip Avenue.
(18) 299Southwest side of Franklin Place from Kip Avenue to Chestnut
Street. [Added 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3010-02]
(19) (Reserved)300
(20) (Reserved)301
(21) Park Avenue from Pierrepont Avenue to Park Place.
(22) Riverview Avenue from Park Avenue to Mortimer Avenue.
(23) (Reserved)302
(24) 303North side of Union Avenue between Chestnut Street and Ayer
Place and the south side of Union Avenue between Chestnut Street
and West Erie Avenue. [Added 10-6-1981 by Ord. No. 2304-81;
amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(25) The southerly side of Santiago Avenue commencing 65 feet from
the intersection of Santiago Avenue with Union Avenue and
continuing westerly for a distance of 107 feet. [Added 12-6-1977
by Ord. No. 2218-77; amended 12-5-1978 by Ord. No.
2243-78]
(26) The northerly side of Santiago Avenue commencing 39 feet from
the intersection of Santiago Avenue with Union Avenue and
continuing westerly for a distance of 20 feet. [Added 12-5-1978
by Ord. No. 2243-78]
(27) Public Park and Ride lot on the northerly side of West Erie Avenue,
except those spots designated as "Park and Ride permit holders
only." [Added 7-1-1986 by Ord. No. 2445-86; amended
9-11-2012 by Ord. No. 3269-12; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
3363-15304; 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3405-16; 5-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 3501-19]
299. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(18), Franklin Place, was repealed 12-6-1977 by Ord.
No. 2218-77.
300. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(19), Erie Avenue, easterly side, was repealed
12-6-1977 by Ord. No. 2218-77.
301. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(20), Erie Avenue, westerly side, was repealed
12-6-1977 by Ord. No. 2218-77.
302. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(23), Beech Street, added 12-6-1977 by Ord. No.
2218-77, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord. No. 2243-78.
303. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(24), Springfield Avenue, added 12-6-1977 by Ord. No.
2218-77, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord. No. 2243-78.
§ 126-24 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-24
123:782
§ 126-25. Authority to designate other zones.
From time to time hereafter as traffic conditions require, said zones in such
other streets and parking lots may be designated by ordinance.
§ 126-26. Designation of parking meter spaces and time limitations.
Upon the installation of parking meters in said parking zones, parking
meter spaces shall be designated as hereinafter provided, and the time
limitations for legal parking in such zones shall be pursuant to and in
compliance with the time limitations fixed by ordinance now in force and
effect or hereafter to be adopted.
§ 126-27. Installation and maintenance of meters.
Authority is hereby given to provide for the installation, regulation, control,
operation and use of parking meters and to maintain them in good workable
condition. The Mayor and Borough Clerk are hereby authorized to enter
into a contract, after the approval of the terms and conditions thereof
by the Borough Council, for the purchase and installation of said parking
meters. The Mayor and Borough Clerk are further authorized to enter
into a contract or contracts, after approval of the terms and conditions
thereof by the Borough Council, for such protection and maintenance of
said parking meters as may be necessary to maintain the same in good
operating condition.
§ 126-28. Placement of meters.
The placement of parking meters shall be as follows:
(28)West Erie Avenue, south side, from Union Avenue to Agnew Place.
[Added 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. 3084-05]
B. The Mayor and Council may from time to time suspend or alter the
public’s ability to park in metered spaces for any and all parking meter
zones established by Borough § 126-24A(1) through (29). In addition,
the Mayor and Council may convert any and all parking meter zones to
permit parking zones for special events. [Added 9-10-2013 by Ord.
No. 3306-13]
A. Parking meters shall not be installed in areas where parking is
prohibited pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.
B. Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established in
§ 126-24 hereof shall be placed immediately adjacent to the individual
parking spaces hereinafter described. Each parking meter shall be
placed or set in such manner as to show or display by a signal that the
parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each
304. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection A(29) as Subsection
A(28). Former Subsection A(28), East Erie Avenue, added 10-17-1995 by Ord. No. 2743-95,
was repealed 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 3364-15.
§ 126-24 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-28
123:783
§ 126-29. Parking within lines or markings.
§ 126-30. Manner of parking.
Any vehicle parked in a parking space in any parking meter zone shall be
parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be nearest to the
parking meter.
§ 126-31. Depositing of coins. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
When any vehicle shall be parked, stopped or standing in any space
adjacent to a parking meter which is located in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the operator of said vehicle shall, upon entering
the said parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited in
such parking meter the coin or coins of the United States of America
required for such parking, in accordance with directions for the
same attached to said meter, and failure to deposit such coin or coins shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 126-32. Overtime parking prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to cause,
allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or operated by
such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking
time established for any parking meter zone herein described.
parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal
parking time established or hereafter established by ordinance.
A. The Police Department shall have lines or markings placed adjacent to
each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space
for which said meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked adjacent to
or next to any parking meter shall park within the lines or markings so
established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such
lines or markings.
B. It shall be unlawful to park in any metered zone except between any
two parking meter street lines or markings. [Added 12-6-1977 by
Ord. No. 2218-77]
C. The Police Department shall have lines or markings placed adjacent to
each permit parking space for the purpose of designating the permit
parking space for which said permit is to be used, and each vehicle
parked adjacent to or next to any permit parking space shall park within
the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park any
vehicle across any such lines or markings. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 3501-19]
§ 126-28 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-33
123:784
§ 126-33. Substitutes for coins prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to deposit or cause to be
deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic substitute for a
coin of the United States of America.
§ 126-34. Tampering with meters.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to deface,
injure, tamper with, open, willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness
of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this chapter;
provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the collection of coins
therefrom or to the repair and maintenance thereof.
§ 126-35. Construction of parking regulations.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to permit parking of
vehicles in those spaces within any zone in which parking is prohibited by
law, nor shall anything contained in this chapter be construed as prohibiting
provision for free parking spaces for loading and unloading, bus stops,
taxicab stands or for other matters of a similar or emergency nature.
§ 126-36. Purpose of parking fees.
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided herein are
levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control
of traffic upon the public streets and the cost of supervision and regulation
for the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones hereby erected on
certain of the public streets and on public parking lots, and to cover the cost
of the purchase, supervision, protection, inspection, installation, operation,
maintenance, control and use of the parking meters described herein.
§ 126-37. Parking meter charges. [Amended 10-7-1975 by Ord. No.
2179-75; 6-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2469-87; 12-6-1988 by Ord. No.
2521-88; 2-7-1989 by Ord. No. 2525-89; 10-17-1995 by Ord. No.
2743-95; 2-6-1996 by Ord. No. 2753-96; 3-19-1996 by Ord. No.
2757-96; 9-8-1999 by Ord. No. 2911-99; 4-26-2005 by Ord. No.
3076-05; 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. 3084-05; 10-25-2005 by Ord. No.
3093-05; 2-14-2012 by Ord. No. 3247-12; 5-8-2012 by Ord. No.
3256-12; 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
Vehicles shall not park, stop or stand for a period exceeding the time limits
established by this section between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, except Sundays and holidays, in a parking space regulated
by a parking meter; nor shall coins be deposited in parking meters beyond
the period of legal parking time established and nor shall any vehicle be
moved from parking space to parking space in an attempt to circumvent
the time limits established, in the areas where parking is permitted on the
below listed streets, avenues and roads, and the charge for parking a motor
vehicle on said public streets, avenues and roads shall be at the following
rates:
§ 126-33 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-37
123:785
§ 126-38. Computation of public parking lot fees. [Amended
10-7-1975 by Ord. No. 2179-75; 10-6-1981 by Ord. No. 2304-81;
3-5-1985 by Ord. No. 2398-85; 9-5-1985 by Ord. No. 2413-85;
2-18-1986 by Ord. No. 2429-86; 12-6-1988 by Ord. No. 2521-88;
4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 2532-89; 11-15-1994 by Ord. No. 2719-94;
9-8-1999 by Ord. No. 2911-99]
Fees for use of public parking lots shall be computed as follows:
A. Park Avenue (Station Square to Pierrepont Avenue); Station Square;
Ames Avenue; Franklin Place (Park Avenue to Chestnut Street); Orient
Way (Station Square to Glen Road); Glen Road; Ridge Road (Park
Avenue to East Passaic Avenue); Sylvan Street (Spring Dell to The
Terrace); The Terrace (Park Avenue to Sylvan Street); Highland Cross
(Park Avenue to Lincoln Avenue); West End District (Union Avenue and
Santiago Avenue); West Erie Avenue, south side (Union Avenue to
Agnew Place); Union Avenue (West Erie Avenue to Ayer Place); and
Agnew Place (Union Avenue to West Erie Avenue).
(1) Fees on all meters shall be as follows: $0.10 for 10 minutes of
parking time, $0.25 for 30 minutes, and $0.50 for 60 minutes.
(2) The parking of any vehicle in excess of two hours is hereby
prohibited.
B. Orient Way (Glen Road to East Passaic Avenue); Spring Dell (Sylvan
Street to Orient Way); Ettrick Terrace (Spring Dell to Orient Way).
(1) Fees on all meters shall be as follows: $0.10 for 10 minutes of
parking time, $0.25 for 30 minutes, and $0.50 for 60 minutes.
(2) The parking of any vehicle in excess of three hours is hereby
prohibited.
A. Ettrick Terrace lot. Fees on all meters shall be as follows:
(1) Fees on all meters shall be as follows: $0.10 for 10 minutes of
parking time, $0.25 for 30 minutes, and $0.50 for 60 minutes.
[Amended 5-8-2012 by Ord. No. 3256-12]
(2) The parking of any vehicle in excess of three hours is hereby
prohibited, except as provided in Article V.
B. Kip Avenue lot.
(1) Fees on all meters shall be as follows: $0.10 for 10 minutes of
parking time, $0.25 for 30 minutes, and $0.50 for 60 minutes.
[Amended 5-8-2012 by Ord. No. 3256-12]
(2) The parking of any vehicle in excess of three hours is hereby
prohibited, except as provided in Subsection B(3) below.
§ 126-37 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-38
123:786
§ 126-39. Effective times for schedule of charges.305 [Added
12-6-1988 by Ord. No. 2521-88; amended 10-17-1995 by Ord. No.
2743-95]
§ 126-40. Designation of rates on meters.
The rates of charges herein established for the parking of a motor vehicle
in a parking meter zone shall be designated on each parking meter in
accordance with the area in which said parking meter is located.
§ 126-41. Effective times for public parking lot rates. [Amended
10-6-1981 by Ord. No. 2304-81; 2-18-1986 by Ord. No. 2429-86;
12-6-1988 by Ord. No. 2521-88]
The schedule of charges herein established for the parking of motor
vehicles in the public parking lots herein designated shall be in full force
and effect during the following hours:
(3) Ten parking meters located on the top of the Kip Avenue Parking
Garage facility shall be designated so as to permit the parking of
motor vehicles for a period of time not exceeding four hours. The
parking of any vehicle in these designated spaces in excess of four
hours is hereby prohibited.
C. Erie Avenue Park N' Ride lot. Fees on all meters shall be as follows:
(1) Fifty cents for each hour of parking time for a period of time not
exceeding 12 hours. [Amended 4-26-2005 by Ord. No. 3076-05]
(2) The parking of any vehicle in excess of 12 hours is hereby
prohibited.
A. The schedule of charges herein established for the parking of motor
vehicles on a public street in a parking space regulated by a parking
meter herein designated shall be in full force and effect during the
hours of 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. every day, except Sundays and holidays,
except as provided in § 126-39B.306
A. Kip Avenue parking garage facility: between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. every day, except Sundays and holidays. [Amended
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
B. Erie Avenue Park N' Ride lot: between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. every day, except Sundays and holidays.
305. Editor's Note: Former § 126-39, Parking meter charges on certain streets, was repealed
10-7-1975 by Ord. No. 2179-75.
306. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regulating parking spaces in certain areas between
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. every day, except Sundays and holidays, which immediately
followed, was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-38 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-42
123:787
§ 126-42. Permit-only parking zones. [Added 4-27-2010 by Ord. No.
3201-10307]
No vehicle shall be parked on the following streets, or parts of streets,
except pursuant to a permit issued under this section, between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, with the exception of
recognized legal holidays.
A. Location; area boundaries. The areas which this section affects shall be
(and which shall not affect metered parking and payable permit parking
areas): [Amended 3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 3355-15; 12-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 3516-19]
(1) The first phase, which was adopted on March 9, 2015,
encompasses the following areas:
(a) All streets east of Ridge Road to Route 17 South and Barrows
Avenue to East Erie Avenue, not including the metered areas.
(See map.)308
(2) The second phase, which was adopted on October 28, 2019,
encompasses the following areas:
(a) The northern border shall be and include Washington Avenue
from Carmita Avenue to West Erie Avenue. (See map.)
(b) The western border shall be and include Carmita Avenue from
Washington Avenue to Fairview Avenue. (See map.)
(c) The southern border shall be and include Fairview Avenue in
its entirety, and Franklin Place from Home Avenue to Park
Avenue. (See map.)
(d) The eastern border shall be West Erie Avenue from Washington
Avenue to Station Square and Park Avenue from Station
Square to Franklin Place. (See map.)
B. Permits.
(1) A parking permit of a design specified by the Borough of
Rutherford will be issued to the resident owner of a specific vehicle
upon submission of the appropriate application and supporting
documents. The permit shall display the permit number, the make,
model, and color of the vehicle, and the date the permit expires. No
permit shall be issued to a vehicle having more than four wheels.
The vehicle must be owned by a person residing in the Borough of
Rutherford.
307. Editor's Note: Former § 126-42, Violations and penalties, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord.
No. 2243-78.
308. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 126-42 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-42
123:788
(2) The following proof of residency of the vehicle's owner must be
presented and approved by the Rutherford Police Department
before a permit is issued:
(a) A copy of a valid New Jersey driver's license for the applicant
which, except for leased or company-owned vehicles, reflect an
address with the Borough of Rutherford;
(b) Except for leased vehicles [see Subsection B(2)(e) below] and
company vehicles [see Subsection B(2)(f) below], a copy of a
valid New Jersey motor vehicle registration for the vehicle for
which the permit is sought, reflecting an address within the
Borough of Rutherford;
(c) Proof of the vehicle being insured in the state of New Jersey;
(d) A current utility or telephone bill with the resident's name, and
with the same address as described on the driver's license and
motor vehicle registration;
(e) If the vehicle for which a permit is sought is leased, then a copy
of the lease agreement must be exhibited;
(f) A resident who requests a permit for a company vehicle must
provide a letter from a reasonable company official, under
oath, confirming that the vehicle is assigned to that person.
(3) The permit is to be displayed on the front driver's side dashboard
or rearview mirror when the vehicle is parked. The permit shall be
removed when the vehicle is in motion.
(4) If a person to whom a permit is issued changes his or her resident
address, but remains a resident of the Borough of Rutherford, a
new permit must be obtained.
(5) All permits will automatically be revoked if the assigned vehicle
ceases to qualify for the permit, or if a person to whom a permit has
been issued ceases to be a resident of the Borough. If revoked, the
permit shall be promptly returned to the Rutherford Police
Department.
(6) The following shall apply to employees of businesses located within
the permit-only parking zone (see Subsection A above): [Added
3-9-2015 by Ord. No. 3355-15]
(a) Employees of businesses located within the permit-only
parking zone (see Subsection A above) shall be entitled to one
permit.
(b) Employees of businesses located within the permit-only
parking zone (see Subsection A above) shall submit proof of
employment with business covered under this section prior to a
permit being issued.
§ 126-42 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-42
123:789
(c) Subsections B.(2)(a), (b), and (d) shall not apply to employees
of businesses located within the permit-only parking zones (see
Subsection A above) requesting permits.
C. Visitor's permits.
(1) Two visitor permits per household may be issued for use by visitors
to residents on the streets, or parts of streets, listed in Schedule A
Map309 only while visitors are actually visiting the household to
which they were issued. There shall be a rebuttable presumption
that any vehicle parked more than one block from the household for
which the visitor permit has been issued is not visiting such
household.
(2) The visitor permit is to be displayed on the front driver's side
dashboard above the steering wheel, and must be fully readable
from the exterior of the vehicle.
(3) The visitor permit shall be returned to the resident at the
conclusion of the visit.
(4) The visitor permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issue.
The expired visitor permit must be returned to the police
department before a new one can be issued.
(5) No visitor permit shall be issued to any person residing in any
building exclusively used by students and affiliates of a college.
D. New permits required for changes in residency or vehicles.
(1) A new permit must be obtained in the event of change of residency
or change of any vehicle or license plate on a previously registered
automobile.
E. Revocation of permits.
(1) Parking permits will automatically be revoked if a vehicle ceases to
qualify, if affixed to a car other than the one so designated at the
time of application, or if the vehicle registration number on the
parking permit is different than the one on the vehicle.
(2) Any vehicle bearing a revoked parking permit and parked on a
street posted "permit only" will be subject to the same penalty as a
vehicle parked in that location without a valid permit.
F. Expiration of permits.
(1) Permits will be valid for two years from the date of issue. Visitor
permits shall be valid for one year from the date of issue.
309. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 126-42 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-42
123:790
§ 126-43. Severability.
If any provision of this article shall be held to be unconstitutional, the
remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
(2) Any vehicle bearing an expired visitor permit and parked on a
street posted "permit only" will be subject to the same penalty as a
vehicle parked in that location without a valid permit.
G. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any vehicle parked in violation of the parking permit regulations
will be subject to a fine of $50.
(2) Residents in possession of parking permits who misuse them are
subject to revocation of the permits for one year and a fine of $100.
(3) Any person(s) found to possess a valid, expired, temporary, visitor,
or business permit, not belonging to that person, or a counterfeit
permit shall be subject to a fine of $100. [Amended 3-9-2015 by
Ord. No. 3355-15]
(4) Vehicles shall be granted a three-hour grace period, after which
time they will be ticketed.
H. Zone designated.
(1) The phrase "parking permit zone" shall mean such street or area
upon which parking is permitted only for vehicles displaying a valid
permit.
I. To the extent the streets covered by this ordinance are covered by other
section establishing restrictions, those ordinances are hereby amended
to exclude these streets from those restrictions between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, with the exception
of alternate-side-of-the-street parking, snow-emergency parking, and
designated legal holidays.
§ 126-42 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-43
123:791

ARTICLE VI
Through Streets and Stop Streets
§ 126-44. Through streets designated.
A. The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the through street.
(1) Ridge Road between the Township of Lyndhurst - Borough of
Rutherford corporate line and Park Avenue.
(2) Orient Way between the Township of Lyndhurst - Borough of
Rutherford corporate line and Station Square.
(3) Highland Cross.
(a) Between New Jersey Route 17 and Orient Way.
(b) Between Orient Way and Ridge Road.
(4) Passaic Avenue between Jackson Avenue and Park Avenue.
(5) Vanderburgh Avenue.
(a) Between Passaic Avenue and Union Avenue.
(b) Between Union Avenue and Erie Avenue.
(6) Mortimer Avenue.
(a) Between Pierrepont Avenue and Passaic Avenue.
(b) Between Passaic Avenue and Union Avenue.
(7) Washington Avenue. [Amended 12-28-1988 by Ord. No.
2522-88]
(a) Between Jackson Avenue and Beech Street.
(b) Between Beech Street and Montross Avenue.
(c) Between Montross Avenue and Erie Avenue.
(8) Morse Avenue between Walnut Street and Erie Avenue.
(9) Feronia Way between Van Riper Avenue and Pierrepont Avenue.
(10) Home Avenue between Passaic Avenue and Union Avenue.
(11) Beech Street between Union Avenue and Erie Avenue. [Amended
12-5-1978 by Ord. No. 2243-78]
(12) Chestnut Street between Union Avenue and West Passaic Avenue.
§ 126-44 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-44
123:793
§ 126-45. Multiway stop intersections designated.310 [Added
12-28-1988 by Ord. No. 2522-88]
(13) Monona Avenue between Vanderburgh Avenue and Darwin Avenue.
[Amended 12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75]
(14) East Pierrepont Avenue between Park Avenue and Lincoln Avenue.
(15) East Passaic Avenue between Orient Way and Meadow Road.
(16) Grand Avenue. [Added 10-6-1981 by Ord. No. 2304-41;
amended 6-16-1982 by Ord. No. 2321-42]
(a) Between Carneer Avenue and Union Avenue.
(b) Between Union Avenue and Monona Avenue.
(17)West Gouverneur Avenue between Park Avenue and Riverside
Avenue. [Added 12-2-1986 by Ord. No. 2458-86]
(18) Darwin Avenue between Union Avenue and Monona Avenue.
[Added 10-2-1990 by Ord. No. 2582-90; amended 7-9-2013 by
Ord. No. 3299-13]
A. The following described street intersections are hereby designated as
multiway stop intersections:
(1) Montross Avenue and Washington Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on all approaches.
(2) Chestnut Street and Ames Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on
all approaches. [Added 8-7-1990 by Ord. No. 2578-90]
(3) Highland Cross and Lincoln Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on
all approaches. [Added 2-4-1997 by Ord. No. 2787-97]
(4) Monona Avenue and Darwin Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed
on all approaches. [Added 11-27-2007 by Ord. No. 3146-07]
(5) Monona Avenue and Grand Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on
all approaches. [Added 11-27-2007 by Ord. No. 3146-07]
(6) Vanderburgh Avenue and Yahara Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on all approaches. [Added 11-27-2007 by Ord. No.
3146-07]
(7) Vanderburgh Avenue and Carneer Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on all approaches. [Added 2-8-2016 by Ord. No.
3388-16]
310. Editor's Note: Former § 126-45, Erection of signs, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord. No.
2243-78.
§ 126-44 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-45
123:794
§ 126-46. Stop intersections designated.
(8) East Pierrepont Avenue and Lincoln Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on all approaches. [Added 6-1-2016 by Ord. No. 3396]
(9) Washington Avenue and Darwin Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on all approaches. [Added 6-1-2016 by Ord. No. 3396]
A. The following street intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections:
(1) Carmita Avenue and Donaldson Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on Donaldson Avenue.
(2) Summit Cross and Feronia Way. Stop signs shall be installed on
Feronia Way.
(3) West Newell Avenue and Montross Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on Montross Avenue.
(4) West Newell Avenue and Carmita Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on Carmita Avenue.
(5) Fairview Avenue and Irving Place. Stop signs shall be installed on
Irving Place.
(6) Fairview Avenue and Hackett Place — Milton Court. Stop signs
shall be installed on Hackett Place — Milton Court.
(7) Montross Avenue and Fairview Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed
on Fairview Avenue.
(8) Wood Street and Fairview Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on
Fairview Avenue.
(9) Sylvan Street and Spring Dell. [Repealed 12-16-1975 by Ord.
No. 2182-75]
(10) Lincoln Avenue and Highland Cross. Stop signs shall be installed
on Highland Cross.
(11) Lincoln Avenue and Pierrepont Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on Pierrepont Avenue.
(12) Lincoln Avenue and Addison Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed
on Addison Avenue.
(13) Pierrepont Avenue and Sylvan Street. Stop signs shall be installed
on Sylvan Street. [Added 7-2-1974 by Ord. No. 2147-74]
(14) Francisco Avenue and Santiago Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on Santiago Avenue. [Added 10-19-1976 by Ord. No.
2196-76]
§ 126-45 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-46
123:795
(15) Darwin Avenue and Washington Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on Washington Avenue. [Added 10-6-1981 by Ord. No.
2304-81]
(16) Darwin Avenue and Hobart Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on
Hobart Avenue. [Added 10-6-1981 by Ord. No. 2304-81]
(17) East Passaic Avenue and Sylvan Street. Stop signs shall be installed
on Sylvan Street. [Added 6-16-1982 by Ord. No. 2321-82]
(18)Woodward Avenue and Montross Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on Montross Avenue. [Added 6-16-1982 by Ord. No.
2321-82]
(19) Highland Cross and Veterans Boulevard. Stop signs shall be
installed on Veterans Boulevard. [Added 10-15-1985 by Ord. No.
2419-85]
(20) Borough Street and Veterans Boulevard. Stop signs shall be
installed on both approaches of Veterans Boulevard. [Added
10-15-1985 by Ord. No. 2419-85]
(21) Sylvan Street and The Terrace. Stop signs shall be installed on The
Terrace. [Added 5-6-1986 by Ord. No. 2437-86]
(22) Summit Cross and Sylvan Street. Stop signs shall be installed on
Sylvan Street. [Added 5-6-1986 by Ord. No. 2437-86; amended
8-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2480-87]
(23) East Pierrepont Avenue and Feronia Way. Stop signs shall be
installed on Feronia Way. [Added 10-7-1986 by Ord. No.
2453-86]
(24) Mountain Way and Woodland Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed
on Mountain Way. [Added 6-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2469-87]
(25) Van Riper Avenue and Sylvan Street. Stop signs shall be installed
on Sylvan Street [Added 6-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2469-87]
(26)Woodland Avenue and Sylvan Street. Stop signs shall be installed
on Sylvan Street. [Added 6-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2469-87]
(27) Mountain Way and Van Riper Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed
on Mountain Way. [Added 6-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2469-87]
(28) Mountain Way and East Pierrepont Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on Mountain Way. [Added 12-15-1987 by Ord. No.
2486-87]
(29) Vreeland Avenue and Montross Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on Vreeland Avenue. [Added 12-15-1987 by Ord. No.
2486-87]
§ 126-46 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-46
123:796
(30) East Van Ness Avenue and Daniel Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on East Van Ness Avenue. [Added 11-20-1990 by Ord.
No. 2590-90311]
(31) Mountain Way and Summit Cross. Stop signs shall be installed on
Mountain Way. [Added 7-5-1989 by Ord. No. 2541-89]
(32) Carmita Avenue and Woodward Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on Woodward Avenue. [Added 7-5-1989 by Ord. No.
2541-89]
(33) Kip Avenue and exit driveway from Kip Avenue parking garage
facility. Stop signs shall be located on exit driveway from Kip
Avenue parking garage facility. [Added 7-5-1989 by Ord. No.
2541-89]
(34)Wood Street and Elliot Place. Stop signs shall be installed on Elliot
Place. [Added 8-7-1990 by Ord. No. 2578-90; amended
2-18-1992 by Ord. No. 2637-92]
(35) Garfield Place and Mountain Way. Stop signs shall be installed on
Mountain Way. [Added 2-5-1991 by Ord. No. 2594-91]
(36)Winslow Place and Mountain Way. Stop signs shall be installed on
Mountain Way. [Added 2-5-1991 by Ord. No. 2594-91]
(37) Cooper Place and Belford Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on
Belford Avenue. [Added 12-3-1991 by Ord. No. 2630-91]
(38) Kip Avenue and exit driveway from the Municipal Access Parking
Lot. Stop signs shall be installed on exit driveway from Municipal
Access Parking Lot. [Added 4-21-1992 by Ord. No. 2645-92]
(39) Montross Avenue and Donaldson Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on Donaldson Avenue. [Added 12-27-1993 by Ord. No.
2695-93]
(40) East Van Ness Avenue and Wheaton Place. Stop signs shall be
installed on Wheaton Place. [Added 12-27-1993 by Ord. No.
2695-93]
(41) Fairview Avenue and Prospect Place. Stop signs shall be installed
on Prospect Place. [Added 12-27-1993 by Ord. No. 2695-93]
(42) Darwin Avenue and Hastings Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed
on Hastings Avenue. [Added 12-27-1993 by Ord. No. 2695-93]
(43) Carneer Avenue and Grand Avenue. Stop signs shall be installed on
Grand Avenue. [Added 12-27-1993 by Ord. No. 2695-93]
311. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(30), which provided that the intersection of Wood
Street and Elliot Place be designated as a stop intersection, added 7-5-1989 by Ord. No.
2541-89, was repealed 11-20-1990 by Ord. No. 2590-90.
§ 126-46 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-46
123:797
§ 126-47. Yield intersections designated.313 [Added 11-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 2822-97]
(44) Francisco Avenue and Springfield Avenue. Stop signs shall be
installed on Springfield Avenue. [Added 5-6-1997 by Ord. No.
2796-97]
(45) East Pierrepont Avenue and Eastern Way. A stop sign shall be
installed on Eastern Way. [Added 8-3-1997 by Ord. No. 2807-97]
(46) East Pierrepont Avenue and Highfield Lane. A stop sign shall be
installed on Highfield Lane. [Added 8-3-1997 by Ord. No.
2807-97]
(47) East Passaic Avenue and Mountain Way-The Terrace. Stop signs
shall be installed on Mountain Way-The Terrace. [Added
11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 2822-97]
(48) Elycroft Parkway and Nevins Street. Stop signs shall be installed on
Nevins Street. [Added 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 2822-97]
(49) Arthur Drive-Elycroft Parkway and Crane Avenue. Stops signs shall
be installed on Crane Avenue. [Added 11-11-1997 by Ord. No.
2822-97]
(50)West Pierrepont Avenue and Mortimer Avenue. A stop sign shall be
installed on Mortimer Avenue. [Added 11-10-1998 by Ord. No.
2866-98312]
A. The following described street intersections are hereby designated as
yield intersections:
(1) Highfield Lane and Evans Avenue. Yield signs shall be installed on
Evans Avenue.
312. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(51), which provided that the intersection of Franklin
Place and Kip Avenue be designated as a stop intersection, added 7-23-2002 by Ord. No.
3010-02, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-24-2004 by Ord. No.
3047-04.
313. Editor's Note: Former § 126-47, Violations and penalties, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord.
No. 2243-78. See now § 126-65.
§ 126-46 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-47
123:798
ARTICLE VII
One-Way Streets
§ 126-48. One-way streets designated.
A. The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
(1) 314Westerly on Franklin Place between Park Avenue and Kip
Avenue. Parking shall be permitted on both sides of Franklin Place.
[Added 12-17-2002 by Ord. No. 3016-02; amended 8-24-2004
by Ord. No. 3047-04; 2-21-2006 by Ord. No. 3103-06]
(2) Southerly on Ettrick Terrace between Spring Dell and Orient Way.
(3) Southwesterly on Vanderburgh Avenue between Erie Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(4) (Reserved)315
(5) Northeasterly on Springfield Avenue between Francisco Avenue
and Union Avenue.
(6) Southwesterly on Belford Avenue.
(7) Westerly on Highland Cross between Meadow Road - Route 17 and
Eastern Way.
(8) Northerly on Agnew Place between Union Avenue and Erie Avenue.
(9) Northeasterly on Elliott Place between Wood Street and Milton
Court.
(10) Northerly on Milton Court between Elliot Place and Fairview
Avenue.
(11) Easterly on The Terrace between Park Avenue and Sylvan Street.
(12) (Reserved)316
(13) Northerly on the travel aisle of the Rutherford Park N' Ride lot,
located east of Erie Avenue between Union Avenue and Washington
Avenue. [Added 2-18-1986 by Ord. No. 2429-86]
(14)Westerly on Riverview Avenue between Park Avenue and Mortimer
Avenue. Parking shall be permitted on both the northerly and
314. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(1), Franklin Place, added 10-19-1993 by Ord. No.
2687-93, was repealed 9-7-1994 by Ord. No. 2709-94.
315. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), Sylvan Street, was repealed 12-16-1975 by Ord. No.
2182-75.
316. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(12), regarding Preble Place (printed as “The Terrace”)
between West Gouverneur Avenue and Marginal Road, was repealed 7-26-2011 by Ord. No.
3233-11.
§ 126-48 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-48
123:799
§ 126-49. (Reserved)318
southerly sides of Riverview Avenue. [Added 8-6-1996 by Ord.
No. 2768-96]317
(15) Northerly on Ayer Place from Union Avenue to Washington Avenue.
Parking shall be permitted on both sides of Ayer Place. [Added
4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 3285-13; amended 5-14-2013 by Ord.
No. 3289-13]
317. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(15), which provided that Franklin Place be designated
one-way between Park Avenue and Kip Avenue, added 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3010-02,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 8-24-2004 by Ord. No. 3047-04.
318. Editor's Note: Former § 126-49, Violations and penalties, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord.
No. 2243-78. See now § 126-65.
§ 126-48 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-49
123:800
ARTICLE VIIA
Speed Limits
[Added 2-4-1975 by Ord. No. 2165-75]
§ 126-49.1. Speed limits established.
§ 126-49.2. (Reserved)319
A. A speed limit of 35 miles per hour is hereby established on the following
streets or parts of streets:
(1) Orient Way from Rutherford Avenue to Station Square.
(2) Marginal Road from Ridge Road to Park Avenue. [Added 2-4-1975
by Ord. No. 2166-75]
319. Editor's Note: Former § 126-49.2, Violations and penalties, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord.
No. 2243-78. See now § 126-65.
§ 126-49.1 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-49.2
123:801

ARTICLE VIII
Street Intersection Closings
§ 126-50. (Reserved)320
320. Editor's Note: Former § 126-50, Intersection closings designated, was repealed 5-28-2019
by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-50 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-50
123:803

ARTICLE IX
Prohibited Turns
§ 126-51. Left turns.
A. No vehicle shall make a left turn at any of the following locations during
certain hours with certain exceptions:
(1) Vehicles moving in a southerly direction along Erie Avenue shall
not turn left at the intersection of Park Avenue and Erie Avenue.
(2) Vehicles moving in a westerly direction and entering the Borough
of Rutherford at the intersection of Erie Avenue and Park Avenue
shall not turn left at said intersection.
(3) (Reserved)321
(4) (Reserved)322
(5) Vehicles moving in a northeasterly direction along Jackson Avenue
shall not turn left at the intersection thereof with Hastings Avenue
between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. during weekdays.
(6) Vehicles moving in an easterly direction on Park Avenue between
Park Place and Donaldson Avenue shall not turn left to enter any
parking lot or driveway.
(7) Vehicles shall not turn left upon entering Park Avenue from parking
lots or driveways on the northerly side thereof between Park
Avenue and Donaldson Avenue.
(8) Vehicles moving in a northerly direction along Erie Avenue shall not
turn left at the intersection thereof with Feronia Way between the
hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to such turn on Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays.
(9) Vehicles moving in a southeasterly direction along Union Avenue
shall not turn left at the intersection thereof with Raymond Avenue
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., except Sundays and
holidays.
(10) Vehicles moving in a northeasterly direction along Erie Avenue
shall not turn left at the intersection thereof with Raymond Avenue
between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and
holidays.
321. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), intersection of Park Avenue and Franklin Place,
was repealed 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3010-02.
322. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), intersection of Sylvan Street and Park Avenue, was
repealed 12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75.
§ 126-51 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-51
123:805
(11) Vehicles moving in a southeasterly direction on Union Avenue
between Beech Street and Carmita Avenue shall not turn left to
enter any parking lot or driveway.
(12) Vehicles shall not turn left upon entering Union Avenue from
parking lots or driveways on the northeasterly side thereof
between Beech Street and Carmita Avenue.
(13) Vehicles moving in a northwesterly direction on Erie Avenue
between Station Square and Union Avenue shall not turn left to
enter any parking lot or driveway.
(14) Vehicles moving in a northwesterly direction on Union Avenue
between Erie Avenue and Agnew Place shall not turn left to enter
any parking lot or driveway.
(15) Vehicles shall not turn left upon entering Union Avenue from
parking lots or driveways on the southwesterly side thereof
between Erie Avenue and Agnew Place.
(16) Vehicles shall not make a left turn into the bank driveway on Wells
Place and shall not make a left turn out of the bank driveway on
Union Avenue.
(17) Vehicles moving in a westerly direction along Park Avenue shall not
turn left at the intersection of Park Avenue and Glen Road. [Added
10-7-1975 by Ord. No. 2179-75]
(18) Vehicles moving in a northwesterly direction along Glen Road shall
not turn left at the intersection of Glen Road and Park Avenue.
[Added 10-7-1975 by Ord. No. 2179-75]
(19) Vehicles moving in a southerly direction along Erie Avenue shall
not turn left at the entrance driveway to the Rutherford Park N'
Ride lot, situated immediately north of Union Avenue. [Added
2-18-1986 by Ord. No. 2429-86]
(20) Vehicles moving in a northerly direction along the travel aisle of the
Rutherford Park N' Ride lot shall not turn left at the exit driveway
from said lot onto Erie Avenue. [Added 2-18-1986 by Ord. No.
2429-86]
(21) Vehicles moving in a northeasterly direction along Orient Way shall
not turn left at the intersection of Woodland Avenue and Orient Way
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and
6:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and state holidays. [Added
6-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2469-87; amended 8-4-1987 by Ord. No.
2480-87]
(22) Vehicles moving in a northeasterly direction along Orient Way shall
not turn left at the intersection of Van Riper Avenue and Orient Way
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and
6:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and state holidays. [Added
§ 126-51 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-51
123:806
§ 126-52. U-turns.
§ 126-53. Right turns.323 [Added 9-7-1994 by Ord. No. 2709-94]
6-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2469-87; amended 8-4-1987 by Ord. No.
2480-87]
(23) Vehicles moving in a northwesterly direction along Ames Avenue
shall not turn left into the National Community Bank driveway.
[Added 7-5-1989 by Ord. No. 2541-89]
A. The driver of a motor vehicle shall not turn such vehicle around from
any approach as to proceed in the opposite direction at the intersection
of Erie Avenue and Union Avenue.
A. (Reserved)324
323. Editor's Note: Former § 126-53, Violations and penalties, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord.
No. 2243-78.
324. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, intersection of Park Avenue and Franklin Place, was
repealed 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3010-02.
§ 126-51 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-53
123:807

ARTICLE X
Bus Stops
§ 126-54. Bus stops designated. [Amended last 11-25-2003 by Ord.
No. 3034-03]
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-8e, the following areas are hereby established
and designated as bus stops wherein autobuses may stop for the sole
purpose of receiving and discharging passengers, and no person shall
park any motor vehicle or other vehicle in a bus stop area:
(1) Along Marginal Road, westbound, on the northerly side thereof, at:
[Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 3330-14; 5-27-2014 by Ord.
No. 3329-14]
(a) College Place (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
College Place and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(b) Wilson Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline
of Wilson Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(2) Along Orient Way, northbound, on the easterly side thereof, at:
(a) Crane Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Crane Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(b) Pierrepont Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly
curbline of Pierrepont Avenue and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom.
(c) Highland Cross (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Highland Cross and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(d) Passaic Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Passaic Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(3) Along Orient Way, southbound, on the westerly side thereof, at:
(a) Passaic Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline
of Passaic Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(b) Highland Cross (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline
of Highland Cross and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(c) Pierrepont Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly
curbline of Pierrepont Avenue and extending 105 feet
northerly therefrom.
(d) Woodland Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly
curbline of Woodland Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
§ 126-54 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-54
123:809
(e) Barrows Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly
curbline of Barrows Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
(4) Along Ridge Road, northbound, on the easterly side thereof, at:
(a) Van Riper Avenue (far side), beginning at the northerly
curbline of Van Riper Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom.
(b) Woodland Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly
curbline of Woodland Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom.
(c) Summit Cross (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Summit Cross and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(d) Passaic Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Passaic Avenue East and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom.
(5) Along Ridge Road, southbound, on the westerly side thereof, at:
(a) Passaic Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Passaic Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(b) Summit Cross (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline
of Summit Cross and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(c) Woodland Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly
curbline of Woodland Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
(d) Marginal Road (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline
of Marginal Road and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(6) Along Station Square, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof, at:
(a) Orient Way (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Orient Way and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(7) Along Veterans Boulevard, northbound, on the easterly side
thereof, at:
(a) Howmedica Way (near side), beginning at the southerly
curbline of Howmedica Way and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom.
(b) Between Borough Street and Howmedica Way (mid-block),
beginning 660 feet south of the southerly curbline of Borough
Street and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(c) Borough Street (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Borough Street and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 126-54 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-54
123:810
(8) Along Veterans Boulevard, southbound, on the westerly side
thereof, at:
(a) Borough Street (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Borough Street and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(b) Between Borough Street and Howmedica Way (mid-block),
beginning 660 feet south of the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Borough Street and extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom.
(c) Howmedica Way (far side), beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Howmedica Way and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom.
(9) Along Erie Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side thereof, at:
(a) Orient Way (far side), beginning at the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Orient Way and extending 121 feet
westerly therefrom.
(10) Along Union Avenue, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof, at:
(a) Darwin Avenue (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Darwin Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(b) Jackson Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline
of Jackson Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(c) Springfield Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly
curbline of Springfield Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly
therefrom.
(d) Montross Avenue (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline
of Montross Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(e) Wood Street (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Wood Street and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(f) Mortimer Avenue (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline
of Mortimer Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom.
(g) Carmita Avenue (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline
of Carmita Avenue and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
[Added 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 3071-05]
(h) Chestnut Street (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline
of Chestnut Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
[Added 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 3329-14]
(11) Along Union Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side thereof, at:
§ 126-54 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-54
123:811
(a) Chestnut Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curb of
Chestnut Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(b) Wood Street (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Wood Street and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(c) Montross Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly
curbline of Montross Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom.
(d) Beech Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Beech Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(e) Jackson Avenue (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Jackson Avenue and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(f) Darwin Avenue (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Darwin Avenue and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(g) Carmita Avenue (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline
of Carmita Avenue and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
[Added 3-22-2005 by Ord. No. 3071-05]
(12) Along Route 3 Service Road, westbound, on the northerly side
thereof, at:
(a) Veterans Boulevard (near side), beginning at the easterly
curbline of Veterans Boulevard and extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom.
(b) Orient Way (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Orient Way and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(13) Along Rutherford Avenue (Route 17), westbound, on the northerly
side thereof, at:
(a) Polito Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Polito Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(b) Between Summit Avenue and Ridge Road, mid-block,
beginning at a point 350 feet south of the prolongation of the
westerly curb line of Summit Avenue and extending 135 feet
westerly therefrom. [Added 5-27-2014 by Ord. No.
3329-14; amended 8-26-2014 by Ord. No. 3336-14]
(14) (Reserved)325
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.1, the State Commissioner of
Transportation is requested to adopt any regulation necessary to effect
the above-stated bus stops, and permission is hereby granted to erect
325. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(14), pertaining to a bus stop along Union Avenue at
Chestnut Street, added 6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 3156-08, was repealed 5-27-2014 by Ord.
No. 3330-14.
§ 126-54 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-54
123:812
§ 126-55. (Reserved)326
appropriate signs at the above-stated bus stops, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-1 98.
326. Editor's Note: Former § 128-55, Violations and penalties, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord.
No. 2228-78.
§ 126-54 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-55
123:813

ARTICLE XI
Loading Zones
§ 126-56. Loading zones designated.
§ 126-57. (Reserved)334
A. The following locations are hereby designated as loading zones
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. weekdays: [Amended
12-5-1978 by Ord. No. 2243-78]
(1) (Reserved)327
(2) (Reserved)328
(3) (Reserved)329
(4) (Reserved)330
(5) (Reserved)331
(6) (Reserved)332
(7) (Reserved)333
B. The following areas are hereby established and designated as loading
zones and may be used by passenger vehicles or trucks for the sole
purpose of loading or unloading passengers or materials between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, prevailing
time, as follows: [Added 10-4-1983 by Ord. No. 2354-83; amended
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
327. Editor's Note: The former entry for the northeast side of Park Avenue, as amended, was
repealed 8-8-2000 by Ord. No. 2945-00.
328. Editor's Note: The former entry for the northwest side of Park Avenue was repealed
7-2-1985 by Ord. No. 2408-85.
329. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), regarding the northeasterly curbline of Union
Avenue, was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
330. Editor's Note: The former entry for the southwest side of Ames Avenue was repealed
12-6-1977 by Ord. No. 2218-77.
331. Editor's Note: The former entry for the southwesterly side of Union Avenue was repealed
7-2-1985 by Ord. No. 2408-85.
332. Editor's Note: The former entry for the southeasterly side of Orient Way was repealed
12-16-1975 by Ord. No. 2182-75.
333. Editor's Note: The former entry for the north side of Park Avenue, added 12-16-1975 by
Ord. No. 2182-75 and amended 10-6-1981 by Ord. No. 2304-81, was repealed 7-5-1989 by
Ord. No. 2541-89.
334. Editor's Note: Former § 126-57, Violations and penalties, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord.
No. 2243-78.
§ 126-56 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-57
123:815

ARTICLE XII
Special Parking Regulations
§ 126-58. Angle parking established. [Added 5-19-1998 by Ord. No.
2840-98335]
§ 126-59. Repair of vehicles.336 [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
No person shall repair any vehicle upon any street with the Borough of
Rutherford except in the case of an emergency.
A. The establishment of zones, to be known as "angle parking zones,"
permitting the ninety-degree-angle parking of motor vehicles within
delineated parking stall lines in the following streets is hereby
authorized:
(1) The easterly side of Veteran's Boulevard commencing 62 feet from
the intersection of Veteran's Boulevard and Altman Drive and
continuing southerly for a distance of 563 feet, except in those
areas where parking would otherwise be prohibited by state
statute.
(2) Hastings Avenue commencing at a point on both sides of Hastings
Avenue at 210 feet from the intersection with Darwin Avenue and
running westerly to its terminus. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
335. Editor's Note: Former § 126-58, Taxi stands designated, amended 12-6-1977 by Ord. No.
2218-77, was repealed 7-1-1986 by Ord. No. 2446-86.
336. Editor's Note: Former § 126-59, Violations and penalties, was repealed 12-5-1978 by Ord.
No. 2243-78. See now § 126-65.
§ 126-58 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-59
123:817

ARTICLE XIII
Truck Exclusions
[Amended 12-5-1978 by Ord. No. 2243-78]
§ 126-60. Trucks over four tons excluded.
§ 126-61. Trucks over 10 tons excluded.
A. Trucks over four tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the
following described streets or parts of streets, except for the pickup
and delivery on such streets:
(1) Ridge Road, entire length.
(2) Barrows Avenue, entire length.
(3) Santiago Avenue, entire length.
(4) Chestnut Street, between Ames Avenue and West Passaic Avenue.
(5) Riverside Avenue, between Union Avenue and Washington Avenue.
[Added 7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 3009-02]
(6) Darwin Avenue, entire length. [Added 7-23-2002 by Ord. No.
3009-02]
(7) Grand Avenue, entire length. [Added 7-23-2002 by Ord. No.
3009-02]
(8) Vanderburgh Avenue, entire length. [Added 7-23-2002 by Ord.
No. 3009-02]
(9) Cooper Place, entire length. [Added 5-1-2007 by Ord. No.
3131-07]
(10) Marginal Road, entire length. [Added 6-26-2007 by Ord. No.
3141-07]
A. Trucks over 10 tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the
following described streets or parts of streets, except for the pickup
and delivery on such streets:
(1) Orient Way, between Erie Avenue and Barrows Avenue.
§ 126-60 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-61
123:819

ARTICLE XIV
Parking on Alternate Sides of Street
§ 126-62. Alternate-side parking designated. [Amended 11-17-1981
by Ord. No. 2309-81; 5-6-1986 by Ord. No. 2435-86; 12-19-1989 by
Ord. No. 2563-89; 6-18-1996 by Ord. No. 2765-96; 12-30-1996 by
Ord. No. 2784-96; 10-6-1998 by Ord. No. 2853-98; 4-6-1999 by Ord.
No. 2891-99; 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 2922-99]
No vehicle shall be permitted to park between the hours of the days
specified upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
A. (Reserved)337
B. (Reserved)338
C. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours listed below on
Mondays, prevailing time, on the following streets:
(1) Hours: 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
(a) North side of Barrows Avenue between Ridge Road and Orient
Way.
(b) South side of Van Riper Avenue between Ridge Road and
Orient Way.
(c) East side of Ridge Road between Barrows Avenue and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(d) South side of East Pierrepont Avenue between Ridge Road and
Route 17.
(e) West side of Sylvan Street between Barrows Avenue and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(f) West side of Van Winkle Place between East Pierrepont Avenue
and its southerly terminus.
(g) East side of Mountain Way between East Pierrepont Avenue
and Barrows Avenue.
(h) North side of Woodland Avenue between Park Avenue and
Orient Way.
(i) East side of Orient Way between East Pierrepont Avenue and
Route 3.
337. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A, concerning parking a vehicle for 24 hours on certain
streets on Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Sunday, was repealed 7-9-2013 by Ord. No.
3300-13.
338. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, concerning parking a vehicle for 24 hours on certain
streets on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday, was repealed 7-9-2013 by Ord. No. 3300-13.
§ 126-62 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-62
123:821
(j) North side of Van Riper Avenue between Orient Way and
Feronia Way.
(k) West side of Feronia Way between East Pierrepont Avenue and
its southerly terminus. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(l) South side of Crane Avenue between Orient Way and Route 17.
[Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(m) North side of Arthur Drive.
(n) North side of Nevins Street between Orient Way and Route 17.
(o) South side of Williams Street between Orient Way and Feronia
Way.
(p) South side of Evans Avenue between Feronia Way and Elycroft
Parkway.
(q) East side of Highfield Lane between Nevins Street and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(r) West side of Elycroft Parkway between East Pierrepont Avenue
and Crane Avenue.
(s) East side of Wilson Avenue between Marginal Road and its
northerly terminus.
(t) West side of Lincoln Avenue between Marginal Road and
Woodland Avenue.
(u) East side of Wheaton Place between Marginal Road and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(v) West side of Daniel Avenue between Marginal Road and
Woodland Avenue. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2987-01]
(w) West side of Daniel Avenue between Woodland Avenue and
East Pierrepont Avenue.
(x) North side of East Van Ness Avenue between Lincoln Avenue
and Wilson Avenue.
(y) South side of East Van Ness Avenue between Park Avenue and
Lincoln Avenue.
(z) East side of Delafield Avenue between East Van Ness Avenue
and Marginal Road.
(aa) East side of East Gouverneur Avenue between Marginal Road
and Park Avenue.
§ 126-62 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-62
123:822
(bb)West side of Park Avenue between East Pierrepont Avenue and
Marginal Road.
(cc) South side of West Van Ness Avenue between Park Avenue and
Edgewood Place.
(dd) North side of West Gouverneur Avenue between Park Avenue
and Riverside Avenue.
(ee) East side of Edgewood Place between Stuyvesant Avenue and
West Pierrepont Avenue.
(ff) East side of Stuyvesant Avenue between Marginal Road and
West Pierrepont Avenue.
(gg) North side of Marginal Road between Ridge Road and
Stuyvesant Avenue, [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2987-01]
(hh) 339East side of Preble Place between West Gouverneur Avenue
and its southerly terminus. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(ii) East side of Riverside Avenue between Route 3 and West
Pierrepont Avenue.
(jj) West side of Riverside Terrace between West Pierrepont
Avenue and West Gouverneur Avenue.
(kk)West side of Summit Avenue between Barrows Avenue and Van
Riper Avenue.
(ll) South side of West Pierrepont Avenue between Park Avenue
and Stuyvesant Avenue. [Amended 5-2-2006 by Ord. No.
3111-06]
(mm) Entire length of Dean Court. [Added 10-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 2987-01]
(2) Hours: 12:00 noon and 3:00 p.m.
(a) North side of Elizabeth Street between Eastern Way and Route
17. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(b) South side of Roliver Street between Eastern Way and Route
17.
(c) North side of Summit Cross between Lincoln Avenue and Route
17.
339. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1)(hh), regarding the west side of Preble Place
between West Gouverneur Avenue and Marginal Road, was repealed 7-26-2011 by Ord. No.
3233-11.
§ 126-62 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-62
123:823
(d) South side of Highland Cross between Lincoln Avenue and
Route 17.
(e) North side of Winslow Place between Sylvan Street and Orient
Way.
(f) South side of Garfield Place between Sylvan Street and Orient
Way.
(g) West side of Orient Way between East Passaic Avenue and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(h) East side of Feronia Way between East Passaic Avenue and
East Pierrepont Avenue.
(i) West side of Eastern Way between East Passaic Avenue and
East Pierrepont Avenue.
(j) (Reserved)340
(k) East side of Mountain Way between East Passaic Avenue and
East Pierrepont Avenue.
(l) West side of Sylvan Street between Highland Cross and East
Pierrepont Avenue. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No.
2990-01]
(m) West side of Ridge Road between Highland Cross and East
Pierrepont Avenue. [Amended 7-9-2013 by Ord. No.
3299-13]
(n) West side of Lincoln Avenue between Highland Cross and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(o) West side of Wheaton Place between East Pierrepont Avenue
and Addison Avenue.
(p) North side of Addison Avenue between Park Avenue and Ridge
Road.
(q) North side of East Newell Avenue between Park Avenue and
Lincoln Avenue.
(r) South side of East Park Place between Park Avenue and
Lincoln Avenue.
(s) (Reserved)341
340. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2)(j), Meadow Road, was repealed 10-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 2987-01.
341. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(2)(s), regarding the east side of Park Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-62 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-62
123:824
(t) North side of Riverview Avenue between Mortimer Avenue and
its westerly terminus. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2987-01]
(u) East side of Mortimer Avenue between West Pierrepont Avenue
and West Passaic Avenue.
(v) West side of Montross Avenue between Vreeland Avenue and
West Passaic Avenue. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No.
2990-01]
(w) West side of Carmita Avenue between West Pierrepont Avenue
and West Passaic Avenue.
(x) East side of Riverside Avenue between West Pierrepont Avenue
and Donaldson Avenue. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(y) South side of Vreeland Avenue between Mortimer Avenue and
Montross Avenue. [Amended 5-2-2006 by Ord. No.
3111-06]
(z) North side of West Newell Avenue between Park Avenue and
Riverside Avenue.
(aa) South side of West Park Place between Park Avenue and
Mortimer Avenue.
(bb) South side of Woodward Avenue between Mortimer Avenue
and Riverside Avenue.
(cc) North side of Donaldson Avenue between Mortimer Avenue
and Riverside Avenue.
(dd) East side of Jackson Avenue between Donaldson Avenue and
West Passaic Avenue. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
D. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours listed below on
Tuesdays, prevailing time, on the following streets:
(1) Hours: 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
(a) South side of Barrows Avenue between Ridge Road and Orient
Way.
(b) North side of Van Riper Avenue between Ridge Road and
Orient Way.
(c) West side of Ridge Road between Barrows Avenue and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(d) North side of East Pierrepont Avenue between Ridge Road and
Route 17.
§ 126-62 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-62
123:825
(e) East side of Sylvan Street between Barrows Avenue and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(f) East side of Van Winkle Place between East Pierrepont Avenue
and its southerly terminus.
(g) West side of Mountain Way between East Pierrepont Avenue
and Barrows Avenue.
(h) South side of Woodland Avenue between Park Avenue and
Orient Way.
(i) West side of Orient Way between East Pierrepont Avenue and
Route 3.
(j) South side of Van Riper Avenue between Orient Way and
Feronia Way.
(k) East side of Feronia Way between East Pierrepont Avenue and
its southerly terminus. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(l) North side of Crane Avenue between Orient Way and Route 17.
[Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(m) South side of Arthur Drive.
(n) South side of Nevins Street between Orient Way and Route 17.
(o) North side of Williams Street between Orient Way and Feronia
Way.
(p) North side of Evans Avenue between Feronia Way and Elycroft
Parkway.
(q) West side of Highfield Lane between Nevins Street and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(r) East side of Elycroft Parkway between East Pierrepont Avenue
and Crane Avenue.
(s) West side of Wilson Avenue between Marginal Road and its
northerly terminus.
(t) East side of Lincoln Avenue between Marginal Road and
Woodland Avenue.
(u) West side of Wheaton Place between Marginal Road and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(v) East side of Daniel Avenue between Marginal Road and
Woodland Avenue. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2987-01]
§ 126-62 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-62
123:826
(w) East side of Daniel Avenue between Woodland Avenue and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(x) South side of East Van Ness Avenue between Lincoln Avenue
and Wilson Avenue.
(y) North side of East Van Ness Avenue between Park Avenue and
Lincoln Avenue.
(z) West side of Delafield Avenue between East Van Ness Avenue
and Marginal Road.
(aa)West side of East Gouverneur Avenue between Marginal Road
and Park Avenue.
(bb) East side of Park Avenue between East Pierrepont Avenue and
Marginal Road.
(cc) North side of West Van Ness Avenue between Park Avenue and
Edgewood Place.
(dd) South side of West Gouverneur Avenue between Park Avenue
and Riverside Avenue.
(ee)West side of Edgewood Place between Stuyvesant Avenue and
West Pierrepont Avenue.
(ff) West side of Stuyvesant Avenue between Marginal Road and
West Pierrepont Avenue.
(gg) South side of Marginal Road between Ridge Road and
Stuyvesant Avenue. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2987-01]
(hh) 342West side of Preble Place between West Gouverneur Avenue
and its southerly terminus. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(ii) West side of Riverside Avenue between Route 3 and West
Pierrepont Avenue.
(jj) East side of Riverside Terrace between West Pierrepont
Avenue and West Gouverneur Avenue.
(kk) East side of Summit Avenue between Barrows Avenue and Van
Riper Avenue.
(ll) North side of West Pierrepont Avenue between Park Avenue
and Montross Avenue. [Amended 5-2-2006 by Ord. No.
3111-06]
342. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(1)(hh), Preble Place, was repealed 8-28-2012 by Ord.
No. 3266-12.
§ 126-62 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-62
123:827
(mm) Entire length of Lynn Court. [Added 10-16-2001 by Ord.
No. 2987-01]
(nn) Both sides of College Place between Marginal Road and its
northerly terminus. [Added 6-24-2008 by Ord. No.
3156-08]
(oo) Entire length of Walter Court. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(2) Hours: 12:00 noon and 3:00 p.m.
(a) South side of Elizabeth Street between Eastern Way and Route
17. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(b) North side of Roliver Street between Eastern Way and Route
17.
(c) South side of Summit Cross between Lincoln Avenue and Route
17.
(d) North side of Highland Cross between Lincoln Avenue and
Route 17.
(e) South side of Winslow Place between Sylvan Street and Orient
Way.
(f) North side of Garfield Place between Sylvan Street and Orient
Way.
(g) East side of Orient Way between East Passaic Avenue and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(h) West side of Feronia Way between East Passaic Avenue and
East Pierrepont Avenue.
(i) East side of Eastern Way between East Passaic Avenue and
East Pierrepont Avenue.
(j) (Reserved)343
(k) West side of Mountain Way between East Passaic Avenue and
East Pierrepont Avenue.
(l) East side of Sylvan Street between Highland Cross and East
Pierrepont Avenue. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No.
2990-01]
(m) East side of Ridge Road between Highland Cross and East
Pierrepont Avenue. [Amended 7-9-2013 by Ord. No.
3299-13]
343. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2)(j), regarding the west side of Meadow Road, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-62 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-62
123:828
(n) East side of Lincoln Avenue between Highland Cross and East
Pierrepont Avenue.
(o) East side of Wheaton Place between East Pierrepont Avenue
and Addison Avenue.
(p) South side of Addison Avenue between Park Avenue and Ridge
Road.
(q) South side of East Newell Avenue between Park Avenue and
Lincoln Avenue.
(r) North side of East Park Place between Park Avenue and
Lincoln Avenue.
(s) (Reserved)344
(t) South side of Riverview Avenue between Mortimer Avenue and
its westerly terminus. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No.
2987-01]
(u) West side of Mortimer Avenue between West Pierrepont
Avenue and West Passaic Avenue.
(v) East side of Montross Avenue between Vreeland Avenue and
West Passaic Avenue. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No.
2990-01]
(w) East side of Carmita Avenue between West Pierrepont Avenue
and West Passaic Avenue.
(x) West side of Riverside Avenue between West Pierrepont
Avenue and Donaldson Avenue. [Amended 5-28-2019 by
Ord. No. 3501-19]
(y) North side of Vreeland Avenue between Mortimer Avenue and
Montross Avenue. [Amended 5-2-2006 by Ord. No.
3111-06]
(z) South side of West Newell Avenue between Park Avenue and
Riverside Avenue.
(aa) North side of West Park Place between Park Avenue and
Mortimer Avenue.
(bb) North side of Woodward Avenue between Mortimer Avenue
and Riverside Avenue.
(cc) South side of Donaldson Avenue between Mortimer Avenue
and Riverside Avenue.
344. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2)(s), regarding the west side of Meadow Road, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-62 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-62
123:829
(dd)West side of Jackson Avenue between Donaldson Avenue and
West Passaic Avenue. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
E. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours listed on Thursdays,
prevailing time, on the following streets:
(1) Hours: 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
(a) (Reserved)345
(b) (Reserved)346
(c) North side of East Passaic Avenue between Orient Way and
Meadow Road.
(d) West side of Feronia Way between East Passaic Avenue and
Erie Avenue.
(e) North side of West Passaic Avenue between Montross Avenue
and Vanderburgh Avenue.
(f) South side of Union Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Riverside Avenue.
(g) West side of Irving Place between Elliott Place and Union
Avenue.
(h) East side of Wood Street between West Passaic Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(i) East side of Milton Court between Elliott Place and Fairview
Avenue.
(j) East side of Hackett Place between Fairview Avenue and Union
Avenue.
(k) West side of Montross Avenue between Fairview Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(l) West side of Prospect Place between Hollister Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(m) East side of Carmita Avenue between West Passaic Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(n) South side of Estate Place between Hackett Place and Wood
Street.
(o) (Reserved)347
345. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(1)(a), regarding the west side of Meadow Road, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
346. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(1)(b), regarding the south side of Erie Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-62 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-62
123:830
(p) South side of Fairview Avenue between Carmita Avenue and
Wood Street. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(q) South side of Alwyn Terrace between Carmita Avenue and
Prospect Place. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(r) North side of Hollister Avenue between Carmita Avenue and
Montross Avenue.
(s) North side of Elliott Place between Wood Street and Milton
Court. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(t) Entire length of Circle Lane. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 3501-19]
(u) East side of Santiago Avenue between West Passaic Avenue
and Francisco Avenue.
(v) West side of Springfield Avenue between West Passaic Avenue
and Francisco Avenue.
(w) East side of Jackson Avenue between West Passaic Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(x) East side of Vanderburgh Avenue between West Passaic
Avenue and Union Avenue.
(y) East side of Grand Avenue between Union Avenue and its
southerly terminus. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(z) East side of Darwin Avenue between Carneer Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(aa) North side of Insley Avenue between Jackson Avenue and its
westerly terminus. [Amended 6-19-2001 by Ord. No.
2972-01; 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(bb) North side of Carneer Avenue between Jackson Avenue and its
westerly terminus. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(cc) North side of Hastings Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Darwin Avenue. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(dd) North side of Clark Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Grand Avenue.
(2) Hours: 12:00 noon and 3:00 p.m.
(a) West side of Hackett Place between Washington Avenue and
Union Avenue.
347. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(1)(o), regarding the north side of Fairview Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-62 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-62
123:831
(b) East side of Ivy Place between Union Avenue and Washington
Avenue.
(c) East side of Maple Street between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(d) West side of Grove Street between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(e) West side of Elm Street between Washington Avenue and
Morse Avenue.
(f) East side of Wood Street between Washington Avenue and Erie
Avenue. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2990-01]
(g) East side of Montross Avenue between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(h) North side of Washington Avenue between Erie Avenue and
Grove Street. [Amended 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 3111-06]
(i) North side of Sidney Avenue between Montross Avenue and
Erie Avenue. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(j) South side of Morse Avenue between Erie Avenue and Walnut
Street.
(k) South side of Beckwith Place between Montross Avenue and
Wood Street.
(l) West side of Prospect Place between Union Avenue and Morse
Avenue.
(m) West side of Hasbrouck Place between Eric Avenue and Morse
Avenue.
(n) West side of Courier Place between Erie Avenue and Morse
Avenue. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(o) East side of Carmita Avenue between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(p) West side of Walnut Street between Erie Avenue and St. Clair
Avenue.
(q) West side of Myrtle Street between Erie Avenue and St. Clair
Avenue.
(r) East side of Beech Street between Washington Avenue and
Erie Avenue.
(s) East side of Hawthorne Street between Erie Avenue and St.
Clair Avenue.
§ 126-62 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-62
123:832
(t) West side of Raymond Avenue between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(u) West side of Carlton Place between Erie Avenue and Raymond
Avenue.
(v) North side of Sunderland Avenue between Raymond Avenue
and its easterly terminus.
(w) East side of Jackson Avenue between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(x) East side of Vanderburgh Avenue between Union Avenue and
Erie Avenue.
(y) West side of Grand Avenue between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(z) East side of Darwin Avenue between Union Avenue and its
northerly terminus. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(aa) North side of Erie Avenue between Grand Avenue and Jackson
Avenue. [Amended 6-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2972-01;
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(bb) South side of Monona Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Darwin Avenue.
(cc) North side of Yahara Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Darwin Avenue.
(dd) South side of Wingra Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Darwin Avenue.
(ee) North side of Hobart Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Riverside Avenue.
(ff) West side of Riverside Avenue between Union Avenue and
Washington Avenue.
(gg) North side of St. Clair Avenue between Raymond Avenue and
Walnut Street. [Added 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(hh) North side of Washington Avenue between Wood Street and
Riverside Avenue. [Added 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 3111-06]
F. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours listed on Fridays,
prevailing time, on the following streets:
(1) Hours: 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
(a) (Reserved)348
(b) (Reserved)349
§ 126-62 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-62
123:833
(c) South side of East Passaic Avenue between Orient Way and
Meadow Road.
(d) East side of Feronia Way between East Passaic Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(e) South side of West Passaic Avenue between Montross Avenue
and Vanderburgh Avenue.
(f) North side of Union Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Riverside Avenue.
(g) East side of Irving Place between Elliott Place and Union
Avenue.
(h) West side of Wood Street between West Passaic Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(i) West side of Milton Court between Elliott Place and Fairview
Avenue.
(j) West side of Hackett Place between Fairview Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(k) East side of Montross Avenue between Fairview Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(l) East side of Prospect Place between Hollister Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(m) West side of Carmita Avenue between West Passaic Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(n) North side of Estate Place between Hackett Place and Wood
Street.
(o) (Reserved)350
(p) North side of Fairview Avenue between Carmita Avenue and
Wood Street. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(q) North side of Alwyn Terrace between Carmita Avenue and
Prospect Place.
(r) South side of Hollister Avenue between Carmita Avenue and
Montross Avenue.
348. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(1)(a), regarding the east side of Meadow Road, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
349. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(1)(b), regarding the north side of Erie Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
350. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(1)(o), regarding the south side of Fairview Avenue,
was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-62 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-62
123:834
(s) South side of Elliott Place between Wood Street and Milton
Court. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(t) South side of Francisco Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Carmita Avenue.
(u) West side of Santiago Avenue between West Passaic Avenue
and Francisco Avenue.
(v) East side of Springfield Avenue between West Passaic Avenue
and Francisco Avenue.
(w) West side of Jackson Avenue between West Passaic Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(x) West side of Vanderburgh Avenue between West Passaic
Avenue and Union Avenue.
(y) West side of Grand Avenue between Union Avenue and its
southerly terminus. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(z) West side of Darwin Avenue between Carneer Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(aa) South side of Insley Avenue between Jackson Avenue and its
westerly terminus. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(bb) South side of Carneer Avenue between Jackson Avenue and its
westerly terminus. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(cc) South side of Hastings Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Darwin Avenue. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(dd) South side of Clark Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Grand Avenue.
(ee) Both sides of Hastings Avenue between Darwin Avenue and its
westerly terminus. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(2) Hours: 12:00 noon and 3:00 p.m.
(a) East side of Hackett Place between Washington Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(b) (Reserved)351
(c) West side of Maple Street between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
351. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(2)(b), regarding the west side of Ivy Place, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-62 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-62
123:835
(d) East side of Grove Street between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(e) East side of Elm Street between Washington Avenue and Morse
Avenue.
(f) West side of Wood Street between Washington Avenue and Erie
Avenue. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2990-01]
(g) West side of Montross Avenue between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(h) South side of Washington Avenue between Erie Avenue and
Grove Street. [Amended 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 3111-06]
(i) South side of Sidney Avenue between Montross Avenue and
Erie Avenue. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(j) North side of Morse Avenue between Erie Avenue and Walnut
Street.
(k) North side of Beckwith Place between Montross Avenue and
Wood Street.
(l) East side of Prospect Place between Union Avenue and Morse
Avenue.
(m) East side of Hasbrouck Place between Erie Avenue and Morse
Avenue.
(n) East side of Courier Place between Erie Avenue and Morse
Avenue. [Amended 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(o) West side of Carmita Avenue between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(p) East side of Walnut Street between Erie Avenue and St. Clair
Avenue.
(q) East side of Myrtle Street between Erie Avenue and St. Clair
Avenue.
(r) West side of Beech Street between Washington Avenue and
Erie Avenue.
(s) West side of Hawthorne Street between Erie Avenue and St.
Clair Avenue.
(t) East side of Raymond Avenue between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(u) East side of Carlton Place between Erie Avenue and Raymond
Avenue.
§ 126-62 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-62
123:836
(v) South side of Sunderland Avenue between Raymond Avenue
and its easterly terminus.
(w) (Reserved)352
(x) West side of Vanderburgh Avenue between Union Avenue and
Erie Avenue.
(y) East side of Grand Avenue between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(z) West side of Darwin Avenue between Union Avenue and its
northerly terminus. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(aa) South side of Erie Avenue between Grand Avenue and Jackson
Avenue. [Amended 6-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2972-01;
5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(bb) North side of Monona Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Darwin Avenue.
(cc) South side of Yahara Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Darwin Avenue.
(dd) North side of Wingra Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Darwin Avenue.
(ee) South side of Hobart Avenue between Jackson Avenue and
Riverside Avenue.
(ff) East side of Riverside Avenue between Union Avenue and
Washington Avenue.
(gg) South side of St. Clair Avenue between Raymond Avenue and
Walnut Street. [Added 10-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2987-01]
(hh) South side of Washington Avenue between Wood Street and
Riverside Avenue. [Added 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 3111-06]
G. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours listed on Wednesdays,
prevailing time, on the following streets:
(1) 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(a) West side of Wells Place between Washington Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(b) West side of Belford Avenue between Union Avenue and
Francisco Avenue.
352. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(2)(w), regarding the west side of Jackson Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-62 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-62
123:837
(c) East side of Springfield Avenue between Francisco Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(d) East side of Beech Street between Union Avenue and
Washington Avenue.
(e) West side of Santiago Avenue between Union Avenue and
Francisco Avenue.
(f) North side of Cooper Place between Springfield Avenue and
Jackson Avenue.
(g) West side of Montross Avenue between Fairview Avenue and W.
Passaic Avenue.
(h) South side of West Passaic Avenue between Montross Avenue
and Park Avenue.
(i) East side of Chestnut Street between West Passaic Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(j) North side of Ames Avenue between Park Avenue and Home
Avenue.
(k) West side of Home Avenue between Union Avenue and West
Passaic Avenue.
(l) East side of Mortimer Avenue between West Passaic Avenue
and Union Avenue.
(m) West side of Maple Street between Union Avenue and Fairview
Avenue.
(n) South side of Fairview Avenue between Wood Street and Home
Avenue. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(o) South side of Franklin Place between Chestnut Street and Park
Avenue. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(p) (Reserved)353
(q) East side of Chestnut Street between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(r) West side of Ayer Place between Washington Avenue and Union
Avenue.
(s) North side of Elliott Place between Wood Street and Home
Avenue. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(t) West side of Orient Way between Erie Avenue and East Passaic
Avenue.
353. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G(1)(p), regarding the east side of Kip Avenue, was
repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19.
§ 126-62 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-62
123:838
(u) North side of East Passaic Avenue between Orient Way and
Park Avenue.
(v) South and west side of The Terrace between Park Avenue and
East Passaic Avenue.
(w) East side of Ridge Road between Highland Cross and Park
Avenue. [Amended 7-9-2013 by Ord. No. 3299-13]
(x) South side of Spring Dell between Park Avenue and Orient Way.
(y) North side of Glen Road between Orient Way and Park Avenue.
(z) West side of Sylvan Street between Spring Dell and Highland
Cross. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2990-01]
(aa)West side of Lincoln Avenue between Park Avenue and
Highland Cross.
(bb) North side of Highland Cross between Lincoln Avenue and
Park Avenue.
(cc) North side of Donaldson Avenue between Park Avenue and
Mortimer Avenue.
(dd) South side of East Pierrepont Avenue between Park Avenue
and Ridge Road.
(ee)West side of Lincoln Avenue between East Pierrepont Avenue
and Woodland Avenue.
(ff) South side of Ettrick Terrace between Spring Dell and Orient
Way.
(gg) South side of Erie Avenue between Maple Street and Park
Avenue, except permit parking spots designated by ordinance.
[Added 6-19-2001 by Ord. No. 2972-01; amended
4-26-2005 by Ord. No. 3076-05; 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(hh)West side of Montross Avenue between Vreeland Avenue and
West Pierrepont Avenue. [Added 12-4-2001 by Ord. No.
2990-01]
(ii) West side of Wood Street between Washington Avenue and
Union Avenue. [Added 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2990-01]
(jj) North side of Washington Avenue between Grove Avenue and
Wood Street. [Added 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 3111-06]
(kk) South side of Vreeland Avenue between Montross Avenue and
Carmita Avenue. [Added 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 3111-06]
§ 126-62 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-62
123:839
(ll) North side of West Pierrepont Avenue between Montross
Avenue and Riverside Avenue. [Added 5-2-2006 by Ord. No.
3111-06]
(mm) South side of East Passaic Avenue between Meadow Road and
its easterly terminus. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
(nn)West side of Agnew Place between Union Avenue and West
Erie Avenue. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
H. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours listed on Fridays,
prevailing time, on the following streets:
(1) 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(a) East side of Wells Place between Washington Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(b) East side of Belford Avenue between Union Avenue and
Francisco Avenue.
(c) West side of Springfield Avenue between Francisco Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(d) West side of Beech Street between Union Avenue and
Washington Avenue.
(e) East side of Santiago Avenue between Union Avenue and
Francisco Avenue.
(f) South side of Cooper Place between Springfield Avenue and
Jackson Avenue.
(g) East side of Montross Avenue between Fairview Avenue and
West Passaic Avenue.
(h) North side of West Passaic Avenue between Montross Avenue
and Park Avenue.
(i) West side of Chestnut Street between West Passaic Avenue and
Union Avenue.
(j) South side of Ames Avenue between Park Avenue and Home
Avenue.
(k) East side of Home Avenue between Union Avenue and West
Passaic Avenue.
(l) West side of Mortimer Avenue between West Passaic Avenue
and Union Avenue.
(m) East side of Maple Street between Union Avenue and Fairview
Avenue.
§ 126-62 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-62
123:840
(n) North side of Fairview Avenue between Wood Street and Home
Avenue. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(o) North side of Franklin Place between Home Avenue and Park
Avenue. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(p) West side of Kip Avenue between Franklin Place and Ames
Avenue.
(q) West side of Chestnut Street between Union Avenue and Erie
Avenue.
(r) East side of Ayer Place between Washington Avenue and Union
Avenue.
(s) South side of Elliott Place between Wood Street and Home
Avenue. [Amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
(t) East side of Orient Way between Erie Avenue and East Passaic
Avenue.
(u) South side of East Passaic Avenue between Orient Way and
Park Avenue.
(v) North and east side of The Terrace between Park Avenue and
East Passaic Avenue.
(w) West side of Ridge Road between Highland Cross and Park
Avenue. [Amended 7-9-2013 by Ord. No. 3299-13]
(x) North side of Spring Dell between Park Avenue and Orient Way.
(y) South side of Glen Road between Orient Way and Park Avenue.
(z) East side of Sylvan Street between Spring Dell and Highland
Cross. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2990-01]
(aa) East side of Lincoln Avenue between Park Avenue and
Highland Cross.
(bb) South side of Highland Cross between Lincoln Avenue and
Park Avenue.
(cc) South side of Donaldson Avenue between Park Avenue and
Mortimer Avenue.
(dd) North side of East Pierrepont Avenue between Park Avenue
and Ridge Road.
(ee) East side of Lincoln Avenue between East Pierrepont Avenue
and Woodland Avenue.
(ff) North side of Ettrick Terrace between Spring Dell and Orient
Way.
§ 126-62 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-62
123:841
§ 126-63. Tow-away. [Amended 12-5-1978 by Ord. No. 2243-78]
Any unoccupied vehicle parked in violation of this article shall be deemed a
nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any
peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall
pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which may result from
such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
(gg) (Reserved)354
(hh) East side of Montross Avenue between Vreeland Avenue and
West Pierrepont Avenue. [Added 12-4-2001 by Ord. No.
2990-01]
(ii) East side of Wood Street between Washington Avenue and
Union Avenue. [Added 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 2990-01]
(jj) South side of Washington Avenue between Grove Avenue and
Wood Street. [Added 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 3111-06]
(kk) North side of Vreeland Avenue between Montross Avenue and
Carmita Avenue. [Added 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 3111-06]
(ll) South side of West Pierrepont Avenue between Stuyvesant
Avenue and Riverside Avenue. [Added 5-2-2006 by Ord. No.
3111-06]
(mm) North side of East Passaic Avenue between Meadow Road and
its easterly terminus. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3501-19]
354. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection H(1)(gg), North side of Erie Avenue, added 6-19-2001 by
Ord. No. 2972-01, was repealed 4-26-2005 by Ord. No. 3076-05.
§ 126-62 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-63
123:842
ARTICLE XV
Effect of Ordinance
§ 126-64. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 126-65. Penalties.355 [Added 12-5-1978 by Ord. No. 2243-78;
amended 3-5-1985 by Ord. No. 2399-85; 7-1-1986 by Ord. No.
2446-86; 8-1-1989 by Ord. No. 2546-89; 12-27-1989 by Ord. No.
2566-89; 8-7-1990 by Ord. No. 2579-90; 8-6-1991 by Ord. No.
2612-91; 2-16-1993 by Ord. No. 2673-93; 2-1-1994 by Ord. No.
2697-94; 11-1-1994 by Ord. No. 2717-94; 2-6-1996 by Ord. No.
2753-96; 3-19-1996 by Ord. No. 2757-96; 5-7-1996 by Ord. No.
2760-96; 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 2819-97; 2-15-2000 by Ord. No.
2925-00]
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by a New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter of the
Code or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more
than $500. [Amended 5-16-2000 by Ord. No. 2934-00]
B. The following specific penalties are hereby established for violations of
the referenced sections: [Amended 11-20-2001 by Ord. No.
2989-01;12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 3036-03; 8-24-2004 by Ord. No.
3047-04; 8-24-2004 by Ord. No. 3048-04; 3-22-2005 by Ord. No.
3075-05; 8-22-2006 by Ord. No. 3118-06]
(1) Section 126-1, prohibited parking in designated areas: $35.
(2) Section 126-2, prohibited stopping or standing: $35.
(3) Section 126-3, fifteen-minute parking restriction: $35.
(4) Section 126-4, thirty-minute parking restriction: $35.
(5) Section 126-5, parking prohibited certain hours: $35.
(6) Section 126-6, one-hour parking limit: $35.
(7) Section 126-7, two-hour parking limit: $35.
(8) Section 126-8, three-hour parking limit: $35.
(9) Section 126-9, overnight parking prohibited (commercial areas
2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.): $50.
(10) Sections 126-9.1 and 126-9.2, truck parking restricted (commercial
MV in business district): $100.
355. Editor's Note: Former § 126-65, Repealer, was repealed 12-6-1977 by Ord. No. 2218-77.
§ 126-64 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-65
123:843
(11) Section 126-10, emergency parking restriction: $100.
(12) Section 126-11, parking during snow emergencies: $200.
[Amended 11-10-2014 by Ord. No. 3344-14]
(13) Section 126-14, parking by permit only: $50.356
(14) Section 126-29, parking within markings required: $50.
(15) Section 126-32, metered overtime parking prohibited: $20.
(16) Section 126-37, parking meter charges (overtime parking,
specified streets 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.):
(a) First offense: $20.
(b) Second and third offense: $33.
(c) Fourth to ninth offense: $57.
(d) Tenth or more offenses, per offense: $157.
(17) Section 126-51, left turn prohibitions: $150.
(18) Section 126-52, U-turn prohibitions: $150.
(19) Section 126-54, parking within bus stops prohibited: $75.
(20) Section 126-56, parking within loading zones prohibited: $75.
(21) Sections 126-60 and 126-61, truck weight limits: $150.
(22) Section 126-62, alternate side parking: $35.
(23) Section 126-68, lane reservation: $150.
(24) Section 126-69, handicapped parking restrictions: as per state
statute.
(25) Section 126-9.5, Public parking spaces for charging of electric
vehicles: [Added 12-11-2018 by Ord. No. 3481-18]
(a) First offense: $20.
(b) Second and third offense: $33.
(c) Fourth to ninth offense: $57.
(d) Tenth or more offenses, per offense: $157.
356. Editor’s Note: Inclusion of this subsection as Subsection B(13) resulted in the
redesignation of former Subsections B(13) through (23) as Subsections B(14) through
(24), respectively.
§ 126-65 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-66
123:844
§ 126-66. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
§ 126-66 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-66
123:845

ARTICLE XVI
Crosswalks
[Added 9-3-1980 by Ord. No. 2289-80]
§ 126-67. Midblock crosswalks designated.
A. The following midblock crosswalks are hereby designated at the
following locations:
(1) Across Veterans Boulevard at a point 220.0 feet southerly from the
center line of Industrial Drive to the near side of the crosswalk,
with the crosswalk being 10.0 feet in width.
§ 126-67 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-67
123:847

ARTICLE XVII
Lane Use Reservations
[Added 10-6-1981 by Ord. No. 2304-81]
§ 126-68. Lane reservations designated. [Amended 9-5-1990 by Ord.
No. 2580A-90; 11-23-2004 by Ord. No. 3056-04; 12-28-2015 by Ord.
No. 3384-15]
A. The following lane locations are designated "lane use reservations," and
all vehicles shall move only as indicated:
(1) East Erie Avenue and Orient Way.
(a) The left lane of the westbound approach of East Erie Avenue
shall be for left turns only.
(b) The right lane of the westbound approach of East Erie Avenue
shall be for through traffic only.
(c) The left lane of the northbound approach of Orient Way shall
be for left turns only.
(d) The right lane of the northbound approach of Orient Way shall
be for right turns only.
(2) East Erie Avenue and Hackensack Street.
(a) The left lane of the eastbound approach of East Erie Avenue
shall be for left turns only.
(3) Rutherford Avenue, Stuyvesant Avenue and Park Avenue.
(a) The left lane of the westbound approach of Rutherford Avenue
shall be reserved for left turns onto Stuyvesant Avenue and
Park Avenue.
(b) The right lane of the westbound approach of Rutherford
Avenue shall be reserved for right turns only.
(c) The left lane of the eastbound approach of Rutherford Avenue
shall be reserved for left turns and through traffic only.
(d) The center lane of the eastbound approach of Rutherford
Avenue shall be reserved for through traffic only.
(e) The right lane of the eastbound approach of Rutherford Avenue
shall be reserved for right turns only onto Stuyvesant Avenue
and Park Avenue.
(f) The left lane of the southbound approach of Park Avenue shall
be reserved for left turns only onto Rutherford Avenue and
Stuyvesant Avenue.
(4) Union Avenue and Jackson Avenue.
§ 126-68 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-68
123:849
(a) The left lane of the eastbound approach of Union Avenue shall
be reserved for left turns only.
(5) West Erie Avenue and Jackson Avenue.
(a) The right lane of the westbound approach of West Erie Avenue
shall be reserved for right turns only.
(6) Riverside Avenue and Marginal Road.
(a) The left lane of the southbound approach of Riverside Avenue
shall be reserved for left turns only onto the ramp to Route
West.
(b) The right lane of the westbound approach of Marginal Road
shall be reserved for right turns only onto Riverside Avenue.
(c) The left lane of the westbound approach of Marginal Road shall
be reserved for left turns only onto Riverside Avenue.
(7) Park Avenue and Marginal Road.
(a) The left lane of the northbound approach of Park Avenue shall
be reserved for left turns only.
(b) The left lane of the southbound approach of Park Avenue shall
be reserved for left turns only.
(c) The left lane of the westbound approach of Marginal Road shall
be reserved for left turns onto Park Avenue and through traffic.
(d) The right lane of the westbound approach of Marginal Road
shall be reserved for right turns onto Park Avenue and through
traffic.
(8) Marginal Road and ramp to Route 3 West.
(a) The left lane of the westbound approach of Marginal Road shall
be reserved for left turns only onto the ramp to Route 3 West.
(9) Rutherford Avenue and ramp to Route 3 East.
(a) The left lane of the eastbound approach of Rutherford Avenue
shall be reserved for left turns only onto the ramp to Route 3
East.
(10) Rutherford Avenue and Ridge Road.
(a) The left lane of the eastbound approach of Rutherford Avenue
shall be reserved for left turns only.
(b) The left lane of the westbound approach of Rutherford Avenue
shall be reserved for left turns only.
(11) Thomas E. Dunn Memorial Highway and Orient Way.
§ 126-68 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-68
123:850
(a) The right lane of the westbound approach of Thomas E. Dunn
Memorial Highway shall be reserved for right turns only.
(12) Highland Cross and Route 17.
(a) The left lane of the westbound approach of Highland Cross
shall be reserved for left turns only.
(b) The center lane of the westbound approach of Highland Cross
shall be reserved for through traffic only.
(c) The right lane of the westbound approach of Highland Cross
shall be reserved for right turns only.
(d) The left lane of the eastbound approach of Highland Cross
shall be reserved for left turns only.
(e) The center lane of the eastbound approach of Highland Cross
shall be reserved for through traffic only.
(f) The right lane of the eastbound approach of Highland Cross
shall be reserved for right turns only.
B. The following lane locations are designated "bus lane use reservations,"
and all other traffic shall be prohibited. [Added 5-28-2019 by Ord.
No. 3501-19]
(1) Northerly side of Station Square between Orient Way and Park
Avenue in front of the Rutherford Train Station.
(2) Southerly side of Station Square between Park Avenue and Orient
Way, except for vehicles utilizing parking designated by Borough
ordinance.
§ 126-68 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-68
123:851

ARTICLE XVIII
Parking for the Handicapped
[Added 6-16-1982 by Ord. No. 2321-82]
§ 126-69. Designation of spaces. [Amended 7-3-1984 by Ord. No.
2374-84; 8-4-1987 by Ord. No. 2474-87; 10-2-1990 by Ord. No.
2582-90; 3-19-1996 by Ord. No. 2757-96; 3-22-2005 by Ord. No.
3071-05; 5-24-2005 by Ord. No. 3079-05; 9-29-2005 by Ord. No.
3089-05; 7-24-2007 by Ord. No. 3143-07; 7-23-2013 by Ord. No.
3302-13; 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5, the following locations on public streets
and municipally owned parking lots are hereby restricted and designated
as accessible parking spaces for use only by persons who have been issued
special "persons with a disability" vehicle identification placards or plates
by the Division of Motor Vehicles:
A. Public street spaces (minimum length 22 feet each).
Name of Street Side Location
Ames Avenue [Added
11-19-1996 by Ord.
No. 2779-96; repealed
12-11-2018 by Ord.
No. 3480-18]
Ames Avenue [Added
9-3-1997 by Ord. No.
2815-97]
South Commencing 68 feet from the
intersection of Ames Avenue and
Chestnut Street running westerly
a distance of 22 feet
Ames Avenue [Added
9-3-1997 by Ord. No.
2815-97]
South Commencing 90 feet from the
intersection of Ames Avenue and
Chestnut Street and running
westerly a distance of 22 feet
Ames Avenue [Added
12-11-2018 by Ord.
No. 3479-18]
South Commencing 68 feet from the
southwest intersection of Park
Avenue and Ames Avenue and
running easterly for a distance of
22 feet
Ayer Place [Added
10-28-2014 by Ord.
No. 3343-14]
East Commencing 60 feet from the
northeast intersection of Ayer
Place and Washington Avenue and
running southerly for a distance of
22 feet
Ayer Place [Added
10-9-2012 by Ord. No.
3270-12; repealed
7-9-2013 by Ord. No.
3298-13]
§ 126-69 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-69
123:853
Name of Street Side Location
Ayer Place [Added
7-9-2013 by Ord. No.
3297-13; repealed
9-22-2014 by Ord. No.
3339-14]
Carmita Avenue [Added
4-18-2000 by Ord. No.
2933-00]
East Commencing 35 feet from the
intersection of Carmita Avenue
and Union Avenue and running
northerly for a distance of 22 feet
Carmita Avenue (two
spaces) [Added
11-21-2000 by Ord.
No. 2953-00;
amended 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 3093-05]
West Commencing 80 feet from the
intersection of West Pierrepont
Avenue and Carmita Avenue and
running northerly for a distance of
22 feet
Carmita Avenue [Added
12-29-1998 by Ord.
No. 2879-98; repealed
4-18-2000 by Ord. No.
2933-00]
Chestnut Street [Added
10-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 3189-09]
East Commencing 105 feet from the
intersection of Chestnut Street
and Ames Avenue, and running
southerly for a distance of 22 feet
Chestnut Street [Added
6-4-1987 by Ord. No.
2469-87]
East Commencing 51 feet from the
intersection of West Passaic
Avenue and Chestnut Street
running northeasterly for a
distance of 22 feet
Chestnut Street [Added
7-7-1992 by Ord. No.
2656-92; repealed
1-23-2018 by Ord. No.
3442-18]
Chestnut Street [Added
2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
3351-15]
West Commencing 246 feet from the
southwest intersection of
Chestnut Street and Ames Avenue
and running southerly for a
distance of 22 feet
Chestnut Street [Added
8-14-2018 by Ord. No.
3471-18]
West Commencing 268 feet from the
intersection of Franklin Place and
Chestnut Street and running
southerly for a distance of 20 feet
§ 126-69 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-69
123:854
Name of Street Side Location
Cooper Place [Added
6-28-2011 by Ord. No.
3229-11; repealed
1-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3486-19]
Courier Place [Added
9-7-1988 by Ord. No.
2513-88; amended
3-5-1996 by Ord. No.
2754-96; repealed
5-27-2003 by Ord. No.
3022-03]
Courier Place [Added
3-5-1996 by Ord. No.
2754-96; repealed
12-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 3383-15]
Daniel Avenue [Added
9-7-1988 by Ord. No.
2513-88; repealed
2-18-1992 by Ord. No.
2637-92]
Darwin Avenue [Added
11-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 3240-11]
East Commencing 62 feet from the
intersection of Darwin and Union
Avenues and running westerly for
a distance of 22 feet
Darwin Avenue [Added
11-14-2011 by Ord.
No. 3240-11; repealed
8-12-2013 by Ord. No.
3305-13]
Darwin Avenue [Added
5-25-2010 by Ord. No.
3203-10]
East Commencing 257 feet from the
intersection of Darwin Avenue and
Union Avenue, and running
southerly for a distance of 22 feet
Darwin Avenue [Added
5-1-2007 by Ord. No.
3131-07; repealed
9-28-2015 by Ord. No.
3378-15]
Darwin Avenue [Added
7-11-1995 by Ord. No.
2735-95; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 3093-05]
§ 126-69 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-69
123:855
Name of Street Side Location
Darwin Avenue [Added
7-11-1995 by Ord. No.
2735-95; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 3093-05]
Delafield Avenue
[Added 9-7-1988 by
Ord. No. 2513-88;
repealed 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 3093-05]
Delafield Avenue
[Added 11-10-1998 by
Ord. No. 2870-98;
repealed 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 3093-05]
Donaldson Avenue
[Added 3-11-2014 by
Ord. No. 3318-14]
North Commencing 624 feet from the
northwest intersection of
Donaldson Avenue and Mortimer
Avenue and running westerly for a
distance of 22 feet
Donaldson Avenue
[Added 2-15-2000 by
Ord. No. 2924-00;
repealed 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 3093-05]
East Gouverneur Avenue
[Added 11-19-1996 by
Ord. No. 2779-96;
repealed 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 3093-05]
East Gouverneur Avenue
[Added 12-29-1998 by
Ord. No. 2879-98]
West Commencing 80 feet from the
intersection of East Gouverneur
Avenue and Marginal Road and
running northerly for a distance of
22 feet
East Gouverneur Avenue
[Added 8-25-2009 by
Ord. No. 3186-09;
repealed 12-14-2015
by Ord. No. 3383-15]
East Park Place [Added
2-13-2018 by Ord. No.
3447-18]
South Commencing 125 feet from the
southwest intersection of East
Park Place and Lincoln Avenue
and running westerly for a
distance of 22 feet
§ 126-69 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-69
123:856
Name of Street Side Location
East Passaic Avenue
[Added 8-4-1998 by
Ord. No. 2847-98;
repealed 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 3093-05]
East Passaic Avenue
[Added 9-24-2013 by
Ord. No. 3307-13;
amended 11-26-2013
by Ord. No. 3316-13]
North Commencing 176 feet from the
northeast intersection of East
Passaic Avenue and Feronia Way
and running easterly for a
distance of 22 feet
East Passaic Ave
[Added 4-24-2018 by
Ord. No. 3457-18]
North Commencing 95 feet from the
northwest intersection of East
Passaic Avenue and Orient Way
and running westerly for a
distance of 22 feet
East Passaic Avenue
[Added 5-6-1986 by
Ord. No. 2436-86357]
West Commencing 66 feet from the
intersection of Ridge Road and
East Passaic Avenue and running
in a westerly direction for a
distance of 22 feet
East Pierrepont Avenue
[Added 9-9-2014 by
Ord. No. 3338-14;
repealed 1-25-2016 by
Ord. No. 3387-16]
East Pierrepont Avenue
[Added 12-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 3479-18]
South Commencing 112 feet from the
southeast intersection of East
Pierrepont Avenue and Wheaton
Place and running south for a
distance of 22 feet
Eastern Way [Added
11-27-2017 by Ord.
No. 3437-17]
East Commencing 420 feet from the
southeast intersection of Eastern
Way and East Passaic Avenue and
running south for a distance of 22
feet
Eastern Way [Added
10-23-2018 by Ord.
No. 3477-18]
East Commencing 273 feet from the
northeast intersection of Eastern
Way and Highland Cross and
running south for a distance of 22
feet
357. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it be limited to school days, Monday
through Friday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.
§ 126-69 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-69
123:857
Name of Street Side Location
Eastern Way [Added
4-24-2018 by Ord. No.
3457-18]
East Commencing 470 feet from the
northeast intersection of Eastern
Way and Highland Cross and
running westerly for a distance of
22 feet
Eastern Way [Added
8-28-2017 by Ord. No.
3428-17]
West Commencing 314 feet from the
southwest intersection of East
Passaic Avenue and Eastern Way
and running southerly for a
distance of 22 feet
Elm Street [Added
11-7-1984 by Ord. No.
2388-84; repealed
2-18-1992 by Ord. No.
2637-92]
Feronia Way [Added
3-16-1999 by Ord. No.
2885-99; repealed
9-23-2003 by Ord. No.
3027-03]
Feronia Way [Added
11-27-2017 by Ord.
No. 3437-17]
East Commencing 218 feet from the
southeast intersection of Feronia
Way and East Erie Avenue and
running south for a distance of 22
feet
Feronia Way [Added
8-24-2004 by Ord. No.
3047-04]
East Commencing 327 feet from the
intersection of Feronia Way and
East Passaic Avenue and running
southerly for a distance of 22 feet
Feronia Way [Added
5-2-2006 by Ord. No.
3112-06; repealed
10-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 3122-06]
Feronia Way [Added
5-15-2001 by Ord. No.
2967-01; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 3093-05]
Feronia Way [Added
7-1-1986 by Ord. No.
2447-86; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 3093-05]
§ 126-69 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-69
123:858
Name of Street Side Location
Grand Avenue [Added
10-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 3122-06]
South Commencing 75 feet from the
northwest corner of Wingra
Avenue and running northerly for
a length of 22 feet
Grand Avenue [Added
2-27-2017 by Ord. No.
3414-17]
West Commencing 35 feet from the
southwest intersection of Monona
Avenue and Grand Avenue and
running southerly for a distance of
22 feet
Grove Street [Added
8-2-1994 by Ord. No.
2706-94; repealed
4-24-2018 by Ord. No.
3458-18]
Hasbrouck Place
[Added 10-27-2009 by
Ord. No. 3189-09]
East Commencing 55 feet from the
intersection of Hasbrouck Place
and West Erie Avenue, and
running southerly for a distance of
22 feet
Hastings Avenue
[Added 7-11-2000 by
Ord. No. 2940-00;
repealed 2-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 3448-18]
Hastings Avenue
[Added 12-16-2008 by
Ord. No. 3174-08]
North Commencing 101 feet from the
northeast corner of Grand Avenue
and running easterly for a length
of 22 feet
Hastings Avenue
[Added 12-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 3479-18]
South Commencing 157 feet from the
southwest intersection of Hastings
Avenue and Darwin Avenue and
running westerly for a distance of
22 feet
Hastings Avenue
[Added 11-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 3213-10;
repealed 2-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 3448-18]
Highland Cross
[Repealed 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 3093-05]
§ 126-69 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-69
123:859
Name of Street Side Location
Highland Cross [Added
8-14-2018 by Ord. No.
3470-18]
North Commencing 154 feet from the
northwest intersection of Ridge
Road and Highland Cross running
west for a distance of 22 feet
Insley Avenue [Added
6-28-2011 by Ord. No.
3229-11]
North Commencing 120 feet from the
intersection of Insley Avenue and
Jackson Avenue and running
westerly for a distance of 22 feet
Irving Place [Added
4-23-2002 by Ord. No.
3003-02]
West Commencing 115 feet from the
intersection of Irving Place and
Union Avenue and running
southerly for a distance of 22 feet
Ivy Place [Added
11-6-1991 by Ord. No.
2626-91; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 3093-05]
Jackson Avenue [Added
10-20-1992]
Northeast
From 436 feet from the
intersection of Jackson Avenue
and Erie Avenue south for 22 feet
Jackson Avenue [Added
5-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3423-17; repealed
4-24-2018 by Ord. No.
3458-18]
Lincoln Avenue [Added
5-1-2007 by Ord. No.
3131-07]
East Commencing 230 feet from the
southeast corner of East
Pierrepont Avenue and running
southerly for a distance of 22 feet
Lincoln Avenue [Added
2-28-2007 by Ord. No.
3104-06; amended
12-11-2017 by Ord.
No. 3438-17]
West Commencing 194 feet from the
northwest corner of West
Pierrepont Avenue and running
northerly for a length of 22 feet
Maple Street [Added
11-21-2000 by Ord.
No. 2953-00; repealed
7-9-2013 by Ord. No.
3298-13]
Maple Street [Added
6-13-2016 by Ord. No.
3398-16; amended
3-13-2017 by Ord. No.
3416-17]
South Commencing 40 feet from the
northeast intersection of Maple
Street and Union Avenue and
running northerly for a distance of
22 feet
§ 126-69 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-69
123:860
Name of Street Side Location
Montross Avenue
[Added 11-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 2953-00;
repealed 5-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 3079-05]
Montross Avenue
[Added 4-13-2015 by
Ord. No. 3360-15]
East Commencing 96 feet from the
northeast intersection of Montross
Avenue and Sidney Avenue and
running north for a distance of 22
feet
Montross Avenue
[Added 3-16-1999 by
Ord. No. 2885-99]
West Commencing 169 feet from the
intersection of West Pierrepont
Avenue and Montross Avenue and
running northerly for a distance of
24 feet
Morse Avenue [Added
8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
3506-19]
South Commencing 35 feet from the
southeast intersection of Morse
Avenue and Montross Avenue and
running southerly for a distance of
22 feet (55 Montross Avenue)
Mortimer Avenue
[Added 11-19-1996 by
Ord. 2779-96]
Northeast
Commencing 91 feet from the
intersection of Elliot Place and
Mortimer Avenue running
northerly for a distance of 22 feet
Mortimer Avenue
[Added 10-15-1996 by
Ord. No. 2775-96]
West 202 Mortimer Avenue
Mortimer Avenue
[Added 7-1-1986 by
Ord. No. 2247-86;
repealed 2-18-1992 by
Ord. No. 2637-92]
Mountain Way [Added
2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
3490-19]
East Commencing 167 feet from the
southeast intersection of
Mountain Way and Highland Cross
and running southerly for a
distance of 22 feet
Mountain Way [Added
3-20-2001 by Ord. No.
2960-01; repealed
7-23-2013 by Ord. No.
3301-13]
§ 126-69 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-69
123:861
Name of Street Side Location
Mountain Way [Added
3-16-1999 by Ord. No.
2885-99; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 3093-05]
Orient Way [Added
3-4-1997 by Ord. No.
2788-97; amended
11-23-2004 by Ord.
No. 3056-04]
East Commencing 45 feet from the
intersection of Orient Way and
Spring Dell Avenue and running
northerly for a distance of 22 feet
Orient Way [Added
11-10-1998 by Ord.
No. 2866-98; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 3093-05]
Orient Way [Added
10-19-1999 by Ord.
No. 2915-99]
West Commencing 201 feet from the
intersection of Highland Cross
and Orient Way running
northwesterly for a distance of 22
feet
Park Avenue [Added
3-5-1996 by Ord. No.
2754-96]
Northwest
Commencing 75 feet from the
intersection of West Newell
Avenue and Park Avenue running
northerly for a distance of 22 feet
Park Avenue [Added
11-21-2000 by Ord.
No. 2953-00]
West Commencing 113 feet from the
intersection of West Gouverneur
Avenue and Park Avenue and
running northerly for a distance of
22 feet
Park Avenue [Added
5-8-2017 by Ord. No.
3423-17]
West Commencing 403 feet from the
southwest intersection of West
Gouverneur Avenue and Park
Avenue and running southerly for
a distance of 22 feet
Park Ave [Added
1-23-2018 by Ord. No.
3442-18]
West Commencing 113 feet from the
northwest intersection of West
Passaic Avenue and running
southerly for a distance of 22 feet
Park Avenue [Repealed
2-18-1992 by Ord. No.
2637-92]
§ 126-69 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-69
123:862
Name of Street Side Location
Prospect Place [Added
10-23-2007 by Ord.
No. 3145-07; repealed
11-26-2013 by Ord.
No. 3315-13]
Prospect Place [Added
7-10-2001 by Ord. No.
2975-01]
West Commencing 473 feet from the
intersection of Prospect Place and
Morse Avenue and running
southerly for a distance of 22 feet
Raymond Avenue
[Added 8-8-2000 by
Ord. No. 2945-00;
repealed 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 3093-05]
Ridge Road [Added
8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
3505-19]
West Commencing 35 feet from the
southwest intersection of Ridge
Road and Woodland Avenue and
running southerly for a distance of
22 feet (250 Ridge Road)
Riverview Avenue
[Added 10-25-2005 by
Ord. No. 3093-05;
repealed 5-2-2006 by
Ord. No. 3112-06]
Santiago Avenue
[Added 12-16-2008 by
Ord. No. 3174-08]
East 191 Santiago Avenue
Spring Dell [Added
4-26-2011 by Ord. No.
3225-11]
North Commencing 95 feet from the
intersection of Spring Dell and
Park Avenue and running easterly
for a distance of 22 feet
Springfield Avenue
[Added 10-16-2001 by
Ord. No. 2984-01]
West Commencing 32 feet from the
intersection of Springfield Avenue
and Union Avenue running in a
southerly direction for a distance
of 22 feet
Springfield Avenue
[Added 10-16-2001 by
Ord. No. 2984-01 358]
West Commencing 59 feet from the
intersection of Springfield Avenue
and Union Avenue running in a
southerly direction for a distance
of 22 feet
358. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that said space is to be specially designated as
a handicap parking space for dropoff or pickup of handicap persons, allowing only shortterm
parking for those purposes only.
§ 126-69 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-69
123:863
Name of Street Side Location
Summit Cross [Added
10-15-1996 by Ord.
No. 2775-96; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 3093-05;
1-25-2016 by Ord. No.
3387-16]
Summit Cross [Added
9-7-1988 by Ord. No.
2513-88; repealed
10-19-1993 by Ord.
No. 2687-93]
Summit Cross [Added
3-19-1996 by Ord. No.
2757-96]
West 114 Summit Cross
Sunderland Avenue
[Added 5-27-2003 by
Ord. No. 3022-03]
South Commencing 175 feet from the
intersection of Sunderland Avenue
and Raymond Avenue and running
easterly for a distance of 22 feet
Sylvan Street [Added
8-2-1994 by Ord. No.
2706-94; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 3093-05]
Union Avenue [Added
7-23-2002 by Ord. No.
3009-02; repealed
10-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 3122-06]
Union Avenue [Added
11-21-2000 by Ord.
No. 2953-00; repealed
10-25-2005 by Ord.
No. 3093-05]
Vanderburgh Avenue
[Added 3-20-2001 by
Ord. No. 2960-01;
repealed 9-23-2003 by
Ord. No. 3027-03]
Van Riper Avenue
[Added 12-16-2008 by
Ord. No. 3174-08]
South Commencing 126 feet from the
southwest corner of Orient Way
and running westerly for a length
of 22 feet
§ 126-69 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-69
123:864
Name of Street Side Location
Vreeland Avenue
[Added 2-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 3246-12]
North Commencing 256 feet from the
intersection of Vreeland Avenue
and Montross Avenue and running
westerly for a distance of 22 feet
Washington Avenue
[Added 3-20-2001 by
Ord. No. 2960-01]
North Commencing 162 feet from the
intersection of Carmita Avenue
and Washington Avenue and
running easterly for a distance of
22 feet
Washington Avenue
[Added 11-23-2004 by
Ord. No. 3056-04]
North Commencing 55 feet from the
intersection of Darwin Avenue and
Washington Avenue and running
westerly for a distance of 44 feet
(two spaces)
Washington Avenue
[Added 5-2-2006 by
Ord. No. 3112-06]
North Commencing 35 feet from the
northwest corner of Jackson
Avenue and running westerly for a
length of 22 feet
Washington Avenue
[Added 11-29-2005 by
Ord. No. 3096-05;
repealed 5-2-2006 by
Ord. No. 3112-06]
West Erie Avenue
[Added 8-27-2002 by
Ord. No. 3014-02]
North Commencing 49 feet east of the
intersection of West Erie Avenue
and Grand Avenue and running
easterly for a distance of 22 feet
West Erie Avenue
[Added 7-8-2014 by
Ord. No. 3333-14]
South Commencing 152 feet from the
southeast intersection of West
Erie Avenue and Maple Street and
running easterly for a distance of
22 feet
West Newell Avenue
[Added 9-7-1988 by
Ord. No. 2513-88;
repealed 10-16-2001
by Ord. No. 2984-01]
West Newell Avenue
[Added 6-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 3262-12]
North Commencing 246 feet from the
intersection of West Newell
Avenue and Montross Avenue and
running westerly for a distance of
22 feet
§ 126-69 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-69
123:865
Name of Street Side Location
West Passaic Avenue
[Added 8-22-2016 by
Ord. No. 3400-16;
repealed 12-11-2018
by Ord. No. 3480-18]
West Passaic Avenue
[Added 8-7-1990 by
Ord. No. 2578-90]
South Commencing 88 feet from the
intersection of Park Avenue and
running westerly for a distance of
22 feet
West Passaic Avenue
[Added 11-19-1996 by
Ord. No. 2779-96;
repealed 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 3093-05]
Wheaton Place [Added
10-11-2011 by Ord.
No. 3238-11; repealed
8-12-2019 by Ord. No.
3507-19]
Wilson Avenue [Added
7-10-2018 by Ord. No.
3467-18]
East Commencing 164 feet from the
southeast intersection of East
Park Place and Lincoln Avenue
and running south for a distance
of 22 feet
Wingra Avenue [Added
12-28-2015 by Ord.
No. 3386-15]
South Commencing 50 feet from the
southwest intersection of Wingra
Avenue and Jackson Avenue and
running westerly for a distance of
22 feet
Winslow Place [Added
9-24-2013 by Ord. No.
3307-13]
North Commencing 71 feet from the
northwest intersection of Winslow
Place and Mountain Way and
running westerly for a distance of
22 feet
Wood Street [Added
1-23-2018 by Ord. No.
3442-18]
West Commencing 155 feet from the
southeast intersection of
Washington Avenue and Wood
Street and running southerly for a
distance of 22 feet
Wood Street [Added
11-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 3123-06]
West Commencing 115 feet from the
northwest corner of West Passaic
Avenue and running northerly for
a length of 22 feet
§ 126-69 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-69
123:866
Name of Street Side Location
Wood Street [Added
1-28-2019 by Ord. No.
3485-19]
West Commencing 97 feet from the
southwest intersection of Wood
Street and Morse Avenue and
running southerly for a distance of
22 feet
Woodland Avenue
[Added 8-7-1990 by
Ord. No. 2578-90;
repealed 10-25-2005
by Ord. No. 3093-05]
Woodland Avenue
[Added 5-23-2006 by
Ord. No. 3113-06;
amended 8-22-2006
by Ord. No. 3119-06]
North Commencing 163 feet from the
northwest corner of Orient Way
and running westerly for a length
of 22 feet
Woodland Avenue
[Added 7-10-2001 by
Ord. No. 2975-01]
South 2 spaces commencing 274 feet
from the intersection of Park
Avenue and running easterly for
22 feet followed by curb cut
running easterly for 4 feet
followed by second handicap
parking space running easterly for
22 feet
Woodland Avenue
[Added 10-2-1990 by
Ord. No. 2582-90;
amended 11-3-1993
by Ord. No. 2689-93;
8-2-1994 by Ord. No.
2706-94; repealed
10-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 3122-06]
Woodland Avenue
[Repealed 7-10-2001
by Ord. No. 2975-01]
Woodward Avenue
[Added 8-14-2012 by
Ord. No. 3265-12]
South 55 Woodward Avenue,
commencing 126 feet from the
intersection of Woodward Avenue
and Mortimer Avenue and running
westerly for a distance of 22 feet
§ 126-69 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-69
123:867
Name of Street Side Location
Yahara Avenue [Added
10-23-2007 by Ord.
No. 3145-07; repealed
11-28-2016 by Ord.
No. 3408-16;
12-11-2018 by Ord.
No. 3480-18]
B. Municipal lot spaces. Each accessible parking place shall meet the
requirements set forth by New Jersey statutes and Americans with
Disabilities Act standards.
Area Location of Spaces
Borough Hall Annex, Park Avenue
Borough Hall Lot, Donaldson
Avenue
2 spaces next to entrance to
building
Ettrick Terrace Municipal Lot First 2 parking spaces closest to
Ettrick Terrace
Kip Avenue Municipal Access
Parking Lot to Ord. No. 2645-92,
which is on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk. [Added
4-21-1992 by Ord. No.
2645-92; amended 3-5-1996
by Ord. No. 2754-96]
5 parking spaces as shown on the
attached site plan which is
made a part of this chapter359
Kip Avenue Parking Garage
[Added 7-25-1989 by Ord. No.
2541-89]
2 parking spaces located on grade
level between columns E-1 and F-1
Memorial Field [Added
10-2-1990 by Ord. No.
2582-90; repealed 11-9-2015
by Ord. No. 3379-15]
Memorial Field [Added
5-15-2001 by Ord. No.
2967-01; repealed 11-9-2015
by Ord. No. 3379-15]
Memorial Field [Added
11-9-2015 by Ord. No.
3379-15; amended 7-10-2018
by Ord. No. 3466-18]
11 spaces; see attached site plan
for location360
359. Editor's Note: The site plan is attached to Ord. No. 2645-92, which is on file in the office of
the Borough Clerk.
360. Editor's Note: The site plan is attached to Ord. No. 3466-18, which is on file in the office of
the Borough Clerk.
§ 126-69 RUTHERFORD CODE § 126-69
123:868
Area Location of Spaces
Rutherford Park and Ride
[Added 7-23-2002 by Ord. No.
3009-02; amended 9-25-2012
by Ord. No. 3272-12]
4 parking spaces at the entrance
as shown on the Station Square
Train Station attached site plan
that is made a part of this
chapter361
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6, the following locations on public streets
are hereby designated as restricted parking zones to be used only by
persons who have been issued special "persons with a disability"
vehicle identification placards or plates and issued the required permit
by the Borough of Rutherford. The locations listed herein are also
exempt from § 126-62, Alternate-side parking designated.
Name of Street Side Location Permit No.
Hawthorne Street
[Repealed
12-28-2015 by Ord.
No. 3385-15]
Mountain Way
[Added 4-22-2014
by Ord. No.
3325-14]
West 214 Mountain Way 214
Santiago Avenue
[Repealed
4-22-2014 by Ord.
No. 3326-14]
Santiago Avenue
[Repealed
4-22-2014 by Ord.
No. 3326-14]
Sylvan Street
[Repealed
4-22-2014 by Ord.
No. 3326-14]
Woodland Avenue South 218 Woodland
Avenue
218362
361. Editor's Note: The site plan is attached to Ord. No. 3009-02, which is on file in the office of
the Borough Clerk.
362. Editor's Note: Former § 126-70, Lots open to public; designated spaces, which immediately
followed, was repealed 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 3501-19. This ordinance also repealed
former Art. XIX, Semipublic and Private Roads, Streets and Driveways.
§ 126-69 UNFIT DWELLINGS § 126-69
123:869
Chapter 127
VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS
§ 127-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to acknowledge and support the contributions
of the Borough of Rutherford Fire Department, First Aid Ambulance Corps.,
Inc., and Office of Emergency Management in providing volunteer public
services for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents and businesses of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 127-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms herein are defined
as follows:
ACTIVE MEMBER — Any individual in any volunteer organization who
meets the definition of active member as established by the bylaws of the
voluntary organization as are in effect on the effective date of this chapter
and has been an active member of said organization for at least one year.
Honorary members are specifically excluded from this definition.
FAMILY — An active member, his or her spouse and all natural or adopted
children under 18 years of age who are unmarried and permanently
occupying the same residence in the Borough of Rutherford.
FEES — Those charges established by the governing body of the Borough
of Rutherford which are fully retained by the Borough of Rutherford as
revenue. Specifically excluded is any portion of the fee which is collected
by the borough on behalf of another entity, including but not limited to the
State of New Jersey, the County of Bergen or any outside vendor.
VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATION — The Borough of Rutherford Fire
Department and Borough of Rutherford First Aid Ambulance Corps., Inc.,
and Office of Emergency Management.
§ 127-3. Incentives.
All active members of a volunteer organization and their families shall be
entitled to the following benefits:
A. Exception from 75% of the municipal portion of the Uniform
Construction Code363 fees for the issuance of a building permit required
in connection with either the construction of an addition or completion
of repairs to an existing single-family dwelling owned and occupied by
an active member of a volunteer organization.
B. An exemption of 75% from the municipal portion of the Uniform
Construction Code fees, not to exceed a maximum of $500, for the
issuance of a building permit required in connection with the
363. Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Construction Code, Uniform.
§ 126-69 RUTHERFORD CODE § 127-3
127:870
§ 127-4. Administration; information required.
construction of a new single-family dwelling to be occupied by the
active member of a volunteer organization.
C. Exemption from the municipal portion of the following miscellaneous
fees, licenses and permits:
(1) Driveway permits.
(2) Sidewalk permits.
(3) Street opening applications.
(4) Garage sale permits.
(5) Cat licenses.
(6) Marriage licenses.
(7) Certificates of continued occupancy for any dwelling personally
occupied by the active member.
(8) Board of Adjustment fees required in connection with an
application for bulk variances sought for any dwelling personally
occupied by the active member, excepting fees and escrows
required by the Board in connection with any site plan or
subdivision application.
(9) Landscaper permits.
(10)Raffle and bingo licenses.
(11) Rental fees for any outdoor recreational facility, provided that such
rental is for the actual use of the active member, the member's
family or the volunteer organization.
(12) Dumpster permit fees.
(13) Overnight truck fees.
A. On or about January 1 of each calendar year a volunteer organization
shall submit to the Borough of Rutherford a list of all individuals who
meet the definition for active member status. Such lists shall be
upgraded on a periodic basis by the volunteer organization to add those
individuals who have completed their probationary status or to delete
individuals who have been dropped from their membership or who no
longer meet the criteria for active member status.
B. On a form provided by the Borough Clerk, each active member shall
provide information related to family status to assist the various
municipal officials in the administration of this chapter in order to be
eligible for the benefits provided in this chapter.
§ 127-3 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 127-4
127:871
Chapter 129
WATER POLLUTION
C. All active members and their families must comply with all registration
procedures and complete all application forms established by the
Borough of Rutherford.
§ 127-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 127-4
127:872
ARTICLE I
General Prohibitions
[Adopted 10-7-1930 by Ord. No. 1333, effective 10-10-1930]
§ 129-1. Pollution prohibited; unlawful substances.364
No person or persons shall place or permit to be placed or discharge or
permit to be discharged or cast or deposit or cause or suffer to be deposited
in the Passiac River, within the limits of the Borough of Rutherford, or into
any tributary or tributaries thereof which empty into said Passaic River, any
sewage or waste matter, article or substance, liquid or solid, of any kind
which creates odors or gases or fumes, due to the putrefaction of organic
matter of the presence of chemicals, or which discolors the waters of said
river or its tributaries, or results in the presence of oil or grease on the
surface of the waters of said river or its tributaries, or which reduces the
dissolved oxygen content thereof to such an extent as to interfere with the
major fish life in said waters, without the permission of the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Rutherford.
§ 129-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-5-1947 by Ord. No.
1495]
Any person or persons, firm, partnership, association or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine not exceeding $100, and in default of the payment
thereof, may be sentenced to the county jail for a term not exceeding 30
days. Every day during which such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 129-3. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication according to
law.
364. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 89, Sanitary Code, § 89-5.
§ 129-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 129-3
127:873

ARTICLE II
Dumpsters and Other Refuse Containers
[Adopted 3-27-2012 by Ord. No. 3252-12]
§ 129-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and to prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge
of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Rutherford and/
or the waters of the state so as to protect health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 129-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — a conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Rutherford or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off that land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 129-6. Covering of containers and dumpsters; prevention of leaks
and discharges.
§ 129-4 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 129-6
127:875
§ 129-7. Exceptions.
Exceptions are as follows:
§ 129-8. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Department of Public Works and
the Construction Code Official; each shall have enforcement authority
coterminous with but separate from the other.
§ 129-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subjected to a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each refuse container
not covered as required by this article.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids, or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Rutherford.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods) placed curbside for pickup.
§ 129-6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 129-9
127:876
Chapter 131
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boardinghouses and lodging houses — See
Ch. 14.
Building code — See Ch. 18.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 22.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 37.
Land subdivision and site plan
regulations — See Ch. 50.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 51.
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 65.
Signs — See Ch. 97.
Special improvements districts — See Ch.
105A.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 107.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 111.
§ 129-9 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 129-9
127:877

ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 131-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a pattern for the use of land and
buildings in the Borough of Rutherford based on the revised Master Plan
for the Borough of Rutherford. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted in order to promote and to protect the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and the general welfare of the people. This chapter
is intended to regulate the use of land within zoning districts, secure
safety from fire and other dangers, provide adequate light and air, promote
orderly development, ensure that development does not conflict with the
development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, avoid
undue concentration of population, prevent the overcrowding of land or
buildings by regulating the intensity of use and the location of buildings,
establish standards of development, limit congestion in the street, prohibit
incompatible uses, promote the conservation of historic sites and districts,
regulate the alteration of existing buildings, protect against hazards,
promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of recyclable
materials from municipal solid waste through the use of planning practices,
conserve the taxable value of land and preserve open space and natural
features. This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 49 of the Municipal
Land Use Law, Chapter 291, Laws of New Jersey 1975.365
365. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62.
§ 131-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-1
127:879

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 131-2. Interpretations; use of words; definitions.
A. General interpretation. All words used in this chapter in the present
tense include the future tense. All words in the plural number include
the singular number, and all words in the singular number include the
plural number, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates
otherwise. The word "person" includes a corporation as well as a
person. The word "building" includes the word "structure." The term
"occupied" or "used" as applied to any building shall be construed as
though followed by the words "or intended, arranged, constructed,
altered, converted, rented, leased or designed to be occupied or used."
The word "lot" includes the word "plot." The term "erected" shall be
deemed also to include "constructed, reconstructed or altered or
moved." The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory
and not discretionary. The word "borough" means the "Borough of
Rutherford" in the County of Bergen, State of New Jersey. The terms
"Council," "Board of Adjustment" and "Planning Board" mean the
respective official bodies of said borough.
B. Specific interpretation. All words and terms herein defined shall be
specifically construed regarding their meanings and intent.
Conformance with certain requirements as defined herein achieves
compliance with the intent of this chapter to foster orderly development
and secure the health, safety and welfare of the community.
C. Definitions and descriptions. For the purpose of this chapter, certain
words and terms herein are defined as follows:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — A building or use which is
customarily associated with and is subordinate and incidental to the
principal building or use, and which is located on the same lot
therewith. An accessory building attached to the principal building
shall comply in all respects with the requirements applicable to the
principal building.
ACTUAL CONSTRUCTION — The placing of construction materials in
their permanent position, fastened in a permanent manner, except that
where a basement or cellar is being excavated, such excavation shall
be deemed to be "actual construction." Where demolition or removal
of an existing structure has been substantially begun preparatory to
rebuilding, such demolition and removal shall be deemed to be "actual
construction," provided that work shall be diligently carried on until the
completion of the building involved.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, photographs,
pictures, films, devices or other periodicals which are distinguished
or characterized by their describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined below), or an
§ 131-2 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-2
127:881
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display
of such material.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building, a structure or use, any
change in supporting or nonsupporting members of a building or
structure, any addition to or diminution of a building or structure, or
change in use from that of one district classification to another, or any
removal of a building or structure, or part thereof, from one location to
another.
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Any place or premises where four or more
amusement machines are maintained for use and operation by the
public.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE — Any machine, apparatus, contrivance,
appliance or other device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug,
token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for the use
as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a
score. It shall include, but not be limited to, such devices as marble
machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines,
baseball or tennis, hockey, road racing or bowling machines, coinoperated
electronically controlled games that are carried out on an
electronic screen and all games, operations or transactions similar
thereto, under whatever name they may be indicated.
APARTMENT BUILDING — A building arranged, intended or designed
to be occupied by three or more families living independently of each
other in apartment units.
APARTMENT UNITS — A portion of a building designed or used
exclusively as the residence or sleeping place of one or more persons,
constituting one family, and shall include cooking and plumbing
facilities.
ARCHITECTURALLY SIGNIFICANT ELEMENTS — Those visual
aspects and physical features, including the overall shape of the
building, its materials, craftsmanship, decorative details and
relationship to its site and environment, that, considered together,
establish a clear and cohesive architectural style and contribute to its
historic or contemporary character.[Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No.
3403-16]
AVERAGE SETBACK — In such cases in residential zones where the
existing dwellings on the same side of the street within 200 feet of
either side line of the subject property form an existing setback line,
the required front yard setback for a new dwelling or an addition to an
existing dwelling shall be modified to the average setback of existing
development within 200 feet on either side of the lot along the street
line on the same side of the street or the required setbacks, whichever
is greater, but in no case need the setback exceed 35 feet.[Amended
2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 2884-99]
AWNING — A temporary roof-like structure consisting of a framing
covered with canvas or similar material mounted partly, solely and/or
§ 131-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-2
127:882
projecting from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a
doorway or window from the elements and/or providing a decorative
trim and may be periodically retracted into the face of the building; also
known as a "canopy."
BASEMENT — That portion of a building, partly below grade, which
has more than 1/2 of its height above the average finished grade of the
ground adjoining the building, measured from finished floor to finished
bottom of the floor joist above. A basement shall be considered in
determining the permissible number of stories, if the space is habitable
or has a ceiling height of seven feet or more.[Amended 12-19-2006
by Ord. No. 3127-06; 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 3230-11]
BUFFER — Open space in addition to any required yards around the
perimeter of any lot, where required by this chapter, as defined in
Article IV, § 131-9. The space shall be maintained and protected by the
owner on whose property it is located.
BUILDING — Any structure or portion thereof, either temporary or
permanent, having a roof supported by columns, posts, piers or walls
and designed or intended for the shelter, business, housing or enclosure
of persons, animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING AREA — The total area within the outside dimensions or
on horizontal plane at average grade level of the principal building,
including decks and covered porches, but excluding uncovered
platforms, terraces or steps. Any area of the building that does not have
surrounding walls shall be included in the building area calculation if
such areas are included within the horizontal projection of the floor
above.[Amended 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 3127-06]
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of the lot area which lies within the
outside lines of exterior walls of all buildings on the lot to the total area
of the lot, expressed as a percentage.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at each outside corner
of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the
deckline of mansard roofs, and to the mean height between eaves and
ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. However, when the Zoning
Officer or other Borough-appointed reviewing professional determines
that the original grading within six feet of each outside corner of the
proposed building or structure has been elevated by more than one
foot, thereby reducing the building height and/or artificially increasing
the maximum permitted building height elevation, then the difference
in the elevation between the original grade and the finished grade that
is in excess of one foot shall be subtracted in calculating the building
height.[Amended 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 3127-06]
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of an exterior
wall of a building with the ground.[Amended 7-22-2003 by Ord. No.
3024-03]
§ 131-2 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-2
127:883
BUILDING LINE, FRONT — A line parallel to the front yard line
touching that part of a principal building closest to the front yard
line, excluding the dimensions of unroofed steps or an unroofed
terrace.[Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 3024-03]
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building within which is conducted the
main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.
BULK — The size and shape of buildings and nonbuilding uses; the
physical relationship of their exterior walls or their location to lot
lines and other buildings or other walls of the same building; and all
open spaces required in connection with a building. Bulk regulations
include regulations dealing with building coverage lot area, lot area per
dwelling unit, lot frontage, lot width, building height, required yards,
courts, usable open space, spacing between buildings on a single lot
and length of buildings in a row.
CAMPUS — The land owned or occupied by an educational institution
for its academic and accessory purposes, consisting of a lot or lots
occupied by the main academic buildings and adjacent lots.
CELLAR — A story of a building partly below grade, which has more
than 1/2 of its height, measured from finished floor to finished ceiling,
below the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
A cellar shall not be considered in determining the permissible number
of stories.[Amended 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 3127-06; 6-28-2011
by Ord. No. 3230-11]
CEMETERY — A plot of ground set aside for the burial of dead animals
and/or persons.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued upon completion
of construction, alteration or change in occupancy of a building. The
certificate shall acknowledge compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and/or all other applicable requirements.
CHURCH or TEMPLE — A building or part thereof occupied or used by
an organized religion recognized by the State of New Jersey wherein
persons regularly assemble for worship. Such building shall be used
only for such purpose and for those accessory activities as are
customarily associated therewith.
CLUB — Premises or building reserved for the exclusive use of
members of an organization and their guests for civic, charitable, social
or recreational purposes not conducted for gain, provided that they
are not conducting any merchandising or commercial activities except
as required by the membership for the purposes of such club. "Club"
shall be deemed to include club, society, fraternity, sorority, association,
lodge, combine, federation, nonprofit organization and recognized
charitable organizations. The conducting of sexually oriented business
on the club premises shall be prohibited.[Amended 3-16-1999 by
Ord. No. 2887-99]
§ 131-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-2
127:884
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle used or maintained primarily
for the transportation of property, including trucks, trailers,
construction equipment and any vehicle bearing a commercial
registration plate or having advertising affixed to its exterior surfaces
but not including camping trailers, boat trailers, recreation trailers,
utility trailers, camping vehicles, house trailers or recreation
vehicles.[Amended 8-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2907-99; 4-13-2015 by
Ord. No. 3358-15]
COMMON PROPERTY — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, together with the improvements
thereon, designed or intended for the ownership, use and enjoyment
shared by the residents and owners of the development. Common
property may contain such complementary structures and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit of the
residents and owners of the development.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of
such use as contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — An apartment or townhouse building(s) where each
dwelling unit is individually owned by respective housekeeping units,
while common property is collectively owned and maintained by all
residents of the buildings.
COURT — A required uncovered, unoccupied space other than a yard
wholly or partly surrounded by buildings or walls.
CURB LEVEL — The mean level of the existing curb or of the lot at the
midpoint of the lot, measured at the street line.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre which is permitted
for various types of residential uses.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a lot or any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure
or of any mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the
use of any building or other structure or land or extension of use of
land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision
Ordinance, Site Plan Ordinance, Official Map Ordinance or other
municipal regulation of the use and development of land, or amendment
thereto, adopted and filed pursuant to this chapter.
§ 131-2 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-2
127:885
DISTRICT — A zoning district as established and described in Article
III, § 131-3 herein.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development and means necessary for water supply preservation or
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or those lands required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing
for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood
damage.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT — A parcel of land or a building used for
retailing purposes and in which the business is primarily conducted by
a customer or client from within his automobile.
DRIVEWAY — An open area of paved land used as a means to provide
vehicular ingress and egress to a property or lot.
DWELLING — A building or part of a building designed exclusively for
residential occupancy, including single-family, two-family and multiplefamily
dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, rooming or boarding
houses, trailers or other accommodations for the use of transient or
overnight occupancy.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A building physically detached from other
buildings or portions of buildings, which is occupied or intended to be
occupied for residence purposes by one housekeeping unit and which
has its own sleeping, sanitary and general living facilities.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT GROUP — A group of two or more
multifamily dwellings, each of which contains at least eight dwelling
units occupying a plot in one ownership.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing
three or more dwelling units on a single plot.
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED — A building which contains two
dwelling units, where the dwelling units are separated by a common
wall and have separate access, and which is the only principal building
on the lot.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached dwelling containing one
dwelling unit only.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE UNIT — A multistory dwelling unit attached
to another multistory dwelling unit and separated from each dwelling
unit by a common wall complying with the building code for such
common wall.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units
only.
§ 131-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-2
127:886
DWELLING UNIT — A room or series of rooms containing living,
cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for one housekeeping unit. A
dwelling unit shall be self-contained and shall not require the use of
outside stairs or common hallways passing through another dwelling
unit or other indirect route(s) for access to any portion of the dwelling
unit, nor shall there be shared facilities with another housekeeping
unit.
EXISTING GRADE — The vertical location of the existing ground
surface prior to cutting or filling.
EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISH SYSTEM (EIFS) — A non-loadbearing
exterior wall cladding system that consists of an insulation
board attached either adhesively or mechanically, or both, to the
substrate; an integrally reinforced base coat; and a textured protective
finish coat.[Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3403-16]
FAMILY — One or more persons, including domestic employees,
occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping
unit.
FENCE — A barrier of permanent construction, such as wood, metal
posts, rails, wire mesh or similar material, used as a means of
protection or confinement, consisting of either of two types:[Amended
3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3391-16]
FINISHED GRADE — The completed surface of lawns, walls and roads
brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The area composed of the channel, floodway
and flood hazard area as defined by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development Flood Insurance Study and shown on
the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary - Floodway Maps,
as amended and supplemented, adopted by the borough and set forth
in Chapter 37, Flood Damage Prevention, of this Code.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the area of all floors of a building measured
from the inside surfaces of the walls enclosing the part of a building
occupied by a single occupant or shared by a distinct group of
occupants, excluding common halls, off-street parking and loading
space, stairwells, elevator shafts, sanitary facilities and storage and
other areas to which patrons or other users do not have regular access.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the area of all floors of a building
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
OPEN FENCE — A fence that is at least 50% open construction,
having open spaces at least the same size between each two
pickets, slats or other construction element, including chain link
fences.
A.
SOLID FENCE — A fence which is constructed of material which
has no open spaces, such as a stockade or basket fence or chain
link fences with slats woven through.
B.
§ 131-2 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-2
127:887
center line of walls separating two buildings, including basements or
any other floor area below grade when used for residential, office,
business, storage, industrial or other purposes, but not including
basements or other floor area below grade when used for the housing
of heating or other mechanical equipment.
FRONT FACADE — The exterior walls of a building exposed to public
view and facing a public street.
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL — A building or part thereof, other than a
private garage, used for the storage, care or repair of public motor
vehicles customarily used for private transportation, local school buses
and commercial vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed space for the storage of one or
more motor vehicles, provided that no business, occupation or service
is conducted for profit therein nor space therein for more than one car
is leased to a nonresident of the premises.
GREENHOUSE — A building made mainly of glass, in which the
temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of
delicate or out-of-season plants. As defined here, greenhouses are
intended as accessory uses to residences. They shall not exceed 500
square feet in floor area. No business or selling to the public shall be
conducted from such greenhouse.
HISTORIC SITE — Any building, structure, area or property that is
significant in the history, architecture, archeology or culture of the
municipality and has been so designated.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 3403-16]
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either by an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior
in states without approved programs.
D.
§ 131-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-2
127:888
HOTEL — A building containing rooms which are rented or hired out to
be occupied for sleeping purposes by guests and where only a general
kitchen and dining room are provided within the building or in an
accessory building. Such facility shall provide for a main entrance lobby
allowing access to all sleeping rooms existing within the building. A
hotel of 100 sleeping rooms or more located in the B-2 or ORD Zone
may be permitted to hold a Class C plenary retail consumption license.
This definition shall not include motor hotels, motels, motor courts,
tourist homes and other similar transient traveler establishments.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons living together in one
dwelling unit on a nonseasonal basis and sharing living, sleeping,
cooking and sanitary facilities on a nonprofit basis.
IMPERMISSIBLE UNIT — A residential rental unit which is a
residential rental unit for which no certificate of occupancy has been
issued, or a residential rental unit which is in excess of the number of
such units for a particular building or zone according to this chapter,
or a residential rental unit which was created without the required
plumbing, electrical or building permits.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or
covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to
infiltration by water (i.e., surface parking, driveways, access aisles,
walkways, patios), but not including principal and accessory building.
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or a structure, or part thereof, used primarily
for the collection, storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal,
used building materials, house furnishings, machinery or other
discarded materials or for the collection, dismantling, storage and
salvage of machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the
sale of parts thereof.
LANDING — Landings for exterior stairways shall be no larger than
the stairway or door that is served by the landing, with one permitted
additional foot on each side of the door assembly. Every landing shall
have a maximum dimension of 36 inches measured in the direction of
travel.[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 3127-06]
LIGHT INDUSTRY — Any production, processing, manufacture,
fabrication, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of goods,
materials, vehicles or products, and business offices accessory thereto,
but not including the storage of flammable, explosive or
environmentally hazardous materials as a principal use.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with
a building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading.
LOT — Any parcel of land separated from other parcels or portions
as by a lawful subdivision or deed of record, survey map or by metes
and bounds, except that, for purposes of this chapter, contiguous
undersized lots under one ownership shall be considered as one lot, and
§ 131-2 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-2
127:889
except further that no portion of a street shall be included in calculating
the lot boundaries or areas.
LOT AREA — The areas contained within the lot lines of a lot but shall
not include any portion of the street right-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — A lot on the junction of and abutting two or more
intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed 135º.[Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3391-16]
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines, measured from the midpoint of the front lot line, at right
angles or radially to the street line, to the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between side lot lines
measured along the street line. The minimum lot frontage shall be
the same as the lot width, except that, on curved alignments with an
outside radius of less than 500 feet, the minimum distance between
the side lot lines measured along the street line shall not be less than
75% of the required minimum lot width. In the case of a corner lot,
either street frontage which meets the minimum frontage required for
that zone may be considered the lot frontage.[Amended 3-14-2016 by
Ord. No. 3391-16]
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.[Amended 3-14-2016
by Ord. No. 3391-16]
LOT LINE — Any line forming a portion of the exterior boundary of a
lot and the same line as the street line for that portion of a lot abutting
a street.[Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3391-16]
LOT LINE, FRONT — A line dividing a lot from a street.[Amended
3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3391-16]
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line other than a front lot line which is most
distant from and most nearly parallel to the front lot line.[Amended
3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3391-16]
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot
line.[Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3391-16]
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot which does not comply with the
regulations prescribed in Article IV, § 131-7A, for the district in which
it is located, but was in existence at the time such regulation(s) became
effective and was lawful at the time it was established.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in
the office of the Clerk of Bergen County, or a lot or parcel described by
metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
LOT WIDTH — The straight and horizontal distance measured
perpendicular to and between the lot lines. The minimum lot width shall
be maintained a minimum distance of 50 feet from the front lot line.
MAJOR ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building, a structure or use,
any change in supporting or nonsupporting members of a building or
§ 131-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-2
127:890
structure, involving 50% or more of the recorded true valuation or a
change in use from that of one district classification to another, or any
removal of a building or structure, or part thereof, from one location to
another.[Added 12-1-1998 by Ord. No. 2874-98]
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of the municipality as adopted pursuant
to law, namely the Borough of Rutherford Master Plan.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR FACILITY — Lands and buildings on which
the primary use is the maintenance and minor repair or servicing of
motor vehicles, provided that the cleaning, dry cleaning, polishing,
or washing of motor vehicles shall be prohibited except as it may
be accessory to such primary use, and provided, further, that such
facilities may not provide for body repairs, painting, welding, new
or used car sales, leasing of trucks and trailers, nor the storage of
inoperable or wrecked vehicles, except as may be incidental to the
servicing of the vehicle.[Amended 10-22-2013 by Ord. No. 3309-13]
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A building containing
three or more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by
persons living independently of each other, or a group of such buildings.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Municipal Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment or governing body of the borough when acting pursuant to
this chapter.
NEW CAR AND TRUCK DEALERSHIPS — An establishment whose
primary use is the sale and servicing of new automobiles and trucks.
Such use may include the sale and servicing of used automobiles and
trailers only as a secondary function to the primary use.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR USE — A building or use which, in
its location or size, does not comply with the regulations prescribed in
this chapter for the district in which it is located, but was in existence at
the time such regulations became effective and was lawful at the time
it was established.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted pursuant to Article 5 of the Municipal
Land Use Law, Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975,366 or any
prior act authorizing such adoption. Such a map shall be deemed to be
conclusive with respect to the location and width of streets and public
drainageways and the location and extent of flood control basins and
public areas.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property of which the lot is a part, which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
366. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
§ 131-2 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-2
127:891
OFF TRACT — Located outside the limits of the property which is the
subject of a development application or on a contiguous portion of a
street or right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to
be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to develop the
same under this chapter.
PARKING SPACE — An area of not less than nine feet wide by 19 feet in
length, either within a structure or in the open, for the parking of motor
vehicles, exclusive of driveways, access drives, fire lanes and public
rights-of-way, except that nothing shall prohibit private driveways for
detached dwelling units from being considered off-street parking areas,
provided that no portion of such driveway within the right-of-way line
of the street intersected by such driveway shall be considered off-street
parking space. The area is intended to be sufficient to accommodate
the exterior extremities of the vehicle, whether, in addition thereto,
wheel blocks are installed within this area to prevent the bumper from
overhanging one end of the parking space. The width and length of each
space shall be measured perpendicular to each other, regardless of the
angle of the parking space to the access isle or driveway. Each space
shall have direct access to a street, driveway or aisle.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted,
including cash, provided that the borough shall not require more than
10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A criterion established to control noise,
odor, smoke, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosion
hazards, and glare or heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or
buildings.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings as allowed by this
chapter.
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY, PUBLIC — Auditorium, church, clubhouse,
meeting hall, restaurant with assembly facilities, temple or other
structure or portion of a structure used at regular or periodic intervals
as a gathering place for purposes of amusement, athletic programs,
conferences, cultural programs, deliberation, education,
entertainment, recreation, social programs or worship.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — A parcel having a
minimum area of 70,000 square feet to be developed according to
a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common property to accommodate commercial or office
uses, or both, and any residential or other uses incidental to the
§ 131-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-2
127:892
predominate uses which may be permitted herein and as further
delineated in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et seq.
PLANNING BOARD — The Municipal Planning Board of the Borough of
Rutherford established pursuant to Article 2 of the Municipal Land Use
Law, Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975. 367
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PLAT, FINAL — The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision or
site plan which is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in
accordance with these regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed
with the proper county recording officer.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The preliminary map indicating the proposed
layout of a subdivision or site plan which is submitted to the Planning
Board for consideration and preliminary approval.
PLAT, SKETCH — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which a lot or building is used.
PUBLIC AREA —
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and
providing for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood
damage, sedimentation and erosion.
PUBLIC FACILITIES — The use of land or buildings by the governing
body of the borough or any officially created authority or agency
thereof.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education, state
or county agency, or other public body for recreational or
conservational use.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A portable structure or wheel-based
structure built on a chassis, which is either self-propelled or designed to
be transported by traction, which is intended by its manufacturer to be
used as a temporary dwelling for travel, camping or vacation purposes.
"Recreational vehicle" shall include camping trailers, motorized homes,
Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational
areas;
A.
B. Other public open spaces;
C. Scenic and historic sites; and
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
367. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40: 55D-23 et seq.
§ 131-2 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-2
127:893
travel trailers and boat and snowmobile trailers, which are defined as
follows:
RECYCLING AREA — A space allocated for collection and storage of
source-separated recyclable materials.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre
of residential land area, including streets, easements and open space
portions of a development.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — A building or portion thereof rented or
offered for rent for dwelling purposes to one or more tenants or family
units.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which
food is sold for consumption on the premises, within the building in
which the food is prepared. However, a snack bar or refreshment stand
at a public or community swimming pool, playground, golf course,
playfield or park, operated solely by the agency or group operating the
recreational facility and for the convenience of patrons of the facility,
shall not be deemed to be a "restaurant." A restaurant of 125 seats or
more, excluding outdoor seats, located in the B-2, ORD or HMDC Zone,
shall be permitted to hold a Class C plenary retail consumption license.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — Any fast-food restaurant which also
provides drive-in facilities which allow customers to be served directly
from the building without leaving their automobiles.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — An establishment whose primary
business is the sale of food for consumption on or off the premises
which is primarily intended for immediate consumption rather than for
use as an ingredient or component of meals; available upon a short
waiting time; and packaged or presented in such a manner that it can
be readily eaten outside the premises where it is sold.
SATELLITE ANTENNA OR DISH — Any apparatus which is designed
for the purpose of receiving telephone, radio, microwave, satellite or
similar signals, but not including the conventional television antennas.
CAMPING TRAILER — A type of trailer that is designed and
constructed with collapsed walls. The walls are collapsed while
the recreational vehicle is being towed and are raised or unfolded
when the vehicle becomes temporary living quarters and is not
being moved.
A.
MOTORIZED HOME — A portable dwelling designed and
constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
B.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A wheel-based vehicle built in a chassis
designed to be hauled by traction.
C.
BOAT AND SNOWMOBILE TRAILER — A wheel-based vehicle on
a chassis designed to be hauled by traction, which is specifically
designed for transporting boats or snowmobiles.
D.
§ 131-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-2
127:894
SCHOOLS — Any nonprofit educational facility, including private
schools, nursery schools, day-care facilities, elementary schools and
high schools.
SENIOR HOUSING — An apartment building, arranged, designed and
utilized for housing elderly and handicapped persons and families, as
those terms are defined by the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development, containing both apartment units and other
accessory areas designed and intended for the benefit of the residents
thereof.
SERVICE STATION — Lands and buildings providing for the retail sale
and direct delivery to motor vehicles of fuel, lubricants and automotive
accessories, which may include facilities for the maintenance and minor
repair, cleaning, dry cleaning, polishing, washing or otherwise cleaning
or servicing of motor vehicles. Such facilities may not provide for body
repairs, painting, welding, new or used car sales, leasing of trucks and
trailers or the storage of inoperable or wrecked vehicles (except as may
be incidental to the general servicing of the vehicle).
SETBACK LINE — A line that establishes a minimum horizontal
distance parallel with a street line or lot line and drawn through the
point of a building nearest to the street line or lot line. The term
"required setback" means a line that establishes a minimum horizontal
distance from the street line or the lot line and beyond which a building
or part of a building is not permitted to extend. A front yard porch shall
be included in the front yard setback calculations if said porch width is
25% or greater of the front facade width of the principal building.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — A commercial establishment
which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale, rental
or display any of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other
printed material, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or other visual representations which depict or
describe a specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area; or
still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing
devices which show images to one person per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by the
depiction of a specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area;
or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with a specified sexual activity; or a commercial
establishment which regularly features live performances
characterized by the exposure of a specified anatomical area or by
a specified sexual activity, or which regularly shows films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic representations
which depict or describe a specified sexual activity or specified
anatomical area.[Added 3-16-1999 by Ord. No. 2887-99]
SIGN — Any building, structure or device or portion thereof on which
any announcement, declaration, display, illustration or insignia is used
to advertise or promote the interest of any person, place, subject,
§ 131-2 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-2
127:895
firm, corporation, article or product whatsoever, including flags and
pennants, when the same is placed in view of the general public.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN AREA — The entire face of a sign, including the advertising
surface and any framing, trim or molding, excluding supporting
structures that are not considered part of the sign proper or of the
display. The area of a sign composed of characters or words attached
directly to a large, uniform, building wall surface shall be the smallest
rectangle that encloses the whole group.[Amended 7-22-2003 by
Ord. No. 3024-03]
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a permitted
business, commercial enterprise, industry, office or profession
conducted upon the premises, which sign shall be an integral part of
such establishment. A "for sale" sign or a "for rent" sign relating to the
property on which it is displayed shall be deemed a "business sign."
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign which is erected and independently
supported without attachment to any building or other structure.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign erected other than parallel to the wall of
a building.[Amended 7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 3024-03]
SIGN, WALL — A sign erected against the wall of any building with the
exposed face of the sign in a parallel plane with the face of the wall at a
distance of 12 inches or less from the wall, measured perpendicularly.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways; the location of all existing and proposed
buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and
egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and
signs, lighting, screening devices and buffers; and any other
information that may be reasonably required in order to make an
informed determination pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law368 and
this chapter, requiring review and approval of site plans by the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — The examination of the specific development
plans for a lot. Wherever the term "site plan approval" is used in this
chapter, it shall be understood to mean a requirement that the site
plan be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, female
breasts below a point immediately above the areola or human male
368. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 131-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-2
127:896
genitals in a discernably turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal, acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse
or sodomy or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breasts.
STORAGE SHED, PRIVATE — An accessory building or structure only
for the storage of tools, implements, appliances and other items
incidental to the care and upkeep of the dwelling unit or structure on
the lot. Such sheds shall be firmly anchored to the ground to keep
the building stationary and intact and shall be limited in size by the
accessory building requirements of the individual zone districts
established herein.
STOREFRONT — The front side of a store or store building facing a
street.[Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3403-16]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of
any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or, if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling or joist next
above it.[Amended 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 3127-06]
STORY, HALF — A half story is the area under a pitched roof at the top
of a building, the floor of which is not more than four feet below the
plate, and where the floor area with a ceiling height of seven feet or
greater does not exceed 60% of the gross floor area of the story below.
An exterior architectural feature such as a dormer, turret, cupola or bay
window may not be considered a story or half story, provided that such
individual architectural features is no greater than 10 feet in width and
provided that these features in the aggregate do not exceed 15% of the
total roof area.[Added 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 3127-06]
STORY HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the top surface of the
floor to the top surface of the floor next above. The height of the
topmost story is the distance from the top surface of the floor to the top
surface of the ceiling joists.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway, which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant
to law, which is on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recording Officer or which is approved by official action as
provided by this chapter, and includes the land between the street
lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement,
shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the
street lines.
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way,
whichever would result in the widest right-of-way, as shown on the
adopted Master Plan or Official Map, forming the dividing line between
the street and a lot.
§ 131-2 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-2
127:897
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed, assembled or erected which
requires location on the ground or attachment to something having
such location on the ground, including but not limited to antennas,
buildings, fences, tanks, towers, signs, advertising devices, swimming
pools, tennis courts and solar energy collectors.[Amended 3-14-2016
by Ord. No. 3391-16]
STRUCTURE HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the
structure to the highest point of the structure. An accessory structure
shall comply in all respects with the height regulations of accessory
buildings except as otherwise regulated herein.[Amended 3-14-2016
by Ord. No. 3391-16]
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale
or development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions,
provided that no new streets are created: divisions of land for
agricultural purposes where the resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
provisions; divisions of property upon court order; or conveyances so as
to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument. "Subdivision" also
includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to
the process of subdividing or to the lands or territory divided.
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the
purpose of reviewing subdivisions and site plans in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and performing such other duties relating
to land subdivision which may be conferred on this Committee by the
Board.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land that does not involve
the creation of more than three lots fronting on an existing street, a
planned development, any new street or the extension of any off-tract
improvement.
SWIMMING POOL, PORTABLE — Portable pools shall not be subject
to the requirements of Article V, § 131-20, and are those pools which
are not otherwise permanently installed; do not require water filtration,
circulation and purification; do not exceed 18 inches in depth; do not
exceed a water surface area of 100 square feet; and do not require
braces or supports.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — Includes artificially
constructed pools, whether located above or below the ground, having
a depth of more than 18 inches and/or a water surface of 100 square
feet or more; designed and maintained for swimming and bathing
purposes by an individual for use by members of his household and
§ 131-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-2
127:898
guests and which is located on a lot as an accessory use and shall
include all buildings, structures, equipment and appurtenances thereto.
TOP PLATE — A horizontal structural member that provides bearing
and anchorage for the trusses, roof, or rafters.[Added 12-19-2006 by
Ord. No. 3127-06]
TOWNHOUSE DWELLING GROUP — A group of two or more separate
townhouse structures.
TOWNHOUSE STRUCTURE — A building containing at least three and
no more than six townhouse units.
TRACT — An area of land composed of one or more lots adjacent to one
another, having sufficient dimensions and area to make one parcel of
land meeting the requirements of this chapter for the use(s) intended.
The original land area may be divided by one existing public street and
still be considered one tract, provided that the street is not an arterial
road and that a linear distance equal to more than 75% of the frontage
of the side of the street having the larger street frontage lies opposite
an equivalent linear distance of street frontage on the other side of the
street.
TRELLIS — A flat, light frame consisting of wooden or metal latticelike
strips crossing one another in various patterns, used as a screen or a
support for vines or plants.[Added 5-18-1999 by Ord. No. 2892-99]
UNIVERSITY — An educational institution of a high level, authorized
to confer various degrees, such as associate's, bachelor's, master's
and doctor's, in a variety of disciplines. Such institutions shall include
universities, colleges and community colleges.
USE — The specific purpose for which either land or a building is
designed, arranged or intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this
chapter.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending across the full width of
the lot and lying between the street line and the closest point of any
building on the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured
horizontally and at right angles to either a straight front lot line or the
point of tangent of a curved front lot line. The minimum required front
yard shall be the same as the required setback.[Amended 3-14-2016
by Ord. No. 3391-16]
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the full width of the lot
and lying between the rear lot line and the closest point of the principal
building on the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured
horizontally and at right angles to either a straight rear lot line or
the point of tangent of curved rear lot lines. The minimum required
rear yard shall be the same as the required rear setback.[Amended
3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3391-16]
§ 131-2 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-2
127:899
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the
rear yard and lying between each side lot line and the closest point of
the principal building on the lot. The width of the required side yard
shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to either a straight
side line or the point of tangent of curved side lot lines.[Amended
3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3391-16]
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer which
is required by this chapter as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building and
which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provisions of this chapter or variance therefrom duly authorized as
provided herein.
§ 131-2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-2
127:900
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts
§ 131-3. Districts established. [Amended 12-28-2010 by Ord. No.
3218-10]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of Rutherford is hereby divided
into 19 districts as follows:
R-1 Residential 1 (Single-Family)
R-1A Residential 1A (Single-Family)
R-1B Residential 1B (Single-Family)
R-2 Residential 2 (Two-Family)
R-3 Residential 3 (Three-Story Apartments)
R-4 Residential 4 (Five-Story Apartments)
B-1 Business 1 (Three-Story Office)
B-2 Business 2 (Five-Story Office)
B-3 Business 3 (Three-Story Office-Retail)
B-3/SH Business 3/Senior Housing
B-4 Business/Light Industrial
ORD ORD (Ten-Story Office, Research and Distribution)
U-RIA University/Residential 1A (Single-Family)
HC Highway Commercial Zone
PCD Planned Commercial Zone
HC-LI Highway Commercial Light Industrial Zone
TO Townhouse Overlay Zone
PMU Planned Mixed Use Overlay Zone
NC Neighborhood Commercial
§ 131-4. Zoning Map.
A. The boundaries of these zoning districts are hereby established as
shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of the Borough of Rutherford,"
dated September 1994, which accompanies and, with all explanatory
matter thereon, is hereby made part of this chapter.369
B. The Zoning Map referred to in Subsection A above is hereby amended
as follows: [Amended 12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 3218-10]
(1) (Reserved)370
369. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
370. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(1), concerning Lots 6.06 and 6.08 in Block 223 of the
Tax Map, was repealed 10-22-2013 by Ord. No. 3310-13.
§ 131-3 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-4
127:901
§ 131-5. Interpretation of boundaries.
(2) Lots 1, 2, and 3 in Block 221 are hereby designated as R-4.
(3) Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.01, 8.02, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15.01, 15.02,
16.01, 16.02, 17.01, 17.02, 18, 19.01, 19.02, 19.06, and 19.07 in
Block 222 are hereby designated as B-2.
(4) Lots 1.04, 6.05, 6.06, 6.08, 6.10, 6.11, 6.13, and 6.14 in Block 223
are hereby designated as HC-LI. [Amended 10-23-2012 by Ord.
No. 3274-12]
(5) Lots 12.02, 15, 17, 20, 22, 24.01, 25.01, 26.01, 27.01, and 28.01 in
Block 175 are designated as NC-1.
(6) Lots 9.01, 11, 19.01, and 20 in Block 74 are hereby designated as
B-1.
(7) Lots 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 18.01, and 20.01 in Block 74 are
hereby designated as R-2. [Amended 10-23-2012 by Ord. No.
3274-12]
(8) In addition to the current B-3 Zone designation, Lots 4, 5, 6, 15, 16,
and 18 in Block 77 and Lots 1, 1.01, 1.02, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and 20 in Block 78 are hereby also
designated as PMU. [Amended 10-23-2012 by Ord. No.
3274-12]
(9) In addition to the current R-2 designation, Lots 25.02, 26, 26.01,
27, 12.01, 13, 13.01, 14, 15, 15.02, 16, and 17.01 in Block 168 and
Lots 2, 3, 27, 28, 30, 30.01, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41,
42, 43, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50, and 22 in Block 169 are hereby also
designated as TO. [Amended 10-23-2012 by Ord. No. 3274-12]
A. Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow the center line of
streets, railroad rights-of-way, streams and recorded lot or property
lines as they exist at the time of enactment of this chapter, unless
otherwise indicated by dimensions on the Zoning Map.
B. Where zone boundaries are not fixed by dimension or other notation
and where they approximately follow property lines or natural features
and do not scale more than 25 feet distant therefrom, such property line
or natural feature shall be deemed to be the location of the zoning
district boundary.
C. Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately
following the borough limits, such boundary shall be construed to be
the borough limits.
D. In all cases where a district boundary divides a lot, other than a through
lot, in one ownership, in such a manner that 50% or more of such lot lies
in a less restrictive district, the regulations prescribed by this chapter
for such less restrictive district shall apply to the entire lot.
§ 131-4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-5
127:902
E. The exact location of any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be
determined by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section 57b
of Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975,371 entitled the
"Municipal Land Use Law."
371. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
§ 131-5 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-5
127:903

ARTICLE IV
General Regulations
§ 131-6. Application of regulations.
§ 131-7. Schedule of regulations
A. No building shall hereafter be erected, and no existing building shall be
used, moved, structurally altered, converted, rebuilt, added to or
enlarged or reduced, wholly or in part, nor shall any land be designed,
used or physically altered, for any purpose or in any manner other than
those included among the uses listed as permitted uses in each zoning
district by this chapter and meeting the requirements set forth in the
schedule of regulations (§ 131-7), nor shall any open space contiguous
to any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in
conformity to the area and bulk requirements, off-street parking and
loading requirements and all other regulations designated in the
schedule and this chapter for the zoning district in which such building
or space is located.
B. Where a lot is formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building,
such subdivision shall be effected in such a manner as not to impair any
of the requirements of this chapter with respect to the existing building
and all yards and other open space in connection therewith and so that
all resulting lots have adequate dimensions consistent with the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and so that all
lots have frontage on a street.
C. No part of a yard or open space required about any building or off-street
parking or loading space required for one building or use for the
purpose of complying with the requirements of this chapter shall be
included in whole or in part as meeting the yard, open space, off-street
parking or loading space requirements for another building or use.
D. In the event of any such unlawful encroachment or reduction, such
building or use shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter, and
the certificate of occupancy shall become void.
E. No person shall rent or suffer to be occupied an impermissible unit in a
building which such person owns or otherwise controls.
F. Upon a tenant being required to vacate an impermissible rental unit,
the landlord of said tenant shall pay to said tenant all reasonable
moving and relocation expenses incurred in the procuring of a new
rental unit; any security deposit; any pro rata rent which may be due to
the tenant because of the tenant being required to vacate the unit prior
to the expiration of the tenancy; as well as any attorney fees and legal
costs incurred by the Borough of Rutherford.
A. Schedule of regulations adopted. The schedules of regulations entitled
"Table of General Use Regulations" and "Table of General Bulk
§ 131-6 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-7
127:905
Regulations,"372 attached hereto and applying to the uses of land and
buildings, the yards and other open spaces to be provided contiguous
thereto and all other matters contained therein or indicated for the
various zones established by this chapter, are hereby declared to be
part of this chapter.
B. Regulations as minimum requirements. The regulations listed for each
zone on said schedules of regulations are hereby prescribed for such
zone, subject to other pertinent provisions of this chapter, and shall be
deemed to be the minimum requirements in every instance of their
application.
C. Schedules of regulations. See attached schedules as referenced in
§ 131-7A above.
D. Supplements to schedules of regulations. The following are
supplemental schedules to the Table of General Use Regulations
(§ 131-7A):
(1) The following is a detailed list of principal permitted local retail,
office and service uses for the B1, B-3, B3/SH and B4 Districts:
[Amended 2-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3449-18]
(a) Uses enumerated.
Ambulatory surgical centers
Antique shops
Appliances and electronics
Architects
Art and school supply stores
Art galleries and studios
Barbershops
Beauty shops
Bicycle stores, including rental and repair
Blueprinting and photostating establishments
Book or stationery stores, except adult bookstores
Camera and photographic supply stores
Card shops
Catering establishments
China and glassware stores
Clothing and costume rental shops
Coin and stamp stores
Computer sales and servicing stores
372. Editor's Note: Said tables are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 131-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-7
127:906
Custom dressmaking and millinery shops
Draperies, curtains and upholstery stores
Drugstores
Dry-cleaning stores, except self-service
Employment agencies
Finance companies
Floor coverings store
Florist shops
Food stores, grocery stores, meat and fish markets, bakery
good sales, candy and ice cream shops and delicatessens
Furniture and home furnishings stores
Furrier shops
Gift shops
Haberdasheries
Hardware stores
Hobby shops
Household appliance stores
Insurance offices
Interior decorating shops
Jewelry stores, including watch repair
Laundries employing not more than four persons in addition
to one owner or manager
Leather goods and luggage stores
Linen stores
Liquor stores
Locksmith shops
Music and record shops
Musical instrument shops
Newsstands
Office supply stores
Paint, glass and wallpaper stores
Pet shops
Physicians
Photograph developing and processing shops
Photographers' or artists' studios
Picture-framing establishments
§ 131-7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-7
127:907
Printing, lithographing or publishing establishments for
letter press, business cards, mimeographing and other
similar services; newspaper publishing, including engraving
and photoengraving
Radio, stereo and TV sales and repair shop
Religious article sales shop
Real estate offices
Restaurants and food service establishments, excluding
drive-in and walkup window establishments
Retail bakeries
Schools for music, dance, computer training, martial arts or
tutorial programs
Secondhand stores, when conducted wholly within a
completely enclosed building
Service stations
Sewing machine stores
Shoe repair stores
Shoe stores
Sporting goods stores
Tailor shops
Theaters, excluding drive-in theaters
Tobacco shops
Toy shops
Travel bureau and ticket offices
Vacuum sales and repairs
Variety stores
Video rental and/or sales stores
Wearing apparel shops
(b) None of the foregoing permitted uses shall carry merchandise
other than that intended to be sold at retail on the premises.
(c) Any use not specifically and expressly permitted herein for the
B-3 District is prohibited.
(2) The following is a detailed list of principal permitted automobile
serving or transient-oriented retail and service uses permitted for
the HC District:
Carpet, rug and linoleum stores
Electrical and household appliance stores, including radio and
television sales
§ 131-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-7
127:908
Furniture stores
Garden centers
Lumberyards
Masonry and building materials sales
New car and truck dealerships
Office supply stores
Paint and wallpaper stores
Plumbing showrooms
Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants, theaters and bowling
alleys
(3) ORD District. The following is a list of principal conditional uses
permitted in the ORD District:
(a) Manufacturing plants of a type which carry on processes
within completely enclosed buildings, including the
manufacture, assembly or treatment of products from
previously prepared materials.
(4) The following is a list of principal conditional uses permitted in the
HC District:
(a) Off-tract, off-street parking.
(b) Service stations.
(c) Amusement centers. (See § 131-36)
(5) Amusement game operations, except amusement centers, shall be
an additional permitted accessory use in all districts except
residential districts, provided that a license is obtained in
accordance with Chapter 8, Amusement Games, of this Code and
said use is limited to no more than 20% of the floor area of the
principal use of the premises.
(6) Residential apartments shall be a permitted conditional use in B-1,
B-3 and B-3/SH Districts, subject to the following conditions:
[Amended 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 2884-99; 12-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 3218-10; 6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 3230-11]
(a) All residential units shall be located in a building with a ground
floor that is primarily devoted to a permitted nonresidential
use, which is defined as no less than 80% of the gross building
area of the ground floor level of the building being devoted to a
nonresidential use.
(b) The primary public access point to the nonresidential use must
be located on the front facade of the building or structure.
§ 131-7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-7
127:909
(c) The horizontal width of the front facade of the ground floor
nonresidential space must be no less than 80% of the gross
outside width of the front facade of the building and contain
traditional shop windows. If the building has more than one
front facade, this requirement would be applied along each
street frontage.
(d) The entire building facade shall conform to all applicable
Downtown Facade Design Guidelines.
(e) Principally permitted nonresidential uses shall not be
restricted to the ground floor level and may also be situated
above the ground floor.
(f) No residential units shall be permitted on the ground floor or in
the basement area of a mixed-use building.
(g) No residential units shall be permitted in buildings or
structures that include an industrial or light industrial use or a
dry cleaning operation.
(h) Prior to a change of occupancy of a residential unit, a
certificate of occupancy shall be obtained.
E. Supplements to schedules of regulations. The following are
supplemental schedules to the Table of General Bulk Regulations373 for
the B-3 District. [Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 3403-16]
(1) General.
(a) This section shall apply to all buildings in the Rutherford
Business District ("the District"), which is specifically
designated in Schedule A374 attached hereto and made a part
hereof, that are or become used, whether all or in part, for
nonresidential use; provided, however, that these rules shall
not apply to public buildings.
(b) The purpose of this section is to provide a clear approach to
design and construction of the built environment in the District
with the goal of improving the appearance of the District by
both preserving existing, architecturally significant buildings
and facades and allowing for the creation of new,
architecturally significant buildings and facades. The exterior
architectural appeal and the proposed plan of a building when
erected should not be so at variance with those of buildings
already constructed or in the course of construction in the
immediate neighborhood as to cause a substantial depreciation
of the property values of the surrounding buildings.
Additionally, new signage and other streetscape improvements
373. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
374. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 131-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-7
127:910
should reinforce the goal of improving the appearance of the
District.
(c) No construction permit shall be issued for signage, exterior
construction, and/or exterior alteration or renovation for any
building in the District, used in whole or in part for
nonresidential purposes, without the review and approval of
plans by the Zoning Officer.
(d) Nothing contained here shall exempt any property owner,
tenant, or applicant from compliance with any requirement of
the Rutherford Building and Zoning Department, the New
Jersey State Building Code, and other applicable laws and
codes.
(2) Streetscape Committee.
(a) For each application presented to it, the Streetscape
Committee shall report its final findings and recommendations
to the Zoning Officer.
(b) Composition.
[1] A Streetscape Committee of nine members shall be
established, consisting of the following classes:
[a] Class 1: A member of the Planning Board appointed by
the Mayor.
[b] Class 2: A representative from the Building and
Zoning Department appointed by the Mayor.
[c] Class 3: Four members of the business community
located in the commercial area of the Borough
appointed by the Mayor, at least one of which should
be from the West End of the Borough.
[d] Class 4: Three Borough residents appointed by the
Mayor.
[2] At least two of these members shall have had training or
experience in building design.
(c) Terms. All members shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
(d) Organization. The Committee shall elect a Chairperson and
Vice Chairperson.
(e) Powers and duties. The Streetscape Committee shall be
advisory to the Zoning Officer and shall function under the
Zoning Board's authority.
(f) The Committee is authorized to adopt its operational
procedures. It shall have the following powers and duties:
§ 131-7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-7
127:911
[1] Assist applicants in attaining conformance with acceptable
design and construction standards, with emphasis on
informal discussions.
[2] Review applications pertaining to design criteria set forth
within this chapter and recommend approval or
disapproval to the appropriate board or official.
[3] Monitor the erection and condition of the streetscape
throughout the Borough for compliance with the
streetscape regulations.
[4] Advise the Zoning Officer of violations or noncompliance
with this chapter and recommend measures for their
correction.
[5] Review and recommend amendments to this chapter for
consideration by the Mayor and Borough Council.
[6] Meet at least once per month.
(3) Application procedures.
(a) Any improvement or change to a building's facade, signage,
lighting or appearance of the streetscape within the District
shall be subject to review and approval as provided in this
section. All applications requesting review of such
improvements or changes shall be filed with the Zoning Officer
and referred to the Streetscape Committee, when applicable,
in accordance with the requirements stated herein.
(b) The applicant shall file seven copies of the application with the
Zoning Officer. The Streetscape Committee shall place all
applications received from the Zoning Officer on its agenda for
its next monthly meeting and shall notify the applicant of the
completeness of the initial application as soon as practical
thereafter. An application will be considered complete if all of
the information requested within same has been provided.
New applications filed after the Streetscape Committee's
monthly meeting shall be considered the following month.
(c) For each application presented to it, the Streetscape
Committee shall report its final findings and recommendations
to the Zoning Officer. The Streetscape Committee shall
conduct its review of the application to determine compliance
with this section.
(d) Within 10 days of the completed review of the Streetscape
Committee's report, the Zoning Officer will issue his/her
decision on the application.
(e) Any person, association of persons or corporation within the
District and subject to this chapter shall have the right of
§ 131-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-7
127:912
appeal of any decisions made pursuant to this section in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72; provided, however, that if
the application is part of an application for development before
the Planning Board, the appeal will be before the Planning
Board. Nothing herein shall prevent an application for variance
relief under the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Laws. Each
appeal shall be taken within 20 days of receiving notice of the
decision of the Zoning Officer.
(4) Required submissions.
(a) Before commencement of any improvements, an applicant who
proposes signage or construction, alteration, and/or renovation
to any building facade within the District shall submit seven
complete sets of the following documents to the Zoning Officer:
[1] Professional certified accurate drawings, sketch plats and/
or narratives to scale, depicting all elements of signage;
building elevation; any element to be demolished, removed
or changed; all proposed materials, colors and finishes;
and all proposed facade construction, alteration, and/or
renovation.
[2] Photographs of the existing subject property and adjacent
buildings.
[3] When available, documentation (historic photos or
drawings and the like) of any original conditions or
buildings that support restoration of, or changes to, the
building and/or facade.
[4] Such additional documentation as the Zoning Officer may
determine necessary for its review.
(5) Design requirements for rehabilitation or renovation and
alteration. All applications for approval shall comply with the
following standards:
(a) Building mass and style.
[1] The proposed design shall consider the original mass (size
and shape) of the building and shall be in accordance with
the standard set forth in Subsection E(1)(b).
[2] The proposed design shall consider the relationship
between the building facade and its original window and
door spacing and heights, bays and cornices, remaining
original upper stories and shall be consistent with those
buildings within 200 feet.
(b) Facade treatments and materials.
§ 131-7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-7
127:913
[1] When facade changes are made, hidden architectural
elements and original materials shall be restored or
replaced to match the original architecture of the building
where practicable and if reasonable. Existing,
architecturally significant elements shall not be covered or
hidden.
[2] In any historic structure, materials that were not available
in the era of the building's original construction shall not
be used, except where reproduction materials make
historic details replaceable that otherwise might not be
replaceable.
[3] Unless original, artificial foam stone, brick-face systems,
cement parging, stucco, shingles or shakes are not
permitted. Residentially scaled, horizontal vinyl or
aluminum siding and exterior insulation finishing systems
(EIFS) are not permitted.
[4] Where the historic construction was brick, stone or stucco,
the original masonry and mortar shall be uncovered,
repaired, and restored, or replaced with historically
correct construction products where practicable and if
reasonable. The original color and texture of masonry
surfaces shall be restored.
[5] Old mortar shall be duplicated in color, texture and
bonding strength so as to avoid damage to masonry.
[6] All painting and paint colors shall require approval.
Painting of masonry is prohibited. It may be considered
when stained or missing masonry cannot be restored to a
neat and clean appearance by reasonable means. Colors
must be selected to match the section of the Sherwin-
Williams Preservation Palette and/or the Benjamin Moore
Historical Collection that is appropriate for the
architectural style and period of the original building.
Vibrant colors in the preservation palette shall only be
used for trim and should be used to accentuate trim and
other architectural elements such as windows, doors and
cornices. Only satin, flat finish or eggshell finish shall be
used on the body of the building.
[7] Facades shall be cleaned with the gentlest materials
possible in order to prevent damage to the facade of the
existing building.
(c) Storefronts.
[1] The design shall be compatible with the proportions of the
rest of the building.
§ 131-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-7
127:914
[2] The entry door shall be recessed, with the display windows
set next to the sidewalk in accordance with the applicable
building code of the Borough of Rutherford and other
applicable laws.
[3] The storefront shall be bounded by the sidewalk on the
bottom, the lower edge of the upper facade on top, and a
wall on either side.
[4] The storefront shall form a definable base for the building
and be designed to fit within its original opening. It shall
not extend beyond the original opening and shall not be
reduced from its original height.
[5] The storefront may have recessed portions but shall not be
recessed as a whole and shall be in accordance with the
applicable building code of the Borough of Rutherford and
other applicable laws.
[6] Glass should be a minimum of 70% of the base of the
facade of the storefront to accommodate large display
windows.
(d) Windows and doors.
[1] Original door and window openings (including transoms,
lintels, and sills) and accenting features shall be
maintained and shall be restored to historic size and style
where practicable and if reasonable.
[2] If a door is replaced, or is not original, the new door must
be selected as part of the entire facade and be compatible
in design, shape, size, and color with the rest of the
storefront and building.
[3] Window and door repairs shall replace damaged parts with
like materials to that of the existing windows or doors.
[4] New windows should replicate the originals in size, style,
spacing and division where practicable and if reasonable.
They shall replicate the original height, including
transoms, up to the original header height where
determinable. True or architectural divided lights are
required when divided light windows or doors are
installed.
[5] Storm windows and storm doors are prohibited. Exterior
screened window and exterior screened doors are
prohibited. Glass shall be clear and untinted. Low-E
coatings shall be clear.
[6] Removal of overdoor air-conditioning units and restoration
of transoms is required when new storefronts are being
§ 131-7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-7
127:915
installed unless the cost for removal exceeds the amount
for installing the new storefront.
[7] Secondary doors leading to upper floors, where original or
appropriate, shall be included in and coordinated with the
rest of the renovation.
[8] Where a new storefront of windows is being designed and
the original windows have been previously removed or
destroyed, new anodized aluminum or brass frames and
modern glass are permitted except where such product
would significantly and adversely affect the historic nature
of the building. The design shall be in keeping with the
original size and style of the building where practicable
and if reasonable.
[9] Window frames shall be of darker colors (bronze or copper
patina, for example). White, sand or silver colored frames
or unpainted aluminum frames are prohibited except on
modern buildings where the style and design is original.
[10] Historically correct replacement windows shall be
permitted and shall be made to fit the original opening,
provided they are not egress windows.
(e) Detailing.
[1] Details (any individual feature of a building) shall remain
and be restored wherever practicable and if reasonable.
Replacement materials shall match existing where
practicable and if reasonable. The applicant shall attempt
to identify signs of a cornice or other architecturally
significant elements, which may have been removed from
a building, and more subtle details, such as the trim
around windows, which may be important to the design of
the overall facade, and restore or replace same where
practicable and reasonable.
[2] New facade details and articulation shall be compatible
with the design of similar nearby buildings within 200 feet
and within Schedule A.375 Horizontal lines, such as
cornices, belt courses (horizontal banding) and opening
heights often continue from one building to the next and
shall not be disrupted where practicable and if reasonable.
(f) Awnings. Awnings are permitted in all zoning districts, and
awning signs shall be permitted in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-3/SH,
B-4, ORD and PCD Districts. Awnings and awning signs that
are located in a zoning district wherein awning signs are
permitted, excepting one- and two-family dwelling structures,
375. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 131-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-7
127:916
shall be subject to the following standards: [Amended
2-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3449-18]
[1] The installation of awnings is encouraged where
architecturally appropriate. Awnings may be operable or
fixed. Awnings shall be of a size, shape, material, color and
design that is appropriate for the building upon which they
are affixed and shall be in accordance with the standards
set forth within § 131-7E(5)(b). Appropriateness will be
determined by reviewing the design of the building to
which the awning is affixed, as well as awnings on
buildings within 200 feet of the existing building.
[2] The vertical flap of any awning shall not exceed eight
inches in height.
[3] Lettering is restricted to the vertical flap of the awning
and shall not exceed six inches in height.
[4] One emblem logo may be used per awning. Location of the
awning's emblem logo is restricted to the center of the
main body of the awning or to the center of the vertical
flap. The maximum allowable size of an emblem logo shall
be computed as follows: the awning's linear width
multiplied by 15% shall be the maximum area (square
footage) of the emblem logo, or four square feet,
whichever is less.
[5] The size of awnings (clearances above the sidewalk and
projection from the building) are regulated by the Borough
of Rutherford's Zoning Code. The exact location and sizing
of the storefront awning shall be coordinated with the
building's original windows and cornices and other
architectural details as well as existing awnings on
adjacent buildings where they have been installed
according to these regulations.
[6] Awning signs shall be calculated as part of the permitted
sign square footage for a property as provided in
§ 131-7E(5)(h).
[7] The minimum height above the sidewalk for awnings shall
be seven feet six inches at its lowest point.
[8] Awnings shall not extend above the first story nor over 12
feet six inches above the sidewalk, whichever is less,
except that the individual awnings may be erected over
windows located on floors above the first floor.
[9] No awning or awning sign may project more than three
feet over any part of any street or any street right-of-way
nor extend more than five feet from the building or
§ 131-7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-7
127:917
structure to which it is attached. The owner of the building
and/or tenant with an awning or awning sign accepts all
liability for such awnings, awning signs or signage
installed over the right-of-way. Retractable awnings
located within the Park Avenue Business Improvement
District may project five feet over any part of the street or
any street right-of-way but may not extend more than five
feet from the building or structure to which it is attached.
The height of the awning, when fully extended, shall not
exceed the length of its projection from the building.
[10] All awnings and awning signs must conform to the
applicable building codes.
[11]No awning or awning sign shall be backlighted or be
constructed of any material which permits the passage of
light or allows light to be seen through the material so as
to illuminate the exterior of the awning.
[12]No awning or awning sign shall have permanent
illumination involving intermittent or flashing lights. This
condition does not apply to temporary holiday/festive
lighting decorations.
[13] All awnings, canopies or marquees shall be maintained in
a clean and neat-appearing condition, and such
maintenance, where applicable, shall include regular
cleaning and removal and repainting of any chipped or
blistered paint or replacement of fabric or material which
is cracked, torn, ripped or otherwise disintegrating.
[14] Any awning, canopy or marquee which no longer identifies
a bona fide business shall be taken down and removed or
modified by the owner of the premises within 10 days after
such business has ceased, and any permits or approvals
therefor shall be deemed to have expired at such time.
[15] If the Construction Code Official finds that any awning,
canopy or marquee has been erected in such a manner or
has deteriorated to such a degree as to be unsightly or to
constitute a hazard to the general public, the hazard shall
be eliminated within 24 hours, and the awning, canopy or
marquee shall be removed or repaired to the satisfaction
of the Construction Code Official within 30 days after
written notice of such condition has been served upon the
owner, owner's agent, lessee or occupant. Failure to
comply therewith shall be a violation of this chapter and
subject the offender to its penalties.
[16] The lettering and logo portion of the awning sign shall be
limited to the flap of the awning, not to exceed eight inches
§ 131-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-7
127:918
in height. There shall be no profane language on any
display.
[17] Any building number on an awning sign shall be in Arabic
numerals and English alphabet letters.
[18] The municipality reserves the right to establish licensing
requirements for awnings which extend onto the Borough
right-of-way.
[19] All canopies, awnings or marquees in the Rutherford
Business District set forth at § 131-7E(1)(a) shall be
reviewed for compliance with this section.
(g) Roof, chimney, and other elements.
[1] The original roof shape shall be maintained where
practicable and if reasonable.
[2] If the roof is visible from street level, roofing materials
that match the original in form, shape, size, color, and
texture shall be used where practicable and if reasonable.
[3] Parapets, bays, towers, turrets, gables and dormers, and
the like shall be preserved, restored and maintained where
practicable and if reasonable.
[4] Satellite dishes, antennas, or mechanical equipment shall
not be visible to pedestrian or vehicular traffic from the
street, except where allowable by local ordinance or
federal law.
[5] Chimneys shall remain the original material where
practicable and if reasonable. Metal flue and cinderblock
chimneys are prohibited unless same can be reasonably
camouflaged to match the color of the existing building.
(h) Signage. The following shall apply to all applicable buildings
noted on Schedule A376 attached hereto: [Amended
2-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3449-18]
[1] Location. The primary store identification signage must
remain within the defined boundaries of the storefront. For
a two-story building, the signage shall be placed above the
storefront windows and below the second-floor windows.
For a one-story building, the signage shall be placed above
the storefront windows and below the top of the pediment.
Secondary locations for signage may include the awning
flap, inside storefront windows, or a small projecting sign
attached to the building. Compliance with the Borough's
Zoning Code shall be required.
376. Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 131-7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-7
127:919
[2] Size. The maximum allowable primary sign size is one
square foot per linear foot of storefront at the building
facade (or 50 square feet, whichever is smaller), as set
forth in the Borough's Zoning Code.
[3] Design. The overall design of the sign shall complement
the building facade and should reinforce the goal of
improving the appearance of the District in accordance
with § 137-7E(1)(b).
[4] Internally illuminated signs may have only separate
individual letters of a single color with alphanumeric
lettering containing the name of the business only. No
logos, pictures, phone numbers or other illuminated items
are allowed. Color shall be limited to white, light green or
light blue for translucent characters. Halo-lit signs with
opaque lettering may be any single color.
[5] New nonilluminated or externally illuminated signs are to
be made of solid materials no less than 3/4 inch thick with
carved, raised or hand-painted lettering and detail. They
may be of more than one color and may include logos and
other design features so long as free of clutter.
[6] Sign boxes. Unused sign boxes shall be removed. An
existing box may only be reused by an existing business. If
new cover panels are inserted, the new panel must be
entirely opaque except for alphanumeric lettering which
shall consist of a single line with the name of the business
only. No illuminated logos, pictures, phone numbers or
other characters will be approved. Color for the
translucent characters shall be limited to white, light
green or light blue.
[7] Prohibited signs. Back-lit sign boxes are prohibited.
Existing back-lit signs must be removed when the existing
sign is damaged or when a business ceases to operate at
that location, to the extent permitted by law. Signs
operated by sodium or metal halide lighting are
prohibited. Any sign not specifically allowed in this section
is prohibited.
[8] No sign of any type shall be permitted to obstruct driving
vision, traffic signals, traffic directional and identification
signs, other places of business, other signs or windows of
the building on which they are located. Except for
authorized public information and direction signs, no sign
shall be attached to trees, fence posts, stumps, utility
poles, bridges, culverts or other signs but shall be
freestanding or attached to buildings in an approved
manner.
§ 131-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-7
127:920
[9] A freestanding sign shall not exceed five feet in height,
except as permitted.
[10] Attached signs shall be mounted flush on the building and
shall not project above the roofline or over sidewalk areas
in the business districts, except as permitted.
[11] Uses on corner lots shall be construed as having frontage
on both streets, and signs shall be permitted accordingly.
[12] No billboards shall be erected.
[13] Overhanging signs are prohibited, except as provided in
Subsection E(5)(h)[18][b] below.
[14] No flashing signs are permitted.
[15] All signs not specifically permitted are prohibited.
[16] Each business that shall have a sign designating the name
of a business or the nature of a business using lettering or
symbols of an alphabet other than the English language
alphabet shall also convey on the sign such information in
the English language alphabet with lettering at least four
inches in height.
[17] Any sign which no longer identifies a bona fide business
shall be taken down and removed by the owner of the
premises within 10 days after such business has ceased,
and any permits and approvals for such signs shall be
deemed to have expired at such time. Before receiving any
certificates of occupancy, any new business is required to
meet the guidelines set forth at § 131-7E(5)(h).
[18] Permitted signs. The following signs are permitted for uses
as specified in the various zone district regulations:
[a] Churches: one freestanding sign not exceeding 12
square feet in area and seven feet in height and set
back at least 25 feet from all street rights-of-way and
lot lines, plus one attached sign not exceeding 25
square feet in area.
[b] Garden apartment dwelling groups. Each
development may have one sign along each arterial or
collector road which the tract in question abuts,
provided that there exists at least 150 feet of
unbroken frontage. Such sign(s) shall not exceed 30
square feet in area and seven feet in height. In
addition, each sign shall be set back from all street
rights-of-way and lot lines a minimum of 30 feet and
shall display only the development's name.
§ 131-7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-7
127:921
[c] B-3 and B-3/SH Business District uses.
[i] Each use located on the ground floor may have
one nonflashing lighted or unlighted sign
displaying the name of the use, attached flat to
the front of the building, not exceeding an area
equivalent to one square foot per lineal feet of
building frontage occupied by the use on that
particular building face or 50 square feet,
whichever is smaller. When the buildings are
designed for rear or side entrances, one unlighted
sign may be attached flat against the building at
the rear and side entrances, each sign not to
exceed an area equivalent to 1/2 that of the
maximum sign area permitted on the front of the
building.
[ii] Projecting signs. Each building may have one
projecting sign attached to the front of the
building, not exceeding 15 square feet in area,
and the greater dimension of the sign shall not
exceed six feet. Said sign shall not extend more
than three feet over any part of any street right-ofway
nor extend more than five feet from the
building to which it is attached. The bottom of a
projecting sign shall be at least eight feet above
the highest point of the finished grade along the
applicable facade and shall not extend above the
roofline or parapet or project above the highest
elevation of the wall to which it is attached.
[iii] The only signs permitted above the ground floor
shall be a single sign for each business
establishment. The sign shall be painted on a
single window in gold leaf, black or white. Each
such sign shall be limited to two lines, and each
line shall be limited to six inches in height. There
shall be a maximum distance of separation of four
inches between the two lines.
[19] Retail sale of goods and services, restaurants, banks,
theaters and new car dealerships. Each use may have one
freestanding sign not exceeding 100 square feet in area
and 10 feet in height. This sign shall be set back at least 25
feet from all rights-of-way and lot lines. In addition, each
use may have one attached sign not exceeding an area
equivalent to 5% of the building front or 50 square feet,
whichever is smaller. Where buildings are designed for
rear or side entrances, one unlighted sign may be attached
flat against the building at the rear and side entrances,
each sign not to exceed an area equivalent to 1/2 that of
§ 131-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-7
127:922
the maximum sign area permitted on the front of the
building.
[20]Office buildings and hotels: one sign used only to display
the name of the office complex or hotel and not exceeding
an area equivalent to 5% of the first-floor portion of the
front facade or 100 square feet, whichever is smaller. Such
sign may be either freestanding or attached and, if
freestanding, shall be set back at least 25 feet from all
street right-of-way and lot lines. Where an individual office
unit has direct access from the outside, a sign not
exceeding six square feet, identifying the name of the
office, may also be attached to the building at the office
entrance.
[21] Service stations. One freestanding sign and one attached
sign are permitted. The freestanding sign shall not exceed
20 square feet in area and shall be set back at least 10 feet
from all street rights-of-way and lot lines. The attached
sign shall not exceed 30 square feet in area. In addition,
the following special signs shall be permitted:
[a] One temporary sign inside the property line and
specifically advertising special seasonal servicing of
automobiles, provided that such sign does not exceed
seven square feet in area.
[b] Directional signs of lettering over individual entrance
doors or bays, consisting only of the words "washing,"
"lubrication," "repairs," "mechanic on duty" or other
words closely similar in import, provided that there
shall be not more than one such sign over each
entrance or bay, the letters thereof shall not exceed 12
inches in height and the total of each sign shall not
exceed six square feet.
[c] Customary lettering or other insignia which are a
structural part of a gasoline pump, consisting only of
the brand name of gasoline sold, lead warning sign, a
price indicator and any other sign required by law, and
not exceeding a total of three square feet on each
pump; and, if illuminated, such signs shall be
nonflashing and shall not in any manner constitute a
traffic hazard with respect to adjacent streets or
intersections.
[d] A nonilluminated credit card sign not exceeding eight
square feet in area, placed on or near the gasoline
pumps.
[22] Laboratories, industrial and manufacturing plants,
wholesale distribution centers and warehouses. One sign
§ 131-7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-7
127:923
not larger than the equivalent of 5% of the area of the
front wall of the building or 100 square feet, whichever
is smaller, is permitted. If attached, the sign shall be
attached flat against the building and shall not be higher
than the roofline. If freestanding, the sign shall not exceed
10 feet in height and shall be set back from all street
rights-of-way and lot lines at least 50 feet.
[23] Residential uses. One nameplate sign not to exceed one
square foot may be placed anywhere in the front yard. In
addition, one customary professional sign or nameplate
not more than two square feet in area shall be permitted
and shall be set back at least 1/2 the setback required for
the principal building in the particular district.
[24] Clubs, lodges, community centers and nonprofit
organizations. Each use may have one freestanding or
attached name display sign not exceeding 10 square feet
in area. This shall be set back at least 25 feet from all
street rights-of-way and lot lines.
[25] Multifamily dwellings. Each use may have one attached
name display sign not exceeding 10 square feet in area.
[26] University. Each university campus shall be permitted one
name display sign along each collector or arterial street
which the tract abuts. Such sign(s) shall not exceed 10
square feet in area and seven feet in height. In addition,
each sign shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from all
street rights-of-way and lot lines. Other signs shall be
permitted as determined necessary and reasonable by
Planning Board site plan review.
[27] Miscellaneous signs.
[a] Real estate signs. Real estate signs, not exceeding six
square feet in area in residential districts and 25
square feet in area in all other districts, shall be
permitted. Such signs, advertising the sale, rental or
lease of property, shall be maintained only on the
premises to which they apply. Such signs shall be set
back at least 15 feet from all street rights-of-way and
lot lines. In cases where the building setback is less
than 25 feet, such signs shall be not more than five
feet from the building. All real estate signs shall be
removed upon closing of title of said sale.
[b] Construction signs. Signs which identify the
architects, contractors, engineers and other parties
involved with the construction activity shall be
permitted. Such signs shall not exceed four square
feet for each firm involved in residential districts and
§ 131-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-7
127:924
10 square feet for each firm involved in all other
districts. Such signs shall be restricted to the
construction site for the construction period. They
shall be removed immediately upon completion of the
work by the named parties. Such signs shall not
include the advertisement of any product.
[c] Window display signs. Such signs are permitted as
integral components of the window display of
merchandise. No signs, however, shall be attached in
any manner to the outside of display windows.
Window display signs, when attached to the inside of
display windows, shall cover an aggregate maximum
of 30% of such window area.
[d] Public signs. Signs of a noncommercial nature in the
public interest are permitted, provided that they are
erected by, or on the order of, a public official in the
performance of his/her public duty. Such signs shall
include safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs,
traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical
interest and other similar signs.
[e] Signs as part of a structure. Names of buildings, dates
of erection, monumental citations, commemorative
tablets, cornerstones and other similar signs are
permitted as an integral part of the structure,
provided that they are carved in stone, concrete or
similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or
another permanent type construction.
[f] Private traffic signs. Signs directing traffic movement
onto or within a premises shall be permitted to a
maximum area of three square feet for each sign.
Horizontal directional signs on and flush with the
pavement are exempt from these restrictions.
[28] For buildings containing more than one nonresidential
tenant, one wall-mounted directory sign for each ground
floor entrance to a building shall be permitted, whether
such entrance fronts on a street or a parking lot. The
maximum size of a directory sign shall not exceed six
square feet in area. Such sign may identify all building
occupant names and their addresses; however, no
individual businesses shall occupy greater than one square
foot in area of such sign. A wall-mounted directory sign
may not be illuminated. All lettering on wall-mounted
directory signs shall have the same font style and color.
(i) Lighting.
§ 131-7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-7
127:925
[1] New and existing electrical wiring shall be concealed as
part of facade work, including signage.
[2] Vestibule lighting of the wall-lantern type or recessed
downlight fixtures are allowable. Gooseneck fixtures
mounted directly above a wall-mounted sign or a simple
shielded light bar mounted above or below the sign are
acceptable. Sign lighting shall light the sign area only,
shall not spill over onto adjacent properties, and shall not
shine onto the street in such a manner as to interfere with
or distract driver vision.
[3] Neon lighting is prohibited on the exterior of any building
or as a border or framing of any storefront window or door.
[4] Light emission levels are regulated by the Borough's
Zoning Code.
[5] Flashing and scrolling signs are prohibited.
(j) Fences.
[1] The following fence types are permitted: board-on-board,
picket, stockade, tubular steel, wrought iron, or brick.
[2] Chain-link fences shall be prohibited except temporarily
during construction.
(k) Building colors. The colors of buildings in the street wall shall
be compatible with surrounding buildings within 200 feet.
Consideration should be given to accentuating trim and other
architectural elements such as doors and windows.
(l) Items permitted to be placed on sidewalks in front of buildings
located in the Rutherford Business District.
[1] Items. Sandwich boards, pedestal signs, benches,
planters, and displays may be placed on the sidewalk in
front of the business establishment during hours of
operation, subject to application and approval by the
Borough Zoning Officer. The above items shall be placed as
close to the buildings as reasonably practicable, and shall
in all cases provide an area clear of all items between the
curb and a point four feet in from the curb.
[2] Application. An applicant must submit the following for
approval to the Zoning Officer, a copy of which will be
provided to the Streetscape Committee:
[a] Scaled plan and elevation drawings and photograph of
the front of the business establishment, the sidewalk,
and the proposed items;
§ 131-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-7
127:926
[b] A list and description of items to be placed on the
sidewalk;
[c] Proof of compliance with the Borough's fire safety
requirements;
[d] A certificate of insurance for liability of $1,000,000
combined single limit and indemnification of the
Borough, and naming the Borough as a covered entity
in its insurance policy.
[3] Maintenance. Signs, benches, and plants must be
maintained in visible working condition or be subject to
removal by the Borough. Outdoor items cannot be made of
cardboard boxes, shipping crates, or other disposable
containers. There also shall be no lewd or pornographic
displays.
[4] Benches.
[a] Must be made of wood, metal or composite materials,
and placed adjacent to building;
[b] May not exceed five feet in length, 30 inches in width,
and 36 inches in height, and may not block the
entrance to the commercial business;
[c] May not extend beyond the length of the storefront
business establishment.
[5] Sandwich board signs.
[a] Shall be limited to one sandwich board sign in front of
any business;
[b] Shall only be permitted in front of the business to
which they pertain;
[c] Shall be no more than 2.5 feet wide by five feet high;
[d] Shall not be illuminated;
[e] Must be maintained in visible working condition by
the applicant, or be subject to removal by the
Borough;
[f] May be incorporated into a pedestal sign provided the
sign component does not exceed 2.5 feet in height,
and the total height is no more than five feet tall;
[g] Must be related to the applicant's business.
[6] Pedestal signs.
§ 131-7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-7
127:927
[a] Shall be limited to one pedestal sign in front of any
business;
[b] Shall only be permitted in front of the business to
which they pertain;
[c] Shall be no more than 2.5 feet wide by five feet high;
[d] The sign component shall not exceed 2.5 feet in
height;
[e] The pole for a pedestal sign may not exceed four
inches in diameter;
[f] Must be weighted to ensure they will not tip over;
[g] Must be related to the applicant's business.
[7] Planters. Decorative planters shall be made of wood,
ceramic, or plastic, and located adjacent to the building
establishment. The planters and plants must be
maintained or be subject to removal. Each planter shall be
less than 1.5 feet from the building, and shall be a
minimum of 2.5 feet high (including the height of the
plants).
[8] Fees. No fees shall be charged for businesses utilizing the
sidewalk as described in § 131-7E(5)(l), subject to
approval.
[9] All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed.
[10] Enforcement. All applications for use of the public
sidewalks as described in § 131-7E(5)(l) will be submitted
to the Zoning Officer for initial approval and will be
forwarded by the Zoning Officer to the Building and
Zoning Department for final approval and issuance of the
permit. The Zoning Officer will be responsible for review
of these items, and will forward information to the
Building and Zoning Department or the Health
Department as warranted when violations of the approved
plans are observed.
(6) Design requirements for new construction. The following design
requirements shall be considered and applied in reviewing
applications for new construction in the District:
(a) New construction elements.
[1] All new construction, including additions to existing
buildings, shall be designed to be compatible with the
existing building and neighboring buildings in terms of
§ 131-7 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-7
127:928
§ 131-8. Accessory buildings and structures.
material, height, scale, facade proportions, and window
design and proportions set forth within § 131-7E(5) to the
extent practicable. New buildings will be evaluated under
this standard for their overall proportions, composition,
details and quality and their design should contribute to
an improved streetscape.
[2] All exterior walls of new construction shall be real brick,
brick veneer, stone, wood siding, fiber cement, or metal
panels as appropriate.
[3] Reflective glazing is prohibited. Glass must be clear, not
tinted.
[4] Roofs may be flat or pitched. Consideration should be
given to adjacent buildings within 200 feet.
[5] Blank walls are prohibited at all facades. Storefronts must
follow the applicable subsections above.
[6] Storefront design, including awnings and signage, must
conform to the applicable subsections above.
(7) Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(a) This section shall be enforced by the Building and Zoning
Department of the Borough of Rutherford in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation that violates any provision of
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined a minimum
sum of not less than $100 per violation and a maximum sum of
not more than $2,000 per violation and may be imprisoned for
a period of time not exceeding 90 days, as the court in its
discretion may impose.
(c) Any person, firm, or corporation found to be in violation of any
provision of this section within one year of the date of a
previous violation may be subject to imposition of an additional
fine and/or penalty as a repeat offender as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:49-5.
A. Accessory buildings and structures as part of principal buildings. Any
accessory building or structure attached to a principal building shall be
considered part of the principal building, and the total structure shall
adhere to the yard requirements for the principal building regardless of
the technique of connecting the principal and accessory buildings.
B. Accessory buildings and structures not to be constructed prior to
principal building. No building permit shall be issued for the
construction of an accessory building or structure prior to the issuance
§ 131-7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-8
127:929
§ 131-9. Buffers.
Buffer areas are required along lot and street lines of all nonresidential
lots where said property lines or the center line of adjacent streets abut
residential uses or residential zoning district lines. Each permitted use
shall provide and maintain attractively landscaped grounds and suitable
screening in order to safeguard the character of adjacent districts. The
width of the buffer area for each particular zoning district shall be as
prescribed in the district regulations. Buffer areas shall be measured
horizontally and be either perpendicular to straight lot and street lines or
radial to curved lot and street lines. Buffer areas shall be maintained and
kept clear of all debris, rubbish, weeds and tall grass. No structure, activity,
storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall be permitted in the buffer
of a building permit for the construction of the main building upon the
same premises. If construction of the main building does not precede
or coincide with the construction of the accessory building or structure,
the Building Inspector shall revoke the building permit for the
accessory building or structure until construction of the main building
has proceeded substantially toward completion.
C. Distance between adjacent buildings. The minimum distance between
an accessory building or structure and any other buildings on the same
lot shall be as prescribed in the individual zone district regulations.
D. Height of accessory buildings and structures. The height of accessory
buildings and structures shall be as prescribed in the individual zone
district regulations.
E. Location. An accessory building or structure may be erected in rear
yard areas only and shall be set back from side and rear lot lines as
prescribed in the individual district regulations, except that, if erected
on a corner lot, the accessory building shall be set back from the side
street to comply with the setback line applying to the principal building
for that side street and shall be set back from the rear lot line the
distance required for a side yard in that district.
F. Garages. In residential zones, the owner shall not be required to
replace or rebuild any existing vehicular garage building required by
this chapter if said garage is destroyed by fire or condemned by the
Building Inspector or his designee as unsafe; provided, however, that
the same total number of off-street parking spaces are maintained.
G. Garages. Attached garages in residential zones where said garage is
located along the river bank and is facing the river are an exception to
the off-street parking requirement. The owner of said premises may
proceed to change the use of that area of the dwelling previously
designated for use as a garage to living space subject to permit
application and approval in accordance with the applicable
construction, electrical, and plumbing codes. [Added 3-12-2013 by
Ord. No. 3281-13]
§ 131-8 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-9
127:930
area, and all buffer areas shall consist of dense planting, bushes, trees,
earthen berms, grass, ground cover or fences or any combination thereof
deemed sufficient to screen the view of a particular use. All buffer areas
shall meet the following requirements:
§ 131-10. Corner lots. [Amended 12-19-2006 by Ord. No. 3127-06;
3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3391-16]
Any structure, with the exception of a fence as provided for in § 131-11,
located on a corner lot in any district other than B-3 shall be set back from
both streets at least the required front yard distances, except as provided
in §§ 131-20 and 131-22. No structure, fence, planting or wall over three
feet in height shall be maintained within 20 feet of any street intersection to
maintain the intersection sight triangle. The rear yard of any single-family
or two-family residential structure located on a corner lot shall be permitted
to have a minimum setback of 15 feet to the rear property line.
§ 131-11. Fences and walls. [Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
3391-16]
A. Plant materials used in screen planting shall be at least six feet in
height when planted and be of such density that all the glare of
automobile headlights emitted from the premises are obscured
throughout the full course of the year. The plant materials shall be of a
species common to the area, be of nursery stock and shall be free of
insects and disease.
B. Buffer areas shall be permanently maintained, and plant material which
does not live shall be replaced within one year or one growing season.
C. The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity the plant
material will be no closer than three feet from any street or property
line.
D. The buffer area shall not be broken unless specifically approved by the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
A. No fence shall be erected of barbed wire, wire mesh, expanded metal,
chipped glass, topped with metal spikes, electrically charged,
temporary expandable and collapsible or in any manner which may be
dangerous to persons or animals.
B. No fence or wall for an interior lot shall exceed the following heights in
the listed zone, and all front yard fences shall be open fences:
All Other Zones B-2, HC, ORD
Zones
Front yard (feet) 3 6
Side yard (feet) 4 8
Rear yard (feet) 6 8
§ 131-9 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-11
127:931
All Other Zones B-2, HC, ORD
Zones
(See attached Figure A)377
Subject, however, to the
following:
(1) A dog run may have fencing of a maximum of six feet in height,
provided that such area is located in rear yard areas only and is set
back from any lot line at least 10 feet. In no case may a dog run be
closer to a neighboring building than it is to the principal building
on the lot.
(2) A private residential swimming pool area must be surrounded by a
fence as set forth in § 131-20.
(3) A tennis court area, located in rear yard areas only, may be
surrounded by an open fence of a maximum of 15 feet in height,
said fence to be set back from any lot line the distances required for
accessory buildings in the individual zoning districts.
(4) Off-street parking, loading and driveway areas shall meet the
requirements specified in § 131-14.
(5) With respect to all residential corner lot properties, and only as it
applies to fences, the following terms, definitions, and heights shall
apply:
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending across the full width of
the lot and lying between the frontage street line and the closest
point of any building on the lot, with the front yard being
determined by the street address. The depth of the front yard shall
be measured horizontally and at right angles to either a straight
front lot line or the point of tangent of a curved front lot line.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the full width of
the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the closest point of
the principal building on the lot.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to
the rear yard and lying between the side lot line opposite the
nonfrontage street and the closest point of the principal building
on the lot.
YARD, STREET SIDE — An open space extending from the front
yard, as determined by the street address, to the rear yard and
lying between the nonfrontage street line and the closest point of
the principal building on the lot.
(6) No fence shall exceed the following heights listed or as determined
by the Borough Code Official in reasonable exercise of discretion in
377. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 131-11 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-11
127:932
§ 131-12. Garden apartment dwelling groups.
order to protect the health and safety of the public in accordance
with the Borough Code, and all front yard fences shall be open
fences:
All Other Zones
Front yard (feet) 3
Street side yard (feet) 4
Side yard (feet) 4
Rear yard (feet) 6
(See attached Figure B)378
Subject, however, to
§ 131-11B(1) through (4).
C. Fences in residential zones shall be installed so that the finished side of
the fence faces the street or the neighboring property.
A. Principal building requirements.
(1) No principal building shall exceed 160 feet in length.
(2) No building shall contain less than four nor more than 24 dwelling
units.
(3) The yard requirements for principal buildings shall apply to each
principal building except as provided in § 131-12A(10) below.
(4) Minimum yard areas shall be measured horizontally in feet and
shall be measured away from the front, side and rear of each
building. The total minimum distance between buildings shall be
the sum of the two abutting yard areas. No building, as measured
radially from any corners, shall be closer to any other building
corner than the combined distances of the side yard requirements
for each building. The combined distance of two side yards shall
exclude any driveway or vehicular access width, which is in
addition to the combined side yard width.
(5) Clothes drying, off-street parking, play areas, waste containers or
other services are not permitted in any front yard or any side yard
on the street side of a corner lot.
(6) No principal building shall be located within 10 feet of an interior
road or driveway. No building shall be located within 35 feet of any
public street.
(7) One apartment for the exclusive use of the superintendent or
caretaker may be located in the basement.
378. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 131-11 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-12
127:933
(8) No offices, professional or otherwise, shall be permitted in any
garden apartment dwelling group building.
(9) Where an interior access road or driveway is located between
buildings, the buildings shall be at least 50 feet apart.
(10) Buildings which are parallel to one another or approximately so,
but which overlap by 20 feet or less, may abut one another, except
that there shall be no more than three such buildings so joined in a
group. Such buildings shall be structurally independent.
(11) Cellars may be permitted, but the use of any cellar must be
specified in detail in the site plan. No dwelling units shall be
permitted in cellars or basements, except as provided in
§ 131-12A(7) above.
(12) All principal buildings shall provide not less than two exterior
exposures for each unit, each of which shall be properly placed so
as to provide through ventilation or cross-ventilation for each unit.
(13)No less than 600 cubic feet of storage space shall be provided in
basement areas for each apartment unit in the building. This shall
be separate and apart from garage space requirements.
(14)No air-conditioning unit shall project more than six inches from the
face of the wall of the building in which it is installed, and no
window-type air-conditioning units shall be permitted.
(15) All principal buildings shall have television antenna equipment
built into the building to eliminate individual antennas being
erected upon the roof. In lieu thereof, cable television or its equal
may be provided. This section shall not apply to a common antenna
tower, subject to Planning Board approval.
(16) The number of living units per building and the general building
plan must be approved by the Planning Board.
B. Density requirements. The maximum permitted density shall be 20
dwelling units per acre.
C. Dwelling unit requirements.
(1) Gross floor area minimum shall be as provided in Article IV,
§ 131-7A, Table of General Bulk Regulations.
(2) The floor plan of each garden apartment is to be approved by the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment. The approved plan shall
not be altered in any way without the consent of the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment.
(3) In every apartment unit, all rooms occupied for sleeping purposes
shall contain a minimum of 100 square feet of floor space for the
§ 131-12 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-12
127:934
initial occupant and a minimum of 50 additional square feet for the
second occupant thereof.
D. Garage and accessory building requirements.
(1) Each garage space shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width and 22
feet in depth.
(2) The maximum joint capacity of each group of garage spaces
arranged in a row shall be 12 vehicles.
(3) Vehicular access to garages shall be from the side or rear of any
principal building.
(4) The entrance to such garages shall not be directly to any main
access street or public street.
(5) Architectural design and materials used in construction of garages
and accessory buildings shall conform to those used in the
construction of the principal buildings.
E. Off-street parking and circulation. Off-street parking facilities shall be
provided in accordance with Article IV, § 131-14 and, in addition, shall
be subject to the following restrictions:
(1) All parking spaces and fire lanes, parking areas and lines on
pavement shall be painted and maintained so as to be visible at all
times.
(2) No parking shall be permitted on any road or accessway within the
garden apartment development. All parking shall be specifically
designated on a site plan for that purpose. Off-street parking areas
shall be located beyond the street setbacks for principal buildings.
(3) Parking areas and access drives shall be paved and curbed and
provided with adequate systems of storm drainage. Furthermore,
each parking space is to be properly marked by lines. Such marking
is to be properly maintained and policed at all times. The parking
plan must be approved by the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment.
F. General requirements.
(1) All traffic ingress and egress to the garden apartment site shall be
from an arterial street and not from a minor street. Such ingress
and egress shall be subject to Planning Board approval.
(2) Sidewalks.
(a) Concrete sidewalks to be constructed in accordance with the
Streets and Sidewalks Ordinance of the Borough of
§ 131-12 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-12
127:935
Rutherford379 to a paved width of not less than four feet shall
be provided:
[1] To and from buildings and parking areas.
[2] To and from buildings and roads or accessways.
[3] To all service areas.
[4] Wherever else required by the Planning Board at the time
of site plan approval.
(b) No sidewalks, except those leading to and from building
entrances and exits shall be placed closer to a building than 10
feet, but may be placed in landscaped areas and within
required yard setback areas.
(3) All areas of a garden apartment site not used for the construction of
buildings, roads, accessways, parking areas or sidewalks shall be
fully and attractively landscaped with trees, shrubs and grass
lawns. Any trees or shrubs in a healthy state at the time the
development begins shall remain and be protected during
construction, provided that they are within areas designated as
open space and not subject to extreme grading. At least 25% of the
gross site shall be devoted to common open space for use of
residents.
(4) Exterior garbage containers shall be so located as to efficiently
service all apartments but shall be clustered so as to have a
minimum number of areas. All such areas shall be provided with
sufficient screening on all sides by wood or other similar materials
so as to prevent access to the same by animals, which screening
shall be at least six feet in height and designed so as to harmonize
with the other architectural elements on the site. Garbage
containers shall be a minimum of 25 feet from all property lines.
(5) Interior roads, driveways, private thoroughfares, parking areas,
building entranceways and pedestrian walks shall be provided with
sufficient illumination to minimize hazards to pedestrians and
motor vehicles utilizing the same and shall, where necessary, be
shielded to avoid glare to occupants of buildings and areas.
Lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect away from any adjoining
properties. Wherever practical, bollard-style lighting shall be used.
(6) Recreational equipment shall be permitted only in such locations as
shown on the approved site plan, but at no time shall such
equipment be permitted in front or side yards.
(7) The architecture employed shall not be aesthetically incongruous
with the surrounding area. The outside walls of all buildings shall
379. Editor's Note: See Ch. 109, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 131-12 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-12
127:936
§ 131-13. Lighting.
All parking areas and walkways thereto and appurtenant passageways and
driveways serving commercial, public, office, industrial, apartment or other
similar uses having common off-street parking and/or loading areas and
be of brick or stone, as approved by the Planning Board and in
accordance with the Building Code380 of the Borough of Rutherford
and the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs. The exterior
of accessory structures shall harmonize architecturally with and
be constructed of materials of a like character to those used in
principal structures.
(8) The interior walls separating dwelling units shall be constructed
with fire-resistant material meeting accepted standards of the
Building Code of the Borough of Rutherford. Each group of four or
fewer dwelling units in a building shall be completely separated
from all other dwelling units in the same building by a masonry wall
extending from foundation to roof, in accordance with the Building
Code.
(9) All apartment dwellings, stairways, furnace rooms, laundry rooms
and garages in apartment dwellings shall have installed fire, smoke
and heat detection devices as required and approved by the
Building Code Official of the Borough of Rutherford.
(10) The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, including
fences, roofs and gutters, shall be maintained in good repair, and
all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted when necessary for the
purpose of preservation and appearance. The same shall be
maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or
brick, excessive peeling of paint or other condition reflective of
deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the
property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated
and the adjoining properties and neighborhood protected from
blighting influence.
(11) Interior walls, ceilings, stairways and entrances shall be free from
cracks, breaks, loose plaster and other hazards to health and
safety.
(12) Where there are holes, excavations, breaks, projections,
obstructions, icy conditions, uncleared snow and excretions of pets
and other animals on paths, walks, driveways and other parts of
premises which are accessible to and are used by persons on the
premises, all such holes and excavations shall be filled and
repaired, walks and steps replaced and other conditions removed
where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions with
reasonable dispatch upon their discovery.
380. Editor's Note: See Ch. 18, Building Code.
§ 131-12 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-13
127:937
building complexes requiring area lighting shall be adequately illuminated
for security and safety purposes. The lighting plan in and around the
parking areas shall provide for nonglare, color-corrected lights focused
downward. The light intensity provided at ground level shall be a minimum
of 0.3 footcandle anywhere in the areas to be illuminated, shall average
a minimum of 0.5 footcandle over the entire area and shall be provided
by fixtures with a mounting height not more than 25 feet or the height
of the building, whichever is less, measured from the ground level to the
center line of the light source spaced a distance not to exceed five times the
mounting height. Wherever practical, bollard-style lighting shall be used.
Any other outdoor lighting, such as building and sidewalk illumination,
driveways with no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and ornamental
lighting, shall be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient detail to allow
determination of the effects to adjacent properties, traffic safety and
overhead sky glow. The objective of these specifications is to minimize
undesirable off-premises effects. No direct lighting shall be permitted.
Additionally, no light shall shine into windows or onto streets and driveways
in such manner as to interfere with or distract driver vision. To achieve
these requirements, the intensity of such light sources, the light shielding
and similar characteristics shall be subject to site plan approval by the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
§ 131-13 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-13
127:938
ARTICLE V
Special Regulations
§ 131-14. Off-street parking, loading and driveways.
A. Landscaping.
(1) Except for detached dwelling units and as specified for corner lots,
opaque fencing or screen planting of a dense evergreen material
not less than four feet in height shall be provided between off-street
parking areas and any lot line or street line, except where a
building intervenes or where the distance between such areas and
the lot line or street line is greater than 150 feet.
(2) All loading areas shall be landscaped and screened sufficiently to
obscure the view of the parked vehicles and loading platforms from
any public street, adjacent residential districts or uses and the
front yards of adjacent commercial and industrial uses. Such
screening shall be by a fence, wall, planting or combination of the
three and shall not be less than four feet in height.
(3) Each off-street parking area shall have a minimum area equivalent
to one parking space of landscaping per every 30 parking spaces
with 1/2 of said spaces having shrubs no higher than three feet and
the other 1/2 having trees with branches no lower than seven feet.
Such spaces shall be distributed throughout the parking area in
order to break the view of long rows of parked cars in a manner not
impairing visibility. However, any parking area located on the
ground-floor level of a building or in a parking structure shall be
exempt from such landscaping requirements.
B. Lighting.
(1) Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be so
arranged and shielded as to reflect the light away from adjoining
residential premises and streets and shall be in accordance with
§ 131-13 above. All parking facilities providing five or more parking
spaces shall be lighted.
(2) All off-street parking areas shall be adequately illuminated from
dusk to dawn.
C. Surfacing and curbing.
(1) All parking and loading areas and access drives shall be paved as
outlined below or the equivalent, as determined by the Borough
Engineer, and approved as part of the site plan approval. All
parking areas, regardless of size and location, shall be suitably
drained and maintained. Areas of ingress or egress, loading and
unloading areas, major interior driveways or access aisles and
other areas likely to experience similar heavy traffic shall be paved
with not less than four inches of compacted base course of plant-
§ 131-14 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-14
127:939
mixed bituminous, stabilized base course, constructed in layers
more than two inches compacted thickness and prepared and
constructed in accordance with New Jersey State Highway
Department Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridge
Construction and amendments thereto. A minimum two-inch-thick
compacted wearing surface of bituminous concrete (FABC) shall be
constructed thereon in accordance with the aforesaid New Jersey
State Highway Department Specifications and amendments
thereto. Parking stall areas and other areas likely to experience
similar light traffic shall be paved with not less than three inches
of compacted base course of plant-mixed bituminous, stabilized
base course, prepared and constructed in accordance with the
aforesaid New Jersey State Highway Department Specifications
and amendments thereto. Where subbase conditions of proposed
parking and loading areas are wet, springy or of such a nature that
surfacing would be inadvisable without first treating the subbase,
the treatment of the subbases shall be made in the following
manner: The area shall be excavated to a depth of six to 12 inches
below the proposed finished grade and filled with suitable subbase
materials, as determined by the Borough Engineer. Where required
by the Borough Engineer, a system of porous concrete pipe
subsurface drains shall be constructed beneath the surface of the
parking area and connected to a suitable drain. After the subbase
material has been properly placed and compacted, the parking
area surfacing material, as described heretofore, shall be spread
thereon.
(2) Any buffer, fence, hedge or wall required by this chapter shall be
protected by concrete curb or bumper guard or the equivalent.
Such curb or bumper guard shall be parallel to the buffer, fence,
hedge or wall; shall be at least five inches in height above the
adjacent paved surface; and shall be at least two feet from the
buffer, fence, hedge or wall. Utility poles, railroad ties or tree
trunks shall not be used as required curbing.
D. Access. Access points from any one lot crossing the street line shall be
limited to a maximum of two along the frontage of any single street. The
center lines of any separate access points shall be spaced at least 65
feet apart, shall handle no more than two lanes of traffic, shall be at
least 20 feet from any property line and shall be set back from the street
line of any intersecting street at least 50 feet or 1/2 the lot frontage,
whichever is greater, except that in no case need the setback distance
exceed 200 feet. Curb cuts and driveways in excess of 20 feet at the
street line shall be prohibited, except that for nonresidential uses, curb
cuts and driveways of not more than 30 feet are permitted, giving due
consideration to the proposed width, curbing, direction of traffic, flow,
radii of curves and method of dividing traffic lanes. Curbing shall be
depressed at the driveway, or the curbing may be rounded at the
corners and the driveway connected with the street in the same manner
§ 131-14 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-14
127:940
as another street. Unrestricted access along the length of the street or
streets which the parking area abuts shall not be permitted.
E. Location of parking and loading areas.
(1) Required off-street parking and loading areas shall be located on
the same lot or premises as the use served, regardless of the
number of spaces required by this chapter, except as provided in
Article VI, § 131-33.
(2) No parking of vehicles shall be permitted in any required front
yard; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to the
parking or standing of automobiles or motorcycles on driveways for
a single-family or two-family dwelling.
(3) The use of a driveway for the parking of automobiles and
motorcycles for a single-family or two-family dwelling shall be
subject to the following limitations:
(a) If there is no garage and there is sufficient room, said driveway
shall run from the street line to at least the rear line of the
main structure and have a maximum width of 12 feet in any
portion of the front yard or extension of the side yard into the
front yard.
(b) If there is a garage and there is sufficient room, said driveway
shall run from the street line to the front of the garage opening
and shall have maximum width of 12 feet in any portion of the
front yard or extension of the side yard into the front yard.
(c) If there is an existing nonconforming front yard garage, said
driveway shall run from the street line to the front of the
garage opening and shall have a maximum width equal to the
width of the garage opening or 12 feet, whichever is greater.
(d) Driveways in all residential zoning districts shall have a
minimum width of eight feet.
(e) Landlords shall be required to provide off-street parking for
tenants in conformity with the applicable requirements of this
chapter.
(4) Loading spaces may occupy all or part of the required side or rear
yard.
F. Type of facility. Parking spaces may be on, above or below the surface of
the ground. When parking spaces are provided within a garage or other
structure, said structure shall adhere to the proper accessory building
setbacks, as applicable. The provision of parking spaces shall also
include adequate driveway and necessary turning areas for handling
the vehicles for which provision is made. Parking areas shall be
designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the
parking space provided for it without requiring the moving of any other
§ 131-14 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-14
127:941
motor vehicles. Aisles providing access to parking spaces shall have the
following minimum dimensions. Where the angle of parking is different
on both sides of the aisle, the larger aisle shall prevail. [Amended
6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 3230-11]
Angle of
Parking Space
(degrees)
One-Way Aisle
(feet)
Two-Way Aisle
(feet)
90 25 24
60 18 --
45 15 --
30 12 --
Parallel 12 24
G. Dimensions.
(1) Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet in width and 18
feet in length, exclusive of access driveways and aisles. [Amended
6-28-2011 by Ord. No. 3230-11]
(2) Each loading space shall be not less than 10 feet in width, 25 feet in
length and 14 feet in height.
H. Computation of spaces.
(1) The required number of parking and loading spaces shall be as
specified in the individual zone district regulations, Article IV,
§ 131-7A, Table of General Use Regulations.
(2) When the required number of spaces results in a fraction, the
fraction shall require one parking space.
(3) For uses not included in Article IV, § 131-7A, Table of General Use
Regulations, the required number of parking spaces shall be the
number of spaces required for the use which most nearly
approximates the proposed use.
(4) When more than one permitted use is located on a lot or premises,
the required number of parking spaces becomes the sum of the
component parking requirements for each use.
I. General requirements.
(1) No building or use shall be permitted, altered or expanded unless
sufficient parking is provided on the same lot or premises upon
which the use or building is located, except as provided in Article
VI, § 131-33.
(2) All off-street parking areas shall have adequate designations to
clearly indicate the traffic flow and parking arrangement.
§ 131-14 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-14
127:942
§ 131-15. Performance standards (all uses).
An application for a building permit shall provide documentation that the
intended use will comply with the performance standards enumerated
below. In the case of a structure being built where the future use is not
known, a building permit may be issued with the condition that no
certificate of occupancy will be issued until such time as this documentation
is submitted with respect to the particular occupant. A new application and
a new certificate of occupancy shall be required in the event of a change of
any user of any structure.
(3) No building or use shall be permitted, altered, expanded or
changed unless sufficient loading space is provided on the same lot
or premises upon which the use is located.
(4) All loading and unloading operations shall be conducted entirely
within the boundaries of the lot of the use for which such loading
space is required. No vehicle or conveyance shall, in any manner,
use public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way for loading or
unloading operations, other than for ingress and egress to the lot.
(5) All required parking spaces for residential purposes, excepting
detached single-family dwellings, shall be designed to provide for
direct and unobstructed ingress and egress to said parking spaces
without requiring the moving or relocation of motor vehicles
occupying parking spaces designated for an adjoining residential
unit or units.
A. Electricity. Electric or electronic equipment shall be shielded so there is
no interference with any radio or television reception at the lot line or
beyond the operator's dwelling unit, in the case of multifamily
dwellings, as the result of the operation of such equipment.
B. Glare. There shall be no direct or reflected glare exceeding 0.5
footcandle measured at the property line of the lot occupied by such
use. Exterior lighting shall be shielded, buffered and directed so that
glare, direct light or reflection will not become a nuisance to adjoining
districts or streets. This regulation shall not apply to lights used at the
entrances and exits of service drives leading to a parking lot.
C. Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines.
Further, no use shall be permitted which would cause the temperature
to rise or fall in any body of water.
D. Noise.
(1) Noise level shall be measured with a sound level meter and an
octave band filter that conforms to specifications of the American
Standards Association as follows: Sound Level Meter Code No. Sl. 4
1961; Octave Band Filter Set Code No. 224, 10-1953. The soundpressure
level resulting from any activity shall not exceed, at any
§ 131-14 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-15
127:943
point beyond the lot line, the maximum permitted decibel level for
the designated octave band as set forth in the following table:
Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
(decibels)
Octave Band
(cycles per second)
Sound Pressure Level
(decibels)
0 to 75 69
75 to 150 54
150 to 300 47
300 to 600 41
600 to 1,200 38
1,200 to 2,400 38
2,400 to 4,800 38
Above 4,800 38
(2) In addition, one or more of the following corrections shall be
subtracted from each of the sound pressure given above, as may be
appropriate.
Type of Operation or Character
of Noise
Correction
(decibels)
Noise of impulsive character
(hammering, etc.)
5
Noise of periodic character (hum,
screech, etc.)
5
E. Odor. There shall be no emission of any odors which will disseminate
beyond the boundaries of the lot occupied by such.
F. Storage and waste disposal. No materials or wastes shall be deposited
upon a lot in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the
lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall any substance which can
contaminate a stream, watercourse or underground aquifer or
otherwise render such stream, watercourse or underground aquifer
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or which will
destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream, watercourse or
underground aquifer. No industrial operation shall discharge industrial
waste of any kind into any reservoir, pond or lake. The discharge of
untreated industrial waste into a stream is prohibited. All methods of
sewage and industrial waste treatment shall be approved by the
Borough Health Department and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP). Effluents from a treatment plant shall
at all times comply with effluent standards as established by the DEP.
All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
§ 131-15 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-15
127:944
§ 131-16. Permitted modifications.
constitute a fire or explosion hazard or which may be edible or
otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored indoors and
enclosed in appropriate containers adequate to eliminate such hazards.
All raw materials, fuels and finished products shall be stored within an
entirely closed building. The storage of flammable or volatile liquids or
gasses in aboveground or underground tanks or cylinders having an
individual capacity greater than 25 pounds or 10 gallons is prohibited,
except that the storage of gasoline or diesel fuel for motor vehicles shall
be permitted in underground tanks, regardless of capacity. The storage
of crude oil in aboveground tanks having an individual capacity greater
than 500 gallons is prohibited.
G. Vibration. No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions in excess
of the standards outlined below, with the exception of that vibration
produced as a result of construction or demolition activity. The
standards below are as set forth in the Table of Frequency Amplitude
Relations. Vibrations shall be expressed as displacement in inches and
shall be measured with a standard, three-component-measuring
system, which is a device for the intensity of any vibration in three
mutually perpendicular directions.
Frequency of Ground Motion
in Cycles Per Second
Maximum Amplitude of Ground
Motion in Inches Not More
Than
Up to 10 .0305
10+ to 20 .0153
20+ to 30 .0102
30+ to 40 .0076
40+ to 50 .0061
50+ to 60 .0051
H. Smoke. No use shall be permitted to emit visible smoke of a shade equal
to or darker than No. 2 on the standard Ringelmann Chart.
I. Radioactivity. No use shall be permitted to emit dangerous radioactivity
at any point.
J. Air contaminants. No use shall be permitted to emit material which is
suspended in or discharged into the atmosphere as dust, fumes, mist,
fog, vapor, gas, particulate matter or other pollutants.
K. Garbage storage. The area used for the storage of garbage on
commercial properties abutting a residential use shall be adequately
buffered from said residential use by means of opaque fencing or a
screen planting of a dense evergreen material not less than four feet in
height.
§ 131-15 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-16
127:945
§ 131-17. Private storage sheds.
A. Height modifications. With the exception of residential uses as
permitted by this chapter, penthouses or roof structures for the housing
of stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, air-conditioning equipment or
similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building,
skylights, spires, cupolas, flagpoles, chimneys or similar structures may
be erected above the height limits prescribed by this chapter, but in no
case more than 25% more than the maximum height permitted for the
use in the district.
B. Average front yard setback modifications. In such cases in residential
zones where the existing dwellings on the same side of the street within
200 feet of either side line of the subject property form an existing
setback line, the required front yard setback for a new dwelling or an
addition to an existing dwelling shall be modified to the average
setback of existing development within 200 feet on either side of the lot
along the street line on the same side of the same street or the required
setbacks, whichever is greater, but in no case need the setback exceed
35 feet. [Amended 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 2884-99]
C. Undersized lots.
(1) Any parcel of land with an area or depth or width less than that
prescribed for a lot in a zone in which such lot is located, excepting
lots located in the U-R1A or R-1A Zones, which parcel was under
one ownership at the date of the adoption of this chapter, and the
owner thereof owns no adjoining land, may be used as a lot for any
purpose permitted in the zone, provided that the minimum area of
such lot shall not be less than 75% of the area required for the zone
in which it is located. The rights acquired herein for the use of such
lot as a building parcel shall terminate should the substandard lot
merge in fee with any adjoining land or property.
(2) Any parcel of land with an area or depth or width less than that
prescribed for a lot in the U-R1A or R-1A Zones, which parcel was
under one ownership at the date of the adoption of this chapter, and
the owner thereof owns no adjoining land, may be used as a lot for
any purpose permitted in the zone, provided that the minimum area
of such lot shall not be less than 65% of the area required for the
zone in which it is located. The rights acquired herein for the use of
such lot as a building parcel shall terminate should the substandard
lot merge in fee with any adjoining land or property.
D. Existing side yard violations. No variance application is required for a
construction permit which otherwise would be permitted under the
Code where the property contains an existing nonconforming side yard,
provided that the requested permit will not extend nor enlarge the side
yard violation.
§ 131-16 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-17
127:946
§ 131-18. (Reserved)381
§ 131-19. (Reserved)382
§ 131-20. Swimming pools. [Amended 3-14-2016 by Ord. No.
3391-16]
§ 131-21. Vehicles in residential districts. 383 [Amended 8-10-1999
by Ord. No. 2907-99]
A. No private residential storage shed shall be constructed or installed on
any lot unless the lot contains a residence building. Storage sheds shall
be located in rear yard areas only and shall meet the setback distances
for accessory buildings as specified for each particular zoning district,
except that in no case may a storage shed be closer than three feet to
any lot line.
B. Storage sheds shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage for accessory
buildings as specified for each particular zoning district.
C. Storage sheds shall be firmly anchored to the ground to ensure stability.
A. No private residential swimming pool shall be constructed or installed
on any lot unless the lot contains a residential building. Pools shall be
located in the rear yard or side yard areas only and shall be set back at
least five feet from any inside property line and 10 feet from any street
line.
B. A swimming pool shall occupy no more than 75% of the side or rear
yard area in which it is located.
C. A private residential swimming pool area must be surrounded by a
suitable fence or wall with a self-closing and self-latching gate at least
four feet but no more than six feet in height, and said fence shall not
require minimum setback from any lot line. The self-latching lock
access shall be located a minimum of four feet above ground level and
shall meet the requirements of the New Jersey Construction Code.
A. In any residential district, the parking or standing of the following
vehicles or boats in any yard area, driveway or street, except as
provided for in this chapter, is prohibited:
(1) Unregistered motor vehicles and parts of motor vehicles of any
type.
381. Editor’s Note: Former § 131-18, Signs, as amended, was repealed 2-27-2018 by Ord. No.
3449-18.
382. Editor’s Note: Former § 131-19, Awnings and awning signs, as amended, was repealed
2-27-2018 by Ord. No. 3449-18.
383. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 125, Vehicles, Abandoned or Junked.
§ 131-17 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-21
127:947
§ 131-22. Yard encroachments. [Amended 5-18-1999 by Ord. No.
2892-99; 3-14-2016 by Ord. No. 3391-16]
The space in any required yard shall be open and unobstructed except as
specified below:
(2) Buses, taxis or other vehicles built for the commercial
transportation of passengers.
(3) Buses or vehicles altered for camper, recreational, mobile shop,
peddler or other similar use.
(4) Trailers or mobile homes of a type used for dwelling purposes.
(5) Camping trailers, mobile homes or recreational vehicles in excess
of 18 feet in length.
(6) Boats of any type or design in excess of 18 feet in length.
(7) Trucks, tractors or other vehicles designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles or trailers and not so constructed as to
carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle so drawn.
(8) Trucks, meaning every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained
primarily for the transportation of property, being capable of
having a combined weight of vehicle and load of more than 3,500
pounds, except as permitted pursuant to § 131-33.1 of this chapter;
provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to trucks
being used in the rendering of a service to the premises. For the
purposes of this subsection, the weight of the truck shall be
determined by the gross weight provided on the registration
certificate of the same.
(9) Trucks or trailer attachments having dual rear wheels.
(10) Commercial vehicles as defined in Article II, § 131-2, except as
permitted pursuant to § 131-33.1 of this chapter.
B. These restrictions shall not apply to trucks being used in the rendering
of service to the lot or premises.
C. Camping trailers, mobile homes or recreational vehicles in excess of 18
feet in length may be parked in a driveway or street of a residential
district for 48 consecutive hours when said vehicle is being loaded or
unloaded in anticipation of or following active use. Said vehicle shall be
parked in the driveway or on that portion of the street immediately
contiguous to the property of the vehicle's owner or operator.
A. Ordinary projections of window sills, cornices, canopies, eaves and
other architectural features shall be permitted to a distance of not more
than one foot.
§ 131-21 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-22
127:948
§ 131-23. Utilities.
B. Projection of a cornice over 20 feet above finished grade shall be
permitted to a distance of three feet.
C. An arbor up to eight feet in height, flagpole, unroofed steps or unroofed
terrace shall be permitted to encroach without limitation.
D. A trellis attached flat against a chimney or building shall be permitted
to be located in a side or rear yard, provided that said trellis shall not
exceed five feet in width and a maximum height equal to the height of
the roofline of the building or 20 feet, whichever is lesser.
E. A freestanding trellis shall be permitted to be located in a required side
or rear yard; provided, however, that said trellis shall conform to the
height restrictions of side or rear yard fences as provided in § 131-11
above.
F. Swimming pools and clothes-drying equipment are restricted to rear
yard areas.
G. Necessary retaining walls, steps or fences, as permitted or required by
this chapter, shall be permitted to encroach without limitation.
H. Chimneys or flues may be erected in rear yard areas, provided that they
do not exceed five square feet in area and do not obstruct free
ventilation.
I. In any commercial zone district, two buildings on one lot may be
connected by an open or enclosed passageway, provided that said
passageway shall not exceed 10 feet in width and 12 feet in height.
A. In any residential or business zone district, the installation of electric,
gas and/or water meters on the front facade or in the front yard of any
building is prohibited.
B. All electric, telephone and television cable lines shall be installed
underground in any multifamily, garden apartment and townhouse
development. This subsection shall only apply to new construction
taking place following the effective date of this chapter, of which this
subsection is a part.
C. In all zoning districts, no heating, ventilating or air-conditioning
equipment shall be located in a front yard.
D. In all zoning districts, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning
equipment located in a side yard shall be situated a minimum of 15 feet
from the front facade of any building.
E. In all zoning districts, all rooftop mechanical equipment shall be located
in the center of the roof measured from the roof perimeter.
§ 131-22 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-24
127:949
§ 131-24. Satellite antennas.
All satellite antennas having a diameter in excess of one meter in residential
districts or two meters in nonresidential districts shall be regulated in
compliance with the following regulations:
A. The service area of a satellite antenna reflective dish shall not exceed
10 feet in diameter.
B. The satellite antenna shall be anchored in a solid concrete foundation if
ground-mounted and on a secure foundation if roof-mounted so that in
all cases the front face of the dish shall be capable of withstanding a
static wind load of not less than 75 miles per hour. Design calculations
shall be furnished by the applicant to indicate compliance with this
subsection.
C. All ground-mounted installations must have an underground electrical
conduit for power and signal wiring. Roof-mounted installations shall
provide electrical conduit for all exterior wiring. All exterior wiring
shall conform to the weatherproof standard as defined in the National
Electric Code.
D. All ground-mounted installations shall be located in the rear yard and
shall comply with the yard and setback requirements for the principal
structure on the lot.
E. The satellite antenna shall be no larger than the minimum size
necessary to provide reliable operation in light of the particular location
and circumstances. It shall be the burden of the applicant to show, by
expert opinion, that the size of the proposed antenna is in compliance
with this section.
F. The satellite antenna shall extend no higher than the minimum height
necessary to provide reliable operation in light of the particular location
and circumstance. It shall be the burden of the applicant to show, by
expert opinion, that the height of the proposed antenna is in compliance
with this section.
G. The ground-mounted satellite antenna shall be located and screened to
minimize motor noise and visibility from the street and adjacent
properties. The ability of the applicant to install the satellite antenna in
an unobtrusive location and to minimize the noise impact on adjacent
properties shall be a major factor in determining whether or not a site
plan shall be approved.
H. No lot shall contain more than one satellite antenna as heretofore
regulated.
I. Every satellite antenna shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and
good constructional material condition at all times, including the repair
or replacement of defective parts and all other acts required for the
maintenance of said antenna. The Construction Code Official shall
§ 131-24 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-24
127:950
require compliance with all construction standards of this chapter. If
the satellite dish is not made to comply with the adequate safety and
maintenance standards, the Construction Code Official shall require its
removal in accordance with this section.
J. Any satellite antenna which is located on property which becomes
vacant and unoccupied for a period of 180 days or more shall be
deemed to have been abandoned. Abandoned satellite antennas shall be
removed by the owner of the premises.
K. No persons shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises
owned or controlled by him any satellite antenna which is in a
dangerous or defective condition. Any such satellite antenna shall be
removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or owner of the
satellite antenna. Upon failure of the owner to remove or repair a
dangerous or defective satellite antenna, the Construction Code Official
shall proceed as described herein.
L. The Construction Code Official shall cause to be removed any satellite
antenna that endangers the public safety such as an abandoned,
dangerous or materially, electrically or structurally defective satellite
antenna or a satellite antenna for which no permit has been issued. A
Construction Code Official shall prepare a notice which shall describe
the satellite antenna and specify the violation involved and which shall
state that if the satellite antenna is not removed or the violation is not
corrected within 10 days, the satellite antenna shall be removed. All
notices shall be sent by certified mail. Any time periods provided in this
chapter shall be deemed to commence on the date of the receipt of the
certified mail. The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property
on which the satellite antenna is located, the owner of the satellite
antenna and the occupant of the property. If any of such persons is
unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such person's
last known address, if any, and posted at the premises.
M. Any person having an interest in the satellite antenna or the property
may appeal the determination of the Construction Code Official
ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with
the Construction Board of Appeals within 10 days after receipt of the
notice. Notwithstanding the above, in cases of eminent danger to the
public safety or other emergency, the Construction Code Official may
cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or a defective satellite
antenna without notice.
N. Any satellite antenna removed by the Construction Code Official
pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall become the property
of the borough and may be disposed of in any manner deemed
appropriate by the borough. The cost of removal of the satellite antenna
shall be considered a debt owed to the borough by the owner of the
satellite antenna and the owner of the property and may be recovered
in an appropriate court action by the borough. The cost of removal shall
include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the borough in
§ 131-24 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-24
127:951
§ 131-25. Residential garages.
For any one- or two-family residence, an attached or detached garage may
be permitted pursuant to the following regulations:
§ 131-26. Uniformity of exterior design and appearance.
connection with the removal. If it shall be necessary for the
Construction Code Official to remove a satellite antenna pursuant to
the provision of this chapter and it should be practicable to sell or
salvage any material derived from the aforementioned removal, he may
sell the same at public sale in conformance with applicable statutory
regulations. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the costs of
removal to be charged to the satellite antenna owner or property owner.
The borough may file a suit in court to collect any excess over such
costs, and the cost of the removal shall be levied as an assessment
against the property on which the satellite antenna is located.
O. Site plan approval by the Planning Board will be required for the
installation of a satellite antenna in all zoned districts. Each application
shall include an antenna plan showing the specific design, location, size
and construction of the proposed antenna which shall comply in all
respects with the standards enumerated herein.
P. The procedure for application to the Planning Board on site plan
approval shall be identical to the procedure established for approval of
a major site plan in accordance with Chapter 50, Land Subdivision and
Site Plan Regulations, of this Code and the Municipal Land Use Act
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
Q. An application fee of $200 shall be submitted when filing the satellite
antenna site plan application.
A. No garage opening or entrance for vehicles shall be located on the front
facade of the residence.
B. Vehicular access to attached garages shall be from the side or rear yard
only.
C. The minimum setback of any garage shall be 20 feet from the front
building line of any one- or two-family residential structure. [Amended
7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 3024-03]
D. The minimum driveway length from the front property line to the
garage opening shall be 40 feet for one-family residential structures
and 70 feet for two-family residential structures. A corner lot that has a
residential structure with a side entrance garage shall have a driveway
length equivalent to the required front yard setback. [Amended
7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 3024-03]
E. The total width of an attached garage door opening shall not exceed 10
feet in width. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 3024-03]
§ 131-24 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-26
127:952
§ 131-27. Security gates.
A. Except as provided in this section, no single-family dwelling shall be
erected if it is like or substantially like any neighboring building then in
existence or for which a building permit has been issued in more than
three of the following aspects:
(1) Height of the main roof ridge or, in the case of a building with a flat
roof, the highest point of the roof beams above the elevation of the
first floor.
(2) Height of the main roof ridge above the top of the plate (all flat
roofs shall be deemed identical in this dimension).
(3) Length of the main roof ridge or, in the case of a building with a flat
roof, length of the main roof.
(4) Width between outside walls at the ends of the building, measured
under the main roof at right angles to the length thereof.
(5) Relative location of windows in the front elevation or in each of
both side elevations with respect to each other and with respect to
any door, chimney, porch or attached garage in the same elevation.
(6) In the front elevation, both:
(a) Relative location with respect to each other of garage, if
attached, porch, if any, and the remainder of the building.
(b) Either height of any portion of the building located outside the
limits of the main roof, measured from the elevation of the first
floor to the roof ridge or, in the case of a flat roof, the highest
point of the roof beams, or width of said portion of the building
if it has gable in the front elevation, otherwise length of said
roof ridge or said flat roof in the front elevation.
B. For the purpose of this section, a building shall be deemed to be a
"neighboring building" if the distance between such building and the
subject building is not more than 50 feet and if both buildings front on
the same street.
A. All security gates must be internal and not occlude the vision of fire,
police and/or governmental officials to inspect and shall provide a
minimum of 75% visibility through the gate.
B. All electrically operated security gates shall be designed and
maintained to be capable of being opened by manual means in the event
of loss of power or other emergency.
C. All properties within the Borough of Rutherford having a security gate,
excepting R-3 uses, shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 34A,
Fire Safety, §§ 34A-17 through 34A-19.
§ 131-26 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-27
127:953

ARTICLE VI
Conditional Uses
§ 131-28. Purpose; standards for conditional uses. [Amended
8-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2907-99]
Recognizing that certain uses, activities and structures are necessary to
serve the needs and conveniences of the borough, and at the same time
recognizing that such uses may be or become inimical to the public health,
safety and general welfare if located and operated without proper
consideration being given to existing conditions and the character of the
surrounding area, such uses are hereby designated as conditional uses
requiring a conditional use permit. Any conditional use shall require
Planning Board site plan review and approval before the issuance of a
conditional use permit. A site plan containing the information required in
the Land Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations Ordinance of the Borough
of Rutherford384 shall be filed with the Planning Board. The Planning Board
shall, in considering said site plan, obtain a report of the Police Department,
which shall be incorporated into its report. The granting of a permit for
the conditional uses shall comply with the general terms and conditions
established in this section using the following principles, as well as the
applicable specific conditions contained in separate sections below:
§ 131-29. Churches.
Churches may be permitted by conditional use permit in all residential
districts, provided that the following conditions are met:
A. The design, arrangement and nature of the particular use is such that
the public health, safety and welfare are protected and reasonable
consideration is afforded to the following:
(1) The character of the neighborhood and zone.
(2) The conservation of property values and the proposal's impact on
the orderly development of adjacent properties in accordance with
the zoning classification of such properties.
(3) The health and safety of the residents and workers on adjacent
property and in the surrounding neighborhood.
(4) The potential congestion of vehicular traffic or creation of undue
hazard.
(5) The providing of adequate landscaping and screening.
(6) The principles and objectives of the Master Plan of the borough.
(7) The protection of natural features.
384. Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations.
§ 131-28 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-29
127:955
§ 131-30. Drive-in banks.
Drive-in banks may be permitted by conditional use permit in the B-1, B-2,
B-3 and B-3/SH Districts, provided that the following conditions are met:
A. The lot shall front on a collector or arterial road, as specified in the
Borough Master Plan, and all ingress and egress shall be limited to such
roads.
B. A minimum buffer area of 20 feet shall be provided along any common
property line with a residential district or residential use.
A. Minimum area and yard requirements shall conform to the following
requirements:
Principal Building Minimum
Type Requirement
Lot area 15,000 square feet
Lot frontage 120 feet
Lot width 120 feet
Lot depth 125 feet
Side yard (each) 20 feet
Front yard 35 feet
Rear yard 30 feet
Accessory Building
Minimum
Type Requirement
Distance to side line 10 feet
Distance to rear line 10 feet
Distance to other building 10 feet
Maximum
Type Requirement
Building coverage of
principal building
40%
Building coverage of
accessory buildings
5%
B. The lot shall front on a collector or arterial road, as specified in the
Borough Master Plan, and all ingress and egress shall be limited to such
roads.
C. A minimum buffer of 20 feet shall be provided along any common
property line with a residential district or residential use.
§ 131-29 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-30
127:956
§ 131-31. Funeral homes.
§ 131-32. Hotels.
Hotels may be permitted by conditional use permit in the B-2 and ORD
Districts, provided that the following conditions are met:
§ 131-33. Off-tract off-street parking.
Off-tract off-street parking may be permitted to be located other than on the
same lot with the use for which it is required in the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-3/SH
and HC Districts, provided that the following conditions are met:
D. All other regulations of the B-1 Business District, except as herein
modified, shall apply.
A. Minimum area and yard requirements shall conform to those required
in § 131-30A above for drive-in banks.
B. The lot shall front on a collector or arterial road as specified in the
Borough Master Plan, and all ingress and egress shall be limited to such
roads.
C. A minimum buffer area of 20 feet shall be provided along any common
property line with a residential district or residential use.
A. The lot shall front on a collector or arterial road as specified in the
Borough Master Plan, and all ingress and egress shall be limited to such
roads.
B. A minimum buffer area of 50 feet shall be provided along any common
property line with the residential district or residential use.
C. Any hotel that may be constructed must contain a minimum of 100 units
of accommodations exclusive of permanent, on-site living quarters for
management personnel.
D. Each unit of accommodation shall include a minimum of two rooms.
These two rooms shall be a bedroom and a separate bathroom which
affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with
a toilet, washbasin and a bathtub or shower, all properly connected to
water and sewer systems.
E. There shall be a maximum residency limitation on all guests of 30 days.
Such limitation shall not apply to an employee living on the premises.
F. Prior to the granting of site plan approval by the appropriate board, the
Municipal Police, Fire and Health Departments shall review the
submitted plans and report to the board whether all applicable state,
county and municipal regulations have been satisfied.
§ 131-30 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-33
127:957
§ 131-33.1. Commercial vehicle off-street parking. [Added
8-10-1999 by Ord. No. 2907-99]
Off-street parking of commercial vehicles may be permitted by conditional
use permit in R-1, R-1A, U-R1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts, provided
that the following conditions are met:
§ 131-34. Service stations.
Service stations may be permitted by conditional use permit in the B-1, B-2,
B-3, B-3/SH and HC Districts, provided that the following conditions are
met:
A. The lot to be used for such parking is adjacent to the lot containing the
use for which the parking is required, based on the definition of "tract"
under Article II, § 131-2, above.
B. The lot to be used for such parking is under the control, either through
ownership or permanent easement, of the owner or operator of the use
for which such space is required.
C. The parking requirements of the use for which such parking is
necessary shall not be reduced below the minimum requirements of this
chapter for such use.
A. The parking of commercial vehicles shall be permitted only in a side or
rear yard or in a wholly enclosed structure. No commercial vehicle, or
any portion thereof, shall be permitted to park in the front yard.
B. A commercial vehicle parked in the side or rear yard shall be screened
from view from adjoining properties.
C. No commercial vehicle shall be permitted to park in the side or rear
yard if the subject property has a wholly enclosed garage of sufficient
size to store said vehicle.
D. Not more than one commercial vehicle of a weight capacity not
exceeding two tons, as defined by the Department of Motor Vehicles,
owned or operated by a resident of the premises, shall be permitted to
be parked on the property.
E. No commercial vehicle parked in the side or rear yard shall have
overhead or side racks for the storage of equipment or supplies.
A. Minimum area and yard requirements shall conform to those required
in § 131-30A above for drive-in banks, except as herein modified:
(1) Side yard (each): 30 feet.
(2) Front yard: 50 feet.
B. All pump islands shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any street
line.
§ 131-33 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-34
127:958
§ 131-35. Manufacturing, office, research and distribution uses.
Manufacturing, office, research and distribution uses may be permitted
by conditional use permit in the ORD District, provided that the following
conditions are met:
C. On corner lots, the side street setback line shall be 50 feet.
D. A minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be provided along any common
property line with a residential district or residential use.
E. Landscaping strips of a minimum width of 10 feet shall be provided
along front and side street lot lines. All landscaped areas shall be
curbed with concrete or granite block curbing.
F. All garbage receptacles or other outside appurtenances shall be
screened by means of adequate landscaping or fencing.
G. Parking on the site shall be limited to those vehicles of employees, those
vehicles which are involved in repairs or servicing at the station and
those commercial vehicles accessory and necessary to the operation of
the service station. No other parking shall be permitted. No parking
shall be permitted on unpaved areas.
H. There shall be a minimum of 1,500 feet between service stations, which
distance shall be measured from the nearest property lines; provided,
however, that this restriction shall not apply to stations located along
opposite side lines of a dual highway with traffic lanes divided by a
permanent median strip.
I. No service station shall be located within 300 feet of any school,
theater, church, public park or playground, fire station, health-care
facility, first-aid station, public building or institution.
J. All appliances, pits and storage areas other than gasoline filling pumps
and air pumps shall be within a building. All lubrication, repair or
similar activities shall be performed in a fully enclosed building, and no
dismantled parts shall be displayed outside of an enclosed building.
A. Minimum area and yard requirements shall conform to those required
in the ORD District for office, research and distribution uses.
B. The lot shall front on a collector or arterial road as specified in the
Borough Master Plan, and all ingress and egress shall be limited to such
roads.
C. A minimum buffer area of 50 feet shall be provided along any common
property line with a residential district or use.
D. A landscaping strip of a minimum width of 10 feet shall be provided
along front and side street lot lines. All landscaped areas shall be
curbed with concrete or granite block curbing.
§ 131-34 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-35
127:959
§ 131-36. Amusement centers.
Amusement centers may be permitted by conditional use permit in the HC
District, provided that the following conditions are met:
E. All garbage receptacles or other outside appurtenances shall be
screened by means of adequate landscaping or fencing.
F. All provisions of the ORD District, except as herein modified, shall
apply.
A. Minimum area and yard requirements shall be the following:
(1) Lot area: 22,500 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage: 150 feet.
(3) Lot width: 150 feet.
(4) Lot depth: 150 feet.
(5) Side yard, each: 25 feet.
(6) Front yard setback: 35 feet.
(7) Rear yard setback:
(a) Bordering a residential zone: 50 feet.
(b) Bordering a nonresidential zone: 25 feet.
B. The lot shall front on a collector or arterial road as specified in the
Borough Master Plan, and all ingress and egress shall be limited to such
roads.
C. A minimum buffer area of 50 feet shall be provided along any common
property line with a residential district or residential use.
D. Parking requirements.
(1) Motor vehicle: 35 spaces per 1,000 square feet of total floor area of
the building.
(2) Bicycle: 25 spaces per 1,000 square feet of total floor area of the
building, located in a bicycle rack not to be located near to any
means of egress doors.
E. Signs. All signs for the amusement center are to conform to
§ 131-18B(4), regarding retail sale of goods and services.
F. Principal building regulations are as follows:
(1) Maximum coverage of principal building: 40%.
(2) Maximum height of building: one story (20 feet).
§ 131-35 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-36
127:960
§ 131-37. Restaurants seating 125 persons or more.
Restaurants may be permitted by conditional use permit in the B-2 and ORD
Districts, provided that the following conditions are met:
§ 131-38. Motor vehicle repair facilities.
Motor vehicle repair facilities may be permitted in the B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-3/
SH Districts, provided that the following conditions are met:
G. Accessory building regulations are as follows:
(1) Distance to lot line: 15 feet.
(2) Distance to rear line: 15 feet.
(3) Distance to other buildings: 20 feet.
(4) Maximum coverage: 5% of lot.
(5) Maximum height: one story or 15 feet.
H. All other regulations of the Highway Commercial District, except as
herein modified, shall apply.
I. This use shall require a license from the Mayor and Council in
accordance with Chapter 8, Amusement Games, of the Borough Code.
J. Restricted use. No other use shall be permitted within an amusement
center except such accessory uses which are directly related and
necessary to the operation of such primary use.
A. Prior to the granting of site plan approval by the appropriate board, the
Municipal Police, Fire and Health Departments shall review the
submitted plans and report to the board whether all applicable state,
county and municipal regulations have been satisfied.
B. No intoxicating beverage shall be permitted to be removed from the
premises by a guest, customer or employee of the restaurant.
A. Minimum area and yard requirements shall conform to those required
in § 131-30A above for drive-in banks, except as herein modified:
(1) Side yard (each): 30 feet.
(2) Front yard: 50 feet.
B. On corner lots, the side street setback line shall be 50 feet.
C. A minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be provided along any common
property line with a residential district or residential use.
D. Landscaping strips of a minimum width of 10 feet shall be provided
along front and side street lot lines. All landscaped areas shall be
curbed with concrete or granite block curbing.
§ 131-36 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-38
127:961
E. All garbage receptacles or other outside appurtenances shall be
screened by means of adequate landscaping or fencing.
F. Parking on the site shall be limited to those vehicles of employees, those
vehicles which are involved in repairs or servicing at the repair facility
and those commercial vehicles accessory and necessary to the
operation of the repair facility. No other parking shall be permitted. No
parking shall be permitted on unpaved areas.
G. No major body work shall take place at a motor vehicle repair facility.
H. No junked unlicensed motor vehicles or parts thereof or motor vehicles
incapable of normal operation upon the highway shall be permitted on
the premises of any motor vehicle repair facility.
I. Not more than three licensed motor vehicles may be located upon any
motor vehicle repair facility outside of a closed or roofed building
overnight, provided that said motor vehicles are awaiting repair by the
owners thereof.
J. There shall be a minimum of 500 feet between motor vehicle repair
facilities, which distance shall be measured from the nearest property
lines; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to facilities
located along opposite side lines for a dual highway with traffic lanes
divided by a permanent median strip.
K. No motor vehicle repair facility shall be located within 300 feet of any
school, theater, church, public park or playground, fire station, healthcare
facility, first-aid station, public building or institution.
L. All appliances, pits and storage areas other than air pumps shall be
within a building. All lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be
performed in a fully enclosed building, and no dismantled parts shall be
displayed outside of an enclosed building.
M. There shall be a minimum of one on-site parking space for each two
employees.
N. There shall be, in addition to the on-site parking requirements
contained in Subsection M above, a minimum of one space for each
vehicle being repaired, inclusive of the enclosed garage bays.
O. All parking spaces shall meet the standards of § 131-2, Interpretations;
use of words; definitions. All parking spaces shall be properly lined and
identified.385
385. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection P, which concerned conversion of an existing service
station to a motor vehicle repair facility and which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed 10-22-2013 by Ord. No. 3311-13.
§ 131-38 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-38
127:962
ARTICLE VII
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 131-39. Nonconforming uses.
A. Continuance. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the lawful
use of land or buildings existing at the date of the adoption of this
chapter may be continued although such use or building does not
conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in
which such land or buildings is located; provided, however:
(1) That no nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size.
(2) That no nonconforming building shall be enlarged, extended or
increased.
(3) That no nonconforming use may be enlarged, extended or
increased.
(4) That the lawful use of a nonconforming building may be extended
to any portion of such nonconforming building.
B. Restoration. If any nonconforming building or use shall be destroyed to
an extent of 50% or less of the recorded true valuation, then such
destruction shall be deemed partial destruction and may be rebuilt,
restored or repaired. Such restoration shall take place within 12
months of the time of destruction. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent
the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any wall, floor or roof
which has been declared unsafe by the Building Inspector. If this time
period is exceeded, a building permit shall only be issued for a
conforming use.
C. Abandonment. An abandoned nonconforming use shall not be
reinstated. A nonconforming use shall be adjudged as abandoned when
there occurs a cessation or discontinuance of use by an act or failure to
act on the part of the tenant or owner to reinstate said use within a oneyear
period.
D. Reversion. No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a
conforming use, be changed back again to a nonconforming use.
E. Alterations. A nonconforming building or structure may be
reconstructed, but not enlarged or extended unless said building is
changed to a building conforming to the requirements of this chapter.
F. Actual construction. Nothing in this chapter shall require any change in
the plans, construction or designated use of any building for which a
building permit has been issued, provided that actual construction is
lawfully begun within six months and completed within 12 months of
the effective date of this chapter. In the event that work is not
commenced or completed within the required period, such permit or
permits shall be void.
§ 131-39 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-39
127:963
G. Reclassification. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed
so as to transfer an area from one district to another of a different
classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any
conforming uses existing therein or created thereby.
H. Unlawful use. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as
authorization for or approval of the continuance of the use of a
structure or premises in violation of zoning regulations in effect at the
time of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 131-39 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-39
127:964
ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 131-40. Enforcement; permit procedure.
Administrative officials. It shall be the duty of the construction code officials
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. No structure shall
be erected until a building permit is obtained from the construction code
officials, and no structure or lot shall be used in violation of this chapter.
It shall be the duty of the construction code officials to keep a record of
all applications and all building permits which are either issued or denied,
with notations of any conditions involved which data shall form a part of the
borough public records. A monthly report of building permits issued shall
be filed with the Tax Assessor. It shall be the duty of the construction code
officials to inspect the structures and land in the borough and order the
owner, in writing, to remedy any condition found to exist in violation of any
provisions of this chapter.
§ 131-41. Building permits required; procedures.
§ 131-42. Application for building permit.
A. It shall be unlawful to construct, enlarge, alter or demolish a structure
or change the occupancy of a building or structure requiring greater
strength, exitway or sanitary provisions or to change to a different use
group, or to install or alter any equipment for which provision is made
or the installation of which is regulated by these regulations, without
first filing an application with the Construction Official, in writing, and
obtaining the required permit therefor.
B. The following are exceptions from Subsection A above.
(1) Ordinary repairs which do not involve any violation of this chapter.
(2) Minor work as determined by the appropriate subcode official.
(3) Emergency work, except that a permit shall be applied for as soon
thereafter as is practicable, but not later than 72 hours thereafter.
A. The application shall contain a general description of the proposed
work, its location, the use and occupancy of all parts of the building or
structure and of all portions of the site or lot not covered by the building
or structure and such additional information as may be required by the
Construction Code Official, which shall include but not be limited to the
following:
(1) The name and address of the owner. Where the owner is not a
resident of the state, he shall designate a resident as agent for the
purpose of service of any notices or orders which may be necessary.
Such address shall not be limited to a post office box but shall
specify a physical location where such owner or agent may be
found during normal business hours. Where the owner is a
§ 131-40 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-42
127:965
corporation, partnership or other business entity, the application
shall indicate the names and addresses of the officers or other
responsible persons upon whom service may be made.
(2) The street address and lot and block number of the property upon
which the building or structure is proposed to be erected.
(3) A description of the proposed work, including the use group
classification, proposed construction type, lot ground coverage in
square feet, total floor area in square feet, total building or
structure volume in cubic feet, the total number of plumbing
fixtures, the total number of electrical fixtures, outlets and major
appliances, a description of the type of heating system, the source
of water supply, the mode of sanitary waste disposal and a listing of
any special, unusual or hazardous facilities proposed for inclusion
in the building or structure.
(4) The estimated cost of the work for which a permit is sought,
including but not limited to building construction, on-site
construction and all integral equipment, built-in furnishings and
finishes. Where any material or labor proposed for installation in
the building or structure is furnished or provided at no cost, its
normal or usual cost shall be included in the estimated cost.
(5) A statement that all required state, county and local prior
approvals have been given, including such certification as the
Construction Code Official may require.
B. In addition, the following information shall be required on any
application for construction permit when such information is available,
but not later than the commencement of work:
(1) The name and addresses of all contractors engaged or planned for
engagement by the owner in the prosecution of the work.
(2) The name and license number of the contractor or subcontractor
for plumbing and for electrical work where such work is proposed.
(3) The name and address of the responsible person who will be in
charge of the work and who is responsible to the owner for
ensuring that all work is installed and completed in conformity with
the regulations. The person may be the design architect or
engineer, the contractor or a third party acceptable to the
Construction Code Official.
(4) In the event of any change of contractor or person in charge of
work, such change shall be filed as an amendment to the
application.
C. A separate application and permit shall be required for each building.
D. Application for a permit shall be made by the owner or his agent, a
licensed engineer, architect or plumbing, electrical or other contractor
§ 131-42 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-42
127:966
§ 131-43. Issuance of building permit.
A building permit shall be granted or denied within 10 days from the date
of a complete application unless additional time is agreed upon, in writing,
by the applicant. One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner
employed in connection with the proposed work. If the application is
by a person other than the owner in fee, it shall be accompanied by an
affidavit of the owner or the authorized person making the application
that the proposed work is authorized by the owner in fee and that the
applicant is authorized to make such application.
E. Plans; plan review; plan approval.
(1) Plans and specifications. The application for the permit shall be
accompanied by three copies of specifications and of plans drawn
to scale, with sufficient clarity and detail dimensions to show the
nature and character of the work to be performed. Plans submitted
shall only be required to show such detail and include such
information as shall be reasonably necessary to assure compliance
with the requirements of this chapter. When quality of materials is
essential for conformity to these regulations, specific information
shall be given to establish such quality; and this chapter shall not
be cited, or the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a
substitute for specific information.
(2) Architect's or engineer's seal. The seal and signature of the
registered architect or licensed engineer who prepared the plans
shall be affixed to each sheet of each copy of the plans submitted
and on the first or title sheet of the specifications and any
additional supportive information submitted. The Construction
Code Official shall waive the requirement for sealed plans in the
case of a single-family home owner who had prepared his own
plans for the construction, alteration or repair of a structure used
or intended to be used exclusively as his private residence and to
be constructed by himself, provided that the owner shall submit an
affidavit attesting to the fact that he has prepared the plans; and
provided, further, that said plans are, in the opinion of the
Construction Code Official and appropriate subcode official, legible
and complete for the purposes of ensuring compliance with these
regulations.
(3) The Construction Code Official, upon the advice of the appropriate
subcode official, may waive the requirement for plans when the
work is of a minor nature.
(4) Examination of plans. All plans submitted and any amendments
thereto accompanied by the required documentation and
application, upon payment of the fee established by the borough,
shall be numbered, docketed and examined promptly after their
submission for compliance with the provisions of the regulations.
§ 131-42 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-43
127:967
when such plans shall have been approved or denied by the Construction
Code Official, together with such permit as may be granted. All dimensions
shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be
built upon shall be based on an actual survey of the lot by a licensed
land surveyor in the State of New Jersey. The lot and the location of the
structures thereon shall be staked out on the grounds before construction is
started. No building permit shall be issued for any new structure located in
a subdivision unless that subdivision is duly approved by the Planning Board
in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Land Subdivision and Site
Plan Ordinance.386
§ 131-44. Certificate of occupancy.
§ 131-45. Conditional certificate of occupancy.
A. No building or structure shall be occupied or used in whole or in part
unless and until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Construction Official. The Construction Official shall not issue such
certificate unless he determines, after inspection, that there are no
violations of any applicable laws, ordinances or orders pending at the
time of issuing the certificate. The certificate shall be issued upon
written request from the owner or his authorized agent.
B. A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for and obtained prior to the
use or occupancy of the whole or any part of any building:
(1) Undergoing construction or alteration.
(2) Undergoing a change in use.
(3) Undergoing a change in ownership.
(4) Undergoing a change in occupancy in other than residential
districts.
C. Upon receiving an application for a certificate of occupancy, the
Construction Official shall make an inspection of the building or part
thereof for which the certificate is requested and shall forthwith issue
the certificate of occupancy if the building or alteration has been
completed and if the use and occupancy thereof shall be in conformity
with the Revised Ordinances of Rutherford or other applicable
ordinances of the borough and if the building is safe and does not
constitute a nuisance or hazard likely to result in injuries to persons or
damages to property. In case the Construction Official shall decline to
issue a certificate of occupancy, his reasons for doing so shall be stated
to the applicant, and a written statement thereof shall be transmitted to
the applicant on request.
A. Notwithstanding § 131-44A or C above, the Construction Official shall,
after appropriate application and inspection as described in § 131-44C
386. Editor's Note: See Ch. 50, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations.
§ 131-43 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-45
127:968
§ 131-46. Deferral of certificate of occupancy.
Notwithstanding § 131-44A or C above, in instances where title to onefamily
and two-family detached dwellings and one-family attached dwellings
is being transferred, the Construction Official shall, after the appropriate
application and inspection described in § 131-44C above, defer the
requirement that a certificate of occupancy issue if:
above, issue a conditional certificate of occupancy for one-family and
two-family detached dwellings and one-family attached dwellings in
instances where title to that dwelling is being transferred if:
(1) The party acquiring title certifies under oath that a binding
contract exists between that person and the current owner of the
dwelling and that failure to complete the transaction prior to
correction of any violations and issuance of an unconditional
certificate of occupancy will result in financial hardship; and
(2) The violations noted in the inspection report are limited to
violations of Chapter 78, Property Maintenance Code, of the Code
of the Borough of Rutherford, and/or violations of other codes
which do not result in a significant direct threat to health and
safety.
B. A conditional certificate of occupancy shall:
(1) List violations which must be corrected prior to issuance of an
unconditional certificate.
(2) Establish a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days or such longer
period as the Construction Official deems reasonable for
completion of the requisite corrections.
C. No conditional certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the
person acquiring title to the property shall countersign a copy of the
conditional certificate acknowledging the conditions which need
correction; permitting the Construction Official or his designee to
inspect the property upon reasonable notice; and acknowledging that
failure to satisfy the conditions within the time provided may, in the
discretion of the Construction Official, result in the filing of such
enforcement action as the Construction Official deems appropriate,
including the filing of a complaint with the Municipal Court.
D. No conditional certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the
dwelling may be occupied safely prior to full correction of any violations
without endangering life or public welfare.
A. The person acquiring title certifies under oath that no person will use or
occupy the dwelling for any purpose except to perform necessary
repairs until all violations are corrected; and
§ 131-45 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-46
127:969
§ 131-47. Enforcement rights of Construction Official.
Issuance of a conditional certificate of occupancy pursuant to § 131-45 or
deferral of the certificate of occupancy requirement pursuant to § 131-46
shall not affect the right of the Construction Official to take such
enforcement action as he deems appropriate for violations of law or any
ordinance.
§ 131-48. Certificate of occupancy fees and administration.
B. The person acquiring title shall countersign the writing in which the
deferral shall be granted acknowledging that:
(1) No person shall use or occupy the dwelling for any purpose except
to perform necessary repairs until all violations are corrected;
(2) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until full compliance
with § 131-44A and C above;
(3) He is aware of the violations noted on the inspection report
prepared by the Construction Official or his designee;
(4) He permits the Construction Official or his designee to inspect the
property upon reasonable notice;
(5) The person acquiring title shall report the progress of repairs to the
Construction Official at such reasonable intervals as the
Construction Official shall determine on the status of necessary
repairs; and
(6) Failure to file the appropriate report or occupancy of the premises
in violation of this section may, in the discretion of the Construction
Official, result in such enforcement action as the Construction
Official deems appropriate, including the filing of a complaint with
the Municipal Court.
A. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to any person having a
proprietary or tenancy interest who shall be held responsible for any
violations on the premises. A record of all certificates shall be kept on
file by the Construction Official, and copies shall be furnished to any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected.
B. Fees for each original certificate of occupancy shall be as stipulated in
Chapter 22, Construction Codes, Uniform, of the Borough of Rutherford
Code.
C. A monthly report of each certificate of occupancy and conditional
certificate of occupancy and each deferral of the requirement issued
shall be filed with the Tax Assessor and the Mayor and Council. A record
of all such items shall be kept in the office of the Construction Official.
§ 131-46 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-48
127:970
ARTICLE IX
Planned Commercial Developments
§ 131-49. Purpose and objectives.
A. The Borough of Rutherford, being confronted with increasing
urbanization and acknowledging that the technology of land
development and land use planning is undergoing substantial and rapid
changes and recognizing the desirability of the objectives set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39, intends to encourage:
(1) Flexibility. The variety and flexibility in land development for all
purposes and uses ancillary thereto and compatible therewith
which is necessary to meet those changes in technology and
demand and which will be consistent with the best interests of the
entire borough.
(2) Initiative. The most efficient allocation and maintenance by private
initiative of open spaces ancillary to all compatible uses.
(3) To meet needs. The most efficient use of those public facilities
required in connection with all development in providing for all
uses of land to be in the best interests of the borough.
B. In recognition of the urgent need for the redevelopment of those
congested and blighted areas abutting the central areas of the borough
in order to furnish appropriate commercial development and adequate
housing facilities in proximity to the commercial and civil amenities of
the central areas of the borough; in the belief that private investment
should be encouraged to contribute to that redevelopment; in
recognition that necessary redevelopment cannot be expected to take
place in strict accordance with those uniform regulations appropriate
to the established areas of the borough; in order to provide increased
flexibility of the laws governing the development of those areas in the
borough aforesaid; to encourage such development in directions that
will recognize both the changes and design in technology in the
building industry and the new demands in the commercial and
residential housing markets; to provide that the uniform regulations
appropriate to previously developed neighborhoods and commercial
areas do not operate to discourage efficient and imaginative
development of said areas consistent with the reasonable enjoyment of
neighborhood properties; to establish patterns and characteristics of
future developments which will result in desirable economic and social
consequences and will make the most desirable and economic use of
the resources of the area planned; to provide for the maximum benefit
from coordinated areas site planning, including the diversified location
of structures and mixed compatible uses; to provide a safe, efficient
system for pedestrian and vehicular traffic, attractive landscaped open
areas; and to provide for the multiple needs of society and maximize the
opportunity for a wide range of choices in commercial development and
residential living and to serve the varying needs of persons in such
§ 131-49 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-49
127:971
§ 131-50. Required development.
No site plan for any planned commercial development shall be approved
unless it contains the following types and amounts of development:
areas, the borough does hereby adopt this chapter so that single
parcels of land or combinations of parcels of land in single ownership
may be developed with one or more principal structures and related
accessory uses and other environmental development.
A. Commercial development use standards.
(1) No business establishment shall offer or sell food or beverages for
consumption on the premises in parked motor vehicles.
(2) Strip commercial development shall have a minimum height of
three stories or 36 feet.
(3) Commercial uses in the PCD District shall be limited to the
following:
(a) Banks.
(b) Offices.
(c) Those uses specified in § 131-7D(1), except blueprinting and
photostating establishments, catering establishments, drive-in
restaurants, fast-food restaurants, grocery stores, laundries,
locksmith shops, newsstands, pawnshops, secondhand stores,
shoe repair stores, taxidermist shops, theaters and
upholstering shops.
(d) Newspaper stores.
B. Residential development.
(1) Types. Any type of structure containing dwelling units may be built,
except single-family houses and two-family houses.
(2) Each planned commercial development shall have no more than 35
dwelling units per acre for the total of the planned commercial
development.
C. Common property.
(1) At least 15% of the area of each planned commercial development,
excluding the area reserved and used for surface and/or enclosed
parking, shall be used for common property.
(2) Common property shall contain landscaped areas and may contain
watercourses or other amenities. Landscaped areas shall contain
lawns, trees and shrubbery and pedestrian paths, walks and malls
and may contain flower and rock gardens, statues and sculpture
§ 131-49 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-50
127:972
§ 131-51. Planned commercial development regulations.
and whatever other matter enhances the quality of the landscaped
area.
(3) The developer of a planned commercial development may satisfy
the requirement for common property through the use of plazas
and malls which may be opened or covered and pedestrian paths
and ways and may contain fountains and reflecting pools,
landscaped areas and watercourses.
(4) Prior to the site plan approval of any planned commercial
development, the Planning Board shall be satisfied that the
applicant has properly provided for the maintenance of the
common property.
(5) Structures and common property shall be laid out in a manner that
best serves the residents and users of each planned commercial
development. Site layouts shall maximize aesthetic values and shall
be in accordance with imaginative and farsighted concepts of site
design. All required utilities to be constructed along Orient Way
and/or Erie Avenue shall be installed underground.
A. Placement of structures. The placement of commercial and residential
structures and accessory parking and refuse depository facilities shall
provide a compatible and practical arrangement of such structures and
uses within the tract and surrounding area.
B. Setback. The common property between the boundaries of the parcel of
property upon which the planned commercial development is to be
constructed and the proposed buildings or structures shall not be less
than 25 feet in depth and shall be maintained as common property,
except that walks, driveways and rights-of-way for utilities and
drainage channels and below-grade parking structures may be
developed and maintained in such area.
C. Traffic circulation. Traffic circulation facilities within the planned
commercial development shall provide for the safe and convenient
movement of pedestrians and vehicles, including accessibility by
emergency, municipal and delivery vehicles.
D. Utilities. The electric power, telephone and illumination lines shall be
installed underground, and easements, when required, provided that
transformers and substations may be installed within accessory
buildings or structures designed for this purpose. This requirement
may be waived only upon a finding by the Planning Board that such
underground installations in the specific area are not feasible.
E. Signs. The use of signs or similar devices for purpose of advertisement
or identification within the planned commercial development, exclusive
of municipal signs, shall be regulated by § 131-18 and is further limited
to:
§ 131-50 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-51
127:973
(1) A sign pertaining to the identification of the planned commercial
development and located at or near the entrance to the
development, provided that the design, scale, material and location
thereof is in harmony with and complementary to the overall
development; such sign may be used independently or as an
architectural extension of a building, structure or wall and may also
be illuminated, provided that it shall be properly shaded so that the
source of light will not be visible.
(2) Signs pertaining to the identification of commercial or
nonresidential establishments, provided that the design, scale,
material and location thereof is in harmony with and
complementary to the overall development; such signs may also be
illuminated, provided that they shall be properly shaded so that the
source of light will not be visible.
(3) Signs pertaining to the direction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
provided that the design, scale, material and location thereof is in
harmony with and complementary to the overall development; such
signs may also be illuminated, provided that they shall be properly
shaded so that the source of light will not be visible.
(4) There shall be no facade or sign lighting above grade level floors.
(5) A freestanding sign located within the PCD District shall be set
back at least 10 feet from all rights-of-way and lot lines.
F. Bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot dimensions.
(a) Area: 70,000 square feet.
(b) Each planned commercial development must have 200 feet of
frontage on Orient Way, and at no point shall the distance
between side lot lines be less than 100 feet.
(c) Each planned commercial development must be a through lot
and have 100 feet of frontage on Feronia Way.
(2) Minimum yard dimensions; front yards, rear yards and side yards.
None required, but if provided, front yards, rear yards and side
yards shall be at least 25 feet each.
(3) Maximum coverage by principal buildings and accessory parking
structures and driveways: 90%.
(4) Maximum height of principal buildings.
(a) Maximum height of principal buildings shall be as follows:
[1] Commercial buildings: five stories or 60 feet.
[2] Residential buildings: five stories or 60 feet.
§ 131-51 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-51
127:974
§ 131-52. Requirements for Planning Board approval.
Prior to the approval of a site plan application for a planned commercial
development, the Planning Board shall find the following facts and
conclusions:
(b) All height calculations for purposes of compliance with this
chapter shall be made from that portion of the building facing
Orient Way; however, the height of any principal building shall
not exceed 60 feet within 75 feet of Feronia Way.
(5) Off-street parking.
(a) Dwelling units: two spaces per unit, provided that 50% of such
parking shall be located in a fully enclosed structure or garage.
(b) Retail establishments: one parking space for every 200 square
feet of gross floor area.
(c) Service establishments: one space for every 300 square feet of
gross floor area.
(d) Offices: one space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area.
(6) Off-street loading. There shall be one loading space for every
residential building and one loading space for every commercial
building.
(7) Minimum amount of commercial space and public common
property. Not less than 50% of the total first floor area of a planned
commercial development shall be devoted to permitted commercial
uses and public common property. No portion of the first floor area
which is situated within 35 feet of Orient Way shall be devoted to
permitted residential uses.
(8) Site plan required. No building permit shall be issued for a planned
commercial development until a site plan application shall have
first been approved by the Planning Board as required in Chapter
50, Land Subdivision and Site Plan Regulations, and Chapter 51,
Land Use Procedures, of the Code of the Borough of Rutherford.
(9) Variation of bulk requirements by Planning Board. The Planning
Board may, in its discretion, permit an increase in the density
specified in § 131-50B(2) of this chapter not to exceed 45 dwelling
units per acre of the total area of the planned commercial
development if the developer provides public or quasi-public
common property (other than otherwise required under any other
section of this chapter) and facilities such as enclosed parking
structures with a reasonable number of parking spaces designated
and reserved for the Rutherford business district and commuter
parking for Rutherford residents in excess of the minimum
standards established by this chapter or other similar facilities.
§ 131-51 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-52
127:975
A. That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to standards of
this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c.
B. That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
property are reliable and the amount, location and purpose of the
common property are adequate.
C. That the provisions for the physical design of the proposed development
for public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the
amenities of light and air, recreation and visible enjoyment are
adequate.
D. That the proposed planned commercial development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to
be established.
E. In the case of a development which contemplates construction over a
period of years, that the terms and conditions intended to protect the
interests of the public and other residents, occupants and owners of the
proposed development in the total completion of the development are
adequate.
§ 131-52 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-52
127:976
ARTICLE IXA
Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
[Added 5-15-2001 by Ord. No. 2969-01]
§ 131-52.1. Purpose.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of
this article are to:
(1) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
(2) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas;
(3) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
(4) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as
a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use
towers;
(5) Encourage use of existing buildings, light and utility poles and/or
towers, to the extent possible, where appropriate, as opposed to
the construction of new towers in areas where the adverse impact
on the community is minimal;
(6) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
(7) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and
innovate camouflaging techniques;
(8) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and
efficiently;
(9) Consider the public health and safety of communication towers;
and
(10) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
B. In furtherance of these goals, the Borough of Rutherford shall give due
consideration to the Borough of Rutherford's Master Plan, Zoning Map,
existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas in approving
sites of towers and antennas.
§ 131-52.1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-52.2
127:977
§ 131-52.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers, and similar
alternative-design mounting or stealth structures that camouflage or
conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANCILLARY FACILITIES — The buildings, cabinets, vaults, closures and
equipment required for operation of telecommunications systems, including
but not limited to repeaters, equipment housing, and ventilation and other
mechanical equipment.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a
tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate or
capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, radio frequencies (excluding
radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication
signals. Parabolic dish antennas used for satellite communications shall not
be included within this definition.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long
distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
COLLOCATION — When two or more receiving and/or transmitting facilities
are placed together in the same location or on the same antenna support
structure.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
GUYED TOWER — A tower that is supported or braced through the use of
cables (guy wires) that are permanently anchored.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure the distance
measured from the lowest finished grade of the parcel to the highest point
on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
LATTICE TOWER — A type of mount that is self-supporting with multiple
legs and cross-bracing of structural steel.
MONOPOLE — The type of tower that is self-supporting with a single shaft
of wood, steel, or concrete and a platform (or racks) for panel antennas
arrayed at the top.
MOUNT — The surface or structure upon which antennas are mounted,
including the following three types of mounts:
A. BUILDING MOUNT — Mounted on the roof or the side of a building.
GROUND MOUNTED — Antenna support (tower) mounted on the
ground.
B.
§ 131-52.2 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-52.2
127:978
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or conditional use permit has been
properly issued prior to the effective date of this article, including permitted
towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such
approval is current and has not expired.
RADIO FREQUENCY RADIATION (RFR) — The emissions from wireless
telecommunications facilities or any electromagnetic energy within the
frequency range from 0.003 MHZ to 300,000 MHZ.
STEALTH DESIGN — A telecommunications facility that is designed or
located in such a way that the facility is not readily recognizable as
telecommunications equipment (see "alternative tower structure").
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support thereto.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless services as
defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 which includes
FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services, including
cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio
(SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar
services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. It
does not include any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated
by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is exclusively for
receive-only antennas, nor does it include noncellular telephone service.
§ 131-52.3. Applicability.
STRUCTURE MOUNTED — Mounted on or in a structure other than a
building.
C.
A. New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the Borough
of Rutherford shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided
in Subsections B through D, inclusive.
B. Amateur radio station operators/receive only antennas. This article
shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is
under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive only antennas.
C. Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article,
other than the requirements of § 131-52.4F and G, absent any
enlargement or structural modification or the addition of any
structures.
§ 131-52.2 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-52.3
127:979
§ 131-52.4. General requirements.
D. AM Array. For purposes of implementing this article, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system
which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered
one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall
be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM
array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the
AM array by right.
E. Satellite dish antennas. This article shall not govern any satellite dish
antennas presently regulated under the Borough Code.
A. Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. Notwithstanding any other borough
land use regulation, a different existing structure on the same lot shall
not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. If a
tower and its appurtenant structures constitute the sole use of the lot,
the tower shall be deemed to be the principal use.
B. Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zone development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
C. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the Building Inspector an inventory of existing towers,
antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either
within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Rutherford or within three
miles of the border thereof, including specific information about the
location, height, and design of each tower. The Building Inspector may
share such information with other applicants applying for
administrative approvals or permits under this article or other
organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the
Borough of Rutherford; provided, however, that the Building Inspector
is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
D. Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to
any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so
as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings.
§ 131-52.3 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-52.4
127:980
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
E. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the
FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
F. State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of
the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is
mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring
towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
G. Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable State of New Jersey
or the borough's building codes, and the applicable standards for
towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as
amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Borough of
Rutherford concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and
standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon
notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have
30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards.
Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense.
H. Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this article and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
I. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation
of a wireless communication system in the Borough of Rutherford have
been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the
administrative officer.
J. Public notice. For purposes of this article, any conditional use request,
variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved use or
conditional use shall require public notice to all abutting property
§ 131-52.4 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-52.4
127:981
§ 131-52.5. Towers and antennas not permitted uses. [Amended
11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 3166-08]
Towers and antennas shall not be permitted, except by conditional use
permit.
§ 131-52.6. Conditional use permits.
owners and all property owners of properties that are located within
200 feet of the property on which the wireless antennae is proposed, in
addition to any notice otherwise required by the Code of the Borough
of Rutherford or the New Jersey State Municipal Land Use Act.387
[Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 3193-09]
K. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
L. Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers should comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
M. Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Borough of Rutherford encourages
and mandates the owners of towers and antennas to collocate antennas.
Applications for approval of collocation sites shall be given priority in
the review process.
A. List of conditional uses. The following uses may be approved by the
Borough as conditional uses:
(1) Antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with the
terms of Subsection A(1) and (2) below:
(a) Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not
attached to a tower may be attached to any business,
industrial, office or institutional structure not located in a
residential zone, provided: [Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 3166-08]
[1] The antenna complies within all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
[2] The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
(b) Antennas on existing towers. An antenna may be attached to
an existing tower in a nonresidential zone, and, to minimize
adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and
clustering of towers, collocation of antennas by more than one
carrier on existing towers shall take precedence over the
construction of new towers, provided such collocation is
accomplished in a manner consistent with the following:
387. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 131-52.4 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-52.6
127:982
[1] A tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna
shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower,
unless the Building Inspector allows reconstruction as a
monopole.
[2] Height.
[a] An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller
height, not to exceed the maximum tower height
established by this article.
[b] The height change referred to in Subsection
A(1)(b)[2][a] may only occur one time per
communication tower.
[c] The additional height referred to in Subsection
A(1)(b)[2][a] shall not require an additional distance
separation as set forth in Subsection E. The tower's
premodification height shall be used to calculate such
distance separations.
[3] On-site location.
[a] A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna may be moved onsite
within 50 feet of its existing location.
[b] After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation,
only one tower may remain on the site.
[c] A relocated on-site tower shall continue to be
measured from the original tower location for
purposes of calculating separation distances between
towers. The relocation of a tower shall be subject to
site plan approval by the Planning Board.
(2) New towers. New monopoles may be constructed in a
nonresidential zone, subject to the conditions outlined in this
article, to hold antennas. Lattice towers and any type of guyed
towers are prohibited. In addition to any information required for
applicants for conditional use permits pursuant to this
chapter, applicants for a conditional use permit for a tower shall
submit the following information:
(a) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses, and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site and
all properties within the applicable separation distances set
forth herein, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access,
setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the
§ 131-52.6 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-52.6
127:983
proposed tower and other structures, topography, parking, and
other information deemed by the Building Inspector to be
necessary to assess compliance with this article.
(b) Legal description of the entire tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
(c) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties,
and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
(d) The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites shall be shown on an updated site
plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of
construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of
the existing towers(s), if known.
(e) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(f) Method of fencing, and finished color, and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
(g) A description of compliance with this article and all applicable
federal, State of New Jersey or borough ordinances.
(h) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
(i) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network
for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular
sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
(j) A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology not requiring the
use of towers or structures to provide the services to be
provided through the use of the proposed new tower.
(k) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Borough of Rutherford based upon
existing physical, engineering, technological or geographical
limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.
(l) A visual study depicting where, within a three-mile radius, any
portion of the proposed tower could be seen.
(m) A statement of intent on whether excess space will be leased.
B. Factors considered in granting conditional use permits for towers. In
addition to any standards or consideration of conditional use permit
applications pursuant to this chapter, the Planning Board shall consider
the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use
permit:
§ 131-52.6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-52.6
127:984
(1) Height of the proposed tower;
(2) Proximity of the tower to residential district boundaries;
(3) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(4) Surrounding topography;
(5) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(6) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
(7) Proposed ingress and egress;
(8) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures, as discussed in this article; and
(9) Availability of the proposed tower to other potential users.
C. Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or alternative
technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board that
no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not
require the use of towers or structures can accommodate the
applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information
requested by the Planning Board related to the availability of suitable
existing towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or
alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna may consist of any of the following:
(1) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area which meet applicant's engineering requirements.
(2) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
(3) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
(4) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures,
or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause
interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(5) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing
tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable.
§ 131-52.6 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-52.6
127:985
(6) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(7) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable
microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/
receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of
alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna
development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
D. Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers
for which a conditional use permit is required:
(1) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 100% of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line and all
nonappurtenant buildings.
(2) Guides and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements as set forth in this chapter.
(3) No tower shall exist within required buffer areas, if adjacent to
residential zones and as prescribed under local ordinance.
(4) The minimum tower setback from a residential zone district line
and from any school and from any site designated on the federal,
state or municipal historic register shall be 500 feet.
E. Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to all
towers and antennas for which a conditional use permit is required:
(1) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
(a) Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas.
(b) Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards set forth herein.
(2) Separation distances between towers. Separation distances
between towers shall be applicable for and measured between the
proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation distances
shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between
the base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a
site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation distances (listed in
linear feet) shall be 1,000 feet.
F. Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less
than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate
anticlimbing device.
G. Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding towers:
§ 131-52.6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-52.6
127:986
(1) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials
that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from
property used for residences or planned residences. The standard
buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide
outside the perimeter of the compound.
(2) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal,
the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
(3) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases,
such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around
the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
(4) Height. The maximum height of new towers shall be:
(a) For single user, up to 90 feet in height.
(b) For two users, up to 120 feet in height.
(c) For three or more users, up to 150 feet in height.
H. General requirements. The following provisions shall govern the
issuance of conditional use permits for towers or antennas by the
approving authority.
(1) A conditional use permit shall be required for the construction of a
tower or the placement of an antenna. [Amended 11-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 3166-08]
(2) Applications for conditional use permits under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of this chapter, except
as modified in this section.
(3) In granting a conditional use permit, the Planning Board may
impose conditions to the extent the Planning Board concludes such
conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed tower on adjoining properties.
(4) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified
by a licensed professional engineer.
(5) An applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit the
information described in this section and a nonrefundable
application fee and an escrow deposit as required by the Borough
of Rutherford Code for conditional use applications.
(6) Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional
buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with
said tower or antenna are permitted as conditional uses only in the
following zones. [Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 3166-08]
§ 131-52.6 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-52.6
127:987
§ 131-52.7. Buildings or other equipment storage.
(a) No towers or antennas shall be permitted as conditional uses in
a residential zone.
(7) An application fee and escrows shall be paid as required by the
Borough Code.
A. Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or
structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the
following:
(1) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100 square
feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in height. In
addition, for buildings and structures which are less than 40 feet in
height, the related unmanned equipment structure shall be located
on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
(2) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
(3) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
B. Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment cabinet
or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in
accordance with the following:
(1) In a front or side yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no
greater than six feet in height or 100 square feet of gross floor area
and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 75 feet from all
lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of at least 42 to 48 inches and a
planted height of at least 36 inches.
(2) In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than
eight feet in height or 120 square feet in gross floor area. The
cabinet structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 48
inches.
(3) In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from
view of all residential properties which abut or are directly across
the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence six feet in
height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet
and a planted height of at least 72 inches.
C. Antennas located on towers. The related unmanned equipment
structure shall not contain more than 200 square feet of gross floor area
or be more than 10 feet in height, and shall be located in accordance
§ 131-52.6 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-52.7
127:988
§ 131-52.8. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or
tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the
Borough of Rutherford notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure
to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be
grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there
are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower. The borough may condition
the issuance of any permit to demolish or remove a tower or antenna on
the posting of an appropriate performance bond or other suitable guarantee
in the face amount of not less than 120% of the cost (as determined by
the Planning Board Engineer) of such removal, grading and restoration to a
state required under all applicable Borough Ordinances, including but not
limited to Chapter 78, Property Maintenance.
§ 131-52.9. Existing towers.
Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas.
Nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may
not be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval or
a conditional use permit and without having to meet the separation
requirements specified herein. The type, height, and location of the tower
on-site shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility
approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then
applicable building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the
date the facility is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said
permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned.
§ 131-52.10. Technical consultants.
The Planning Board or Zoning Board may, as it deems appropriate, retain
technical consultants as it deems necessary to provide assistance in the
review of the site location alternatives analysis. The service provider shall
bear the reasonable cost associated with such consultation, which cost shall
be deposited in accordance with the borough's escrow policies.
§ 131-52.11. Site plan approval required.
Site plan approval by the Planning Board is required for the installation
of any wireless communications tower and/or antenna within the municipal
boundaries in all zoned districts. Each application shall include a site plan
showing the specific design, location, size and construction of the proposed
structure which shall comply in all respects with the standards enumerated
herein.
with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which
located.
§ 131-52.7 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-52.12
127:989
§ 131-52.12. Monitoring and maintenance.
§ 131-52.13. Terms and conditions to be binding.
This ordinance and all of its terms and conditions, including annual
reporting and continued maintenance, shall be binding upon the applicant,
coapplicant, any legal successor in interest, and the real party in interest.
A. After the wireless telecommunications facility is in operation, the
applicant shall submit, within 90 days of beginning operations, and at
annual intervals from the date of issuance of the building permit,
existing measurements of RFR from the wireless telecommunications
facility. Such measurements shall be signed and certified by a radio
frequency engineer, stating that FRF requirements are accurate and
meet FCC guidelines as specified in the radio frequency standards
section of this section.
B. The applicant and coapplicant shall maintain the wireless
telecommunications facility in good condition. Such maintenance shall
include, but not be limited to, painting, structural integrity of the mount
and security barrier, and maintenance of the buffer areas and
landscaping.
§ 131-52.12 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-52.13
127:990
ARTICLE X
Penalties
§ 131-53. Violations and penalties.
A. Penalties for violation of § 131-6E.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
§ 131-6E of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in any court
authorized by law to hear and determine the matter, be fined such
sum not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, as such court in its
discretion may impose, or, if the party so convicted is a natural
person, such person may be imprisoned for such term not
exceeding 90 days, as such court in its discretion may impose, or be
fined such sum not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, as such
court in its discretion may impose, or such natural person may be
both imprisoned and fined not exceeding the maximum limits set
forth herein, as such court in its discretion may impose.
(2) Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. Penalties for violation of all other sections of this chapter.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in any court authorized
by law to hear and determine the matter, be fined such sum not
exceeding $500, as such court in its discretion may impose, or, if
the party so convicted is a natural person, such person may be
imprisoned for such term not exceeding 90 days, as such court in
its discretion may impose, or be fined such sum not exceeding
$500, as such court in its discretion may impose, or such natural
person may be both imprisoned and fined not exceeding the
maximum limits set forth herein, as such court in its discretion may
impose.
(2) Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense.
(3) The owner of any building or structure, lot or land or part thereof,
and/or the tenant or occupant of any building or structure, lot or
land, or part thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter
shall be placed or shall exist or shall be suffered, allowed or
permitted to exist, and any architect, builder, developer, contractor,
agent, person or corporation engaged in connection therewith and
who assists in the commission of any such violation shall each be
guilty of a separate violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall
each be liable to the fine or imprisonment, or both, specified above.
C. Action instituted by the borough. In case any building or structure is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved or converted or
any building, structure or land is used in violation of or contrary to the
§ 131-53 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-53
127:991
provisions of this chapter, the borough may institute an action to enjoin
or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or use.
§ 131-53 RUTHERFORD CODE § 131-53
127:992
ARTICLE XI
Amendments
§ 131-54. Amendment procedure.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, in accordance with the
provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291, Section 49, of
the Laws of New Jersey 1975,388 and after public notice and hearing in
accordance with law, amend, supplement or change the regulations and
districts herein established and adopt rules and regulations for the purpose
of interpreting and carrying this chapter into effect.
388. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62.
§ 131-54 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-54
127:993

ARTICLE XII
Interpretation; Severability; Repealer; Title
§ 131-55. Interpretation.
§ 131-56. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase
or provision of this chapter shall for any reason be held unconstitutional
or invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the affected portion so
adjudged, and the remainder of this chapter shall be deemed valid and
effective.
§ 131-57. Repealer.
This chapter is a revision of Chapter 131389 of the Code of the Borough
of Rutherford, as amended through Ordinance No. 2134-73, and shall
supersede said Zoning Ordinance and the amendments and supplements
thereto, which are hereby repealed. The repeal of such ordinance or parts of
such ordinance shall not affect any act done, offense committed or liability,
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time such repeal
takes effect, and the same may be enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully
and to the same extent as if such repeal has not been effected.
§ 131-58. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Rutherford
Zoning Ordinance."
A. Interpretation of standards. The provisions of this chapter shall be held
to be minimum requirements. Where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by
other rules or resolutions, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
Where other laws, rules, regulations or resolutions require greater
restrictions than are imposed or required by this chapter, the provisions
of such other laws, rules, regulations or restrictions shall control.
B. Prohibited uses. All uses not expressly permitted in this chapter are
prohibited.
C. Time of compliance. All requirements shall be met at the time of the
erection, enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use of the
principal use and shall apply to the entire structure or structures,
whether or not the entire structure or structures were involved in the
erection, enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use.
389. Editor's Note: Former Ch. 131, Zoning, was adopted 12-19-1978 by Ord. No. 2246-78.
§ 131-55 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § 131-58
127:995
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2879-98 12-29-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2880-98 12-29-1998 Municipal Building parking
lot amendment
Ch. 61, Art. II
2881-98 12-29-1998 Abandoned or junked
vehicles amendment
Ch. 125
2882-98 12-29-1998 Playgrounds and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 73
2884-99 2-16-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
2885-99 3-16-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2886-99 3-16-1999 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 51
2887-99 3-16-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
2888-99 4-6-1999 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 68
2891-99 4-6-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2892-99 5-18-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
2894-99 6-8-1999 Tobacco products Ch. 116A
2896-99 6-22-1999 Numbering of buildings and
lots amendment
Ch. 63A
2899-99 7-13-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
2900-99 7-13-1999 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 22
2904-99 8-10-1999 Personnel policies and
procedures amendment
Ch. 70
2906-99 8-10-1999 Length of service award
program
Ch. 51A
2907-99 8-10-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
2907A-99 9-8-1999 Purchasing repealer Ch. 81
§ 131-58 RUTHERFORD CODE § DL-1
127:996
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2908-99 9-8-1999 Borough Treasurer repealer Ch. 4, Art. IX
2909-99 9-8-1999 Finance Department Ch. 31A
2910-99 9-8-1999 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 68
2911-98 9-8-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2913-99 10-5-1999 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
2915-99 10-19-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2916-99 10-19-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2918-99 11-23-1999 Fire Department amendment Repealed by Ord.
2991-01
2922-99 12-21-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2924-00 2-15-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2925-00 2-15-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2926-00 2-15-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2928-00 3-21-2000 Finance Department
amendment
Ch. 31A
2929-00 3-21-2000 Purchasing Ch. 81
2930-00 3-21-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2931-00 3-21-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2932-00 4-18-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2933-00 4-18-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2934-00 5-16-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2939-00 7-11-2000 Tax exemption for
commercial and industrial
improvements repealed
Ch. 112, Art. V
§ DL-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § DL-1
127:997
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2940-00 7-11-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2941-00 7-11-2000 Sports equipment
prohibition in roadways
Ch. 106A
2942-00 7-11-2000 Board of Recreation
Commissioners repealed
Ch. 17, Editor's
Note only
2944-00 8-8-2000 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 7
2945-00 8-8-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2946-00 9-5-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2952-00 10-17-2000 Fire Department amendment Repealed by Ord.
2991-01
2953-00 11-21-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2954-00 11-21-2000 Rent control amendment Ch. 83A
2958-01 2-20-2001 Filming Ch. 34
2959-01 2-20-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2960-01 3-20-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2963-01 4-18-2001 Fire safety amendment Ch. 34A
2964-01 5-1-2001 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 76
2966-01 5-15-2001 Sale of municipal property Ch. 61A
2967-01 5-15-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2968-01 5-15-2001 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 7
2969-01 5-15-2001 Zoning amendment: wireless
telecommunications towers
Ch. 131
2972-01 6-19-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2975-01 7-10-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2978-01 7-10-2001 Fire safety amendment Ch. 34A
2984-01 10-16-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
§ DL-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § DL-1
127:998
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2985-01 10-16-2001 Fire Department amendment Repealed by
2991-01
2986-01 10-16-2001 Special improvement
districts amendment
Repealed by
3402-16
2987-01 10-16-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2989-01 11-20-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2990-01 12-4-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
2991-01 12-18-2001 Fire Department Ch. 33
2992-01 12-18-2001 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
2995-01 12-18-2001 Fire lanes or zones Ch. 35
2996-01 12-18-2001 Special improvement
districts: Park Avenue
Business Improvement
District amendment
Repealed by
3402-16
2997-01 12-18-2001 Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapies
Ch. 55
3000-02 3-26-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3001-02 3-26-2002 Obscene materials Ch. 64A
3002-02 3-26-2002 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
3003-02 4-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3004-02 4-23-2002 Personnel policies and
practices amendment
Ch. 70
3005-02 4-3-2002 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 22
3009-02 7-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3010-02 7-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3013-02 8-27-2002 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
3014-02 8-27-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
§ DL-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § DL-1
127:999
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
BH 2-02 11-25-2002 Food handlers training Ch. 36B
3016-02 12-17-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3017-02 12-17-2002 Towing amendment Ch. 117
3018-02 12-17-2002 Rent control amendment Ch. 83A
3019-03 2-25-2003 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
3020-03 3-25-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3021-03 3-25-2003 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 7
3022-03 5-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3023-03 5-27-2003 Parks, playgrounds, open
spaces and recreation areas
Ch. 73
3024-03 7-22-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3026-03 8-26-2003 Hotel and motel room
occupancy tax
Ch. 112, Art. V
3027-03 9-23-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3031-03 10-28-2003 Fire Department amendment Ch. 33
3032-03 10-21-2003 Special improvement
districts: Park Avenue
Business Improvement
District amendment
Repealed by
3402-16
3033-03 10-10-2003 Rent control amendment Ch. 83A
3034-03 11-25-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3035-03 11-25-2003 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 51
3036-03 12-16-2003 Municipal Building parking
lot amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment
Chs. 61, Art. II;
126
3041-04 6-22-2004 Street vacation NCM
3042-04 6-22-2004 Street acceptance NCM
3044-04 5-25-2004 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 7
§ DL-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § DL-1
127:1000
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3047-04 8-24-2004 Municipal building parking
lot amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 61, Art II; Ch.
126
3048-04 8-24-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3051-04 9-28-2004 Playgrounds and recreation
areas amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 3058-04
3056-04 11-23-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3057-04 11-23-2004 Municipal Court amendment Ch. 60
3058-04 11-23-2004 Playgrounds and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 73
3059-04 11-23-2004 Rent control amendment Ch. 83A
3062-04 9-14-2004 Cat licensing amendment;
dogs and kennels
amendment; Police
Department: fees for
services amendment
Ch. 20A; Ch. 26;
Ch. 76, Art. III
BH1-04 9-27-2004 Food establishments:
licensing amendment
Ch. 36A, Art. I
BH2-04 9-27-2004 Food handlers training
amendment
Ch. 36B
BH3-04 10-25-2004 Sanitary code amendment Ch. 89
3064-04 12-14-2004 Fire Department amendment Ch. 33
3065-04 12-14-2004 Fire safety amendment Ch. 34A
3066-04 12-14-2004 Playgrounds and recreation
areas amendment
Ch. 73
3067-04 12-14-2004 Recycling amendment Ch. 82A
3071-05 3-22-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3075-05 3-22-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3076-05 4-26-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3079-05 5-24-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3080-05 6-28-2005 Length of Service Awards
Program amendment
Ch. 51A
§ DL-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § DL-1
127:1001
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3083-05 7-26-2005 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 37
3084-05 7-26-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3085-05 8-23-2005 Fire Department amendment Ch. 33
3089-05 9-29-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3092-05 10-18-2005 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 51
3093-05 10-25-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3096-05 11-29-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3101-06 2-28-2006 Administrative offices:
Borough Administrator
amendment
Ch. 4, Art. VIII
3103-06 2-21-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3104-06 2-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3105-06 2-28-2006 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 113
3111-06 5-2-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3112-06 5-2-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3113-06 5-23-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3116-06 7-25-2006 Bicycles amendment Ch. 12
3118-06 8-22-2006 Municipal property and
grounds: municipal building
parking lot amendment;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Chs. 61, Art. II;
126
3119-06 8-22-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3120-06 9-26-2006 Dogs and kennels
amendment
Ch. 26
3122-06 10-24-2006 Taxicabs amendment;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Chs. 113; 126
§ DL-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § DL-1
127:1002
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3123-06 11-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3124-06 11-28-2006 Rent control amendment Ch. 83A
3125-06 11-28-2006 State stormwater
management control;
Borough stormwater
management amendment
Chs. 107A; 107B
3126-06 11-28-2006 Deposit and removal of
materials amendment
Ch. 56
3127-06 12-19-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3128-07 3-27-2007 Feeding of pigeons repealer;
stormwater management
control: feeding of wildlife
Ch. 72, reference
only; Ch. 107C
3130-07 3-27-2007 Uniform construction codes
amendment; streets and
sidewalks: use of streets
amendment
Chs. 22; 109, Art.
II
3131-07 5-1-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3132-07 5-1-2007 Police Department: fees for
services amendment
Ch. 76, Art. III
3134-07 5-1-2007 Special improvement
districts: Park Avenue
Business Improvement
District amendment
Repealed by
3402-16
3139-07 5-22-2007 Convenience stores Ch. 22A
3140-07 8-28-2007 Dogs, pets, animals and
kennels amendment;
littering amendment;
recycling, yard waste and
food packaging amendment
Chs. 26; 53; 82A
3141-07 6-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3142-07 6-19-2007 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 7
3143-07 7-24-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3145-07 10-23-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
§ DL-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § DL-1
127:1003
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3146-07 11-27-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3147-07 12-18-2007 Salaries NCM
3148-07 12-18-2007 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 91
3150-08 3-25-2008 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
3152-08 3-25-2008 Marriage and civil union
ceremonies: fees
Ch. 54A, Art. I
3153-08 4-29-2008 Personnel policies and
practices amendment
Ch. 70
3156-08 6-24-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3157-08 6-24-2008 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 91
3158-08 6-24-2008 Streets and sidewalks: use of
streets amendment
Ch. 109, Art. II
3159-08 6-24-2008 Playgrounds, parks, open
spaces and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 73
3161-08 8-26-2008 Boardinghouses and lodging
houses repealer
Ch. 14 (reference
only)
3162-08 8-26-2008 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 68
3163-08 9-23-2008 Recycling, yard waste and
food packaging amendment
Ch. 82A
3164-08 11-10-2008 Registration of landscapers
and landscaping services
Ch. 82B
3165-08 11-10-2008 Fire Department amendment Ch. 33
3166-08 11-10-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3171-08 11-25-2008 Sanitary sewers amendment Ch. 91
3172-08 11-25-2008 Renewal of cable television
and communications
agreement (Comcast)
NCM
3174-08 12-16-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3175-08 12-16-2008 Rent control amendment Ch. 83A
3176-08 12-16-2008 Length of service award
program amendment
Ch. 51A
3180-09 3-24-2009 Recycling amendment Ch. 82A
§ DL-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § DL-1
127:1004
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3181-09 4-28-2009 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 7
3182-09 5-26-2009 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 113
3183-09 5-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3186-09 8-25-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3187-09 8-25-2009 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
3188-09 9-22-2009 Special improvement
districts: Park Avenue
Business Improvement
District amendment
Repealed by
3402-16
3189-09 10-27-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3191-09 10-27-2009 Administrative Code Ch. 5
3192-09 11-23-2009 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 51
3193-09 11-23-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3196-10 2-23-2010 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 5
3199-10 4-27-2010 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 7
3200-10 4-27-2010 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 113
3201-10 4-27-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3202-10 4-27-2010 Playgrounds, parks, open
spaces and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 73
3203-10 5-25-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3204-10 5-25-2010 Fire safety amendment Ch. 34A
3205-10 7-27-2010 Taxes: fee for redemption
calculations
Ch. 112, Art. VI
3211-10 10-26-2010 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
3213-10 11-23-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
§ DL-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § DL-1
127:1005
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3214-10 11-23-2010 Regulation of streets and
sidewalks amendment
Ch. 109, Art. I
3216-10 12-28-2010 Fire safety amendment Ch. 34A
3217-10 12-28-2010 Rent control amendment Ch. 83A
3218-10 12-28-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3219-11 2-22-2011 Borough Clerk and Deputy
Clerk
Ch. 4, Art. IX
3221-11 2-22-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3225-11 4-26-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3226-11 4-26-2011 Towing amendment Ch. 117
3229-11 6-28-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3230-11 6-28-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3231-11 6-28-2011 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 51
3232-11 7-26-2011 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 5
3233-11 7-26-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3236-11 9-13-2011 Awarding of public contracts Ch. 22B, Art. I
3238-11 10-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3239-11 10-25-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3240-11 11-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3241-11 12-13-2011 Street openings amendment Ch. 109, Art. III
3242-11 12-13-2011 Position of police aide NCM
3243-11 12-13-2011 Position of Clerk 1 NCM
3246-12 2-14-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3247-12 2-14-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3251-12 3-27-2012 Miscellaneous stormwater
management: private storm
drain inlet retrofitting
Ch. 107D, Art. I
§ DL-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § DL-1
127:1006
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3252-12 3-27-2012 Water pollution: dumpsters
and other refuse containers
Ch. 129, Art. II
3253-12 3-27-2012 Garbage, rubbish and refuse
amendment
Ch. 40
3255-12 4-10-2012 Newsracks Ch. 62
3256-12 5-8-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3257-12 5-21-2012 Donation clothing bins Ch. 27
3258-12 5-21-2012 Streets and sidewalks: street
openings amendment
Ch. 109, Art. III
3262-12 6-26-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3264-12 7-10-2012 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
3265-12 8-14-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3266-12 8-28-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3267-12 8-28-2012 Recreation Department
amendment
Ch. 83
3268-12 9-11-2012 Graffiti Ch. 41
3269-12 9-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3270-12 10-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3271-12 9-25-2012 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
3272-12 9-25-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3273-12 9-25-2012 Loitering amendment Ch. 54
3274-12 10-23-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3276-12 12-11-2012 Recreation Department
amendment
Ch. 83
3278-12 12-11-2012 Rent control amendment Ch. 83A
3281-13 3-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3283-13 3-26-2013 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
§ DL-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § DL-1
127:1007
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3284-13 4-9-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3285-13 4-9-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3286-13 4-9-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3288-13 5-14-2013 Playgrounds, parks, open
spaces and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 73
3289-13 5-14-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3290-13 5-28-2013 Police Department: fees for
services amendment
Ch. 76, Art. III
3291-13 5-28-2013 Solicitors, peddlers and
canvassers amendment
Ch. 105
3296-13 6-11-2013 Grease traps Ch. 43
3297-13 7-9-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3298-13 7-9-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3299-13 7-9-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3300-13 7-9-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3301-13 7-23-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3302-13 7-23-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3305-13 8-12-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3306-13 9-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3307-13 9-24-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3309-13 10-22-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3310-13 10-22-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3311-13 10-22-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
§ DL-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § DL-1
127:1008
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3314-13 11-26-2013 Municipal property and
grounds: Municipal Building
parking lot amendment
Ch. 61, Art. II
3315-13 11-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3318-14 3-11-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3322-14 4-8-2014 Fire Department amendment Ch. 33
3323-14 4-8-2014 Police Department: dress
and uniforms amendment
Ch. 76, Art. II
3325-14 4-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3326-14 4-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3327-14 4-22-2014 Firefighter auxiliary
program, junior
Ch. 33A
3329-14 5-27-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3330-14 5-27-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3331-14 6-25-2014 Fire Department amendment Ch. 33
3333-14 7-8-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3334-14 8-26-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3335-14 8-26-2014 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 7
3336-14 8-26-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3338-14 9-9-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3339-14 9-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3340-14 10-14-2014 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 51
3341-14 10-28-2014 Fire Department amendment Ch. 33
3342-14 10-28-2014 Municipal property and
grounds amendment
Ch. 61
§ DL-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § DL-1
127:1009
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3343-14 10-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3344-14 11-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3345-14 11-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3346-14 11-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3347-14 11-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3349-14 12-22-2014 Rent control amendment Ch. 83A
3351-15 2-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3352-15 2-23-2015 Deposit and removal of
materials amendment
Ch. 56
3354-15 3-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3355-15 3-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3356-15 3-23-2015 Disability Act Advisory
Committee
Ch. 25
3357-15 4-13-2015 Playgrounds, parks, open
spaces and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 73
3358-15 4-13-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3359-15 4-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3360-15 4-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3361-15 4-13-2015 Commercial property
maintenance amendment
Ch. 21A
3362-15 4-27-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3363-15 4-27-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3364-15 4-27-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3365-15 4-27-2015 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 51
§ DL-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § DL-1
127:1010
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3367-15 5-11-2015 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 51
3372-15 7-13-2015 Tobacco products
amendment
Ch. 116A
3375-15 9-10-2015 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 51
3376-15 9-28-2015 Deposit and removal of
materials amendment
Ch. 56
3377-15 9-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3378-15 9-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3379-15 11-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3380-15 11-23-2015 Garbage, rubbish and refuse
amendment
Ch. 40
3382-15 12-14-2015 Disability Act Advisory
Committee amendment
Ch. 25
3383-15 12-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3384-15 12-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3385-15 12-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3386-15 12-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3387-16 1-25-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3388-16 2-8-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3389-16 2-22-2016 Administrative offices:
Executive Secretary
Ch. 4, Art. XI
3391-16 3-14-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3392-16 3-14-2016 Shade Tree Commission Ch. 95
3396-16 6-1-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3398-16 6-13-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
§ DL-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § DL-1
127:1011
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3400-16 8-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3401-16 8-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3402-16 9-12-2016 Special improvement
districts repealer
Ch. 105A,
reference only
3403-16 9-12-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 131
3404-16 9-12-2016 Merchants and Rutherford
Business District licenses
amendment
Ch. 57
3405-16 9-12-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3406-16 9-12-2016 Land use procedures
amendment; municipal
property and grounds:
municipal building parking
lot amendment
Ch. 51; Ch. 61,
Art. II
3408-16 11-28-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3410-16 12-27-2016 Rent control amendment Ch. 83A
3412-17 2-27-2017 Police Department: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
3414-17 2-27-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3415-17 2-27-2017 Precious metals and
secondhand goods
Ch. 77A
3416-17 3-13-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3417-17 3-27-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3421-17 5-8-2017 Fire Department amendment Ch. 33
3422-17 5-8-2017 Playgrounds, parks, open
spaces and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 73
3423-17 5-8-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3427-17 8-14-2017 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 51
3428-17 8-28-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
§ DL-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § DL-1
127:1012
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3432-17 9-25-2017 Towing amendment Ch. 117
3434-17 10-23-2017 Playgrounds, parks, open
spaces and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 73
3435-17 11-13-2017 Municipal property and
grounds: municipal building
parking lot amendment
Ch. 61, Art. II
3437-17 11-27-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3438-17 12-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 126
3441-17 12-26-2017 Administrative offices:
Borough Administrator
amendment
Ch. 4, Art. VIII
3442-18 1-23-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126
3447-18 2-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126
3448-18 2-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126
3449-18 2-27-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 131
3450-18 2-27-2018 Garbage, Rubbish and
Refuse Amendment
Ch. 40
3451-18 2-27-2018 Solicitors, Peddlers and
Canvassers Amendment
Ch. 105
3453-18 3-13-2018 Garbage, Rubbish and
Refuse Amendment
Ch. 40
3457-18 4-24-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126
3458-18 4-24-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126
3462-18 5-22-2018 Playgrounds, Parks, Open
Spaces and Recreation Areas
Amendment
Ch. 73
3464-18 6-26-2018 Administrative Code
Amendment
Ch. 5
3465-18 6-26-2018 Purchasing Amendment Ch. 81
3466-18 7-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126
§ DL-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § DL-1
127:1013
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
3467-18 7-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126
3469-18 7-24-2018 Personnel Policies and
Practices Amendment
Ch. 70
3470-18 8-14-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126
3471-18 8-14-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 126
3472-18 8-14-2018 Fire Department Amendment Ch. 33
3473-18 9-11-2018 Short-Term Rental Property Ch. 96A
3474-18 9-11-2018 Abandoned or Junked
Vehicles Amendment
Ch. 125
3477-18 10-23-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126
3479-18 12-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126
3480-18 12-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126
3481-18 12-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126
3482-18 12-11-2018 Municipal Property and
Grounds: Municipal Building
Parking Lot Amendment
Ch. 61, Art. II
3483-18 12-11-2018 Junior Firefighter Auxiliary
Program Amendment
Ch. 33A
3484-18 12-11-2018 Rent Control Amendment Ch. 83A
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
3485-19 1-28-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126 27
3486-19 1-28-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126 27
§ DL-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § DL-1
127:1014
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
3487-19 2-11-2019 Board of
Health:
Composition
and
Appointment
of Members
Amendment
Ch. 16, Art. I 27
3488-19 2-11-2019 Board of
Health:
Schedule of
Fees
Amendment
Ch. 16, Art. II 27
3489-19 2-11-2019 Administrative
Code
Amendment
Ch. 5 27
3490-19 2-11-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126 27
3492-19 2-25-2019 Playgrounds,
Parks, Open
Spaces and
Recreation
Areas
Amendment
Ch. 73 27
3494-19 7-15-2019 Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 131 27
3495-19 4-22-2019 Redevelopment
Plan
NCM 27
3496-19 4-22-2019 Redevelopment
Plan
NCM 27
3500-19 5-13-2019 Massage,
Bodywork
and Somatic
Therapies
Amendment
Ch. 55 27
3501-19 5-28-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126 27
§ DL-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § DL-1
127:1015
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
3502-19 5-28-2019 Municipal
Property and
Grounds:
Municipal
Building
Parking Lot
Amendment;
Memorial
Field Parking
Lot
Amendment;
Additional
Provisions
Applicable to
Parking Lots
Amendment
Ch. 61, Art.
II; Ch. 61,
Art. III; Ch.
61, Art. IV
27
3504-19 6-10-2019 Administrative
Offices:
Executive
Secretary
Repealer
Ch. 4, Art. XI,
reference
only
27
3505-19 8-12-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126 27
3506-19 8-12-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126 27
3507-19 8-12-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126 27
3508-19 8-12-2019 Towing
Amendment
Ch. 117 27
3509-19 8-12-2019 Land Use
Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 51 27
3510-19 8-12-2019 Flood
Damage
Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 37 27
3511-19 9-9-2019 Short-Term
Rental
Property
Amendment
Ch. 96A,
footnote only
27
§ DL-1 RUTHERFORD CODE § DL-1
127:1016
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
3512-19 9-23-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126 27
3513-19 10-15-2019 Towing
Amendment
Ch. 117 27
3514-19 12-9-2019 Recycling
Amendment
Ch. 82A 27
3515-19 12-9-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126 27
3516-19 12-9-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 126 27
§ DL-1 VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS § DL-1
127:1017