Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 106-2005]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of River Vale
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Council of the
Township of River Vale, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters
1 through 245, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of River Vale,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1967 Code and all general
and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code,
except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of River Vale by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of River
Vale" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of River Vale, pursuant to law, shall this Adopting
Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be
maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting
Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Township Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
of River Vale to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,250 or imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days,
in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 RIVER VALE CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which
are inconsistent with the any provision in the Code are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency as of the effective date of this Adopting
Ordinance.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 11-22-2004.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Township's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. General penalty.
Unless otherwise provided in the Code or by statute, anyone violating any
section of the Code of the Township of River Vale shall be subject, upon
conviction, to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $1,250 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-15. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature changes: Throughout the Code the following
nomenclature changes have been made:
(1) Magistrate to Judge.
(2) Court Clerk to Court Administrator.
(3) Dog Licensing Official to Animal Control Officer.
(4) Animal Warden to Animal Control Officer.
(5) Building Inspector to Construction Code Official in Chs. 73 and
123.
(6) Executive Health Officer to Health Officer in Ch. 152.
(7) Superintendent or Supervisor of Roads to Director of Roads in Ch.
214, Art. I.
C. Throughout the Code, statutory references have been updated or
revised to the current citation. Consolidated (N.J.S.A.) references have
been added to unconsolidated (P.L.) where appropriate.
§ 1-13 RIVER VALE CODE § 1-15
1:6
D. The following penalty sections have been revised (or added) so that
they refer to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14: 45-11,
57-10, 61-4B, 61-13, 61-33, 61-36, 70-4, 73-6, 90-6E, 93-7, 112-16,
123-11, 128-6, 138-9, 142-73, 142-142,142-163, 142-176, 142-190,
142-212, 142-220A, 142-241, 142-253A, 142-306D, 146-4, 152-20,
159-3, 166-12, 166-15A, 166-30, 170-8, 174-7, 178-7, 181-17, 186-12A,
193-6, 197-4, 203-18, 210-5, 214-4, 214-33, 214-39, 233-3, 241-7,
245-5, 142-27H(2), 212-1.
E. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-15E, the chapters, articles and sections which were
amended or added by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by footnotes or
chapter histories referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes and histories indicating amendments and additions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added) 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 106-2005."
Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 10.
Board of Health — See Ch. 21.
Fire Department — See Ch. 17.
Police Department — See Ch. 33.
Police Reserve — See Ch. 36.
Personnel policies — See Ch. A251.
§ 1-15 RIVER VALE CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 3-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "River Vale Administrative Code."
§ 3-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances pertaining hereto, except as the context may otherwise
require, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Business Administrator appointed pursuant to the
Charter and this Code or any Deputy or Acting Administrator temporarily
serving in place of the Business Administrator.
CHARTER — Mayor-Council Plan E of the Optional Municipal Charter Law,
hereinafter "OMCL," and all applicable provisions of the general law.2
CLERK or TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Municipal Clerk appointed by the
Council.
COUNCIL — The governing body of the Township exercising the legislative
power of the municipality as set forth in the Charter.
DEPARTMENT — The basic organizational unit of the Township government
established as such pursuant to this Administrative Code.
DIRECTOR — The administrative head of a department.
MAYOR — The chief executive officer of the Township exercising the
executive powers of the municipality as set forth in the Charter.
MONTH — A calendar month, unless otherwise specifically provided.
RESOLUTION — An action expressing the sense or will of the Council on
a matter of special or temporary interest, which shall be written and may
be adopted at the meeting at which it is introduced, without publication or
public hearing.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of River Vale.
YEAR — A calendar year, unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 3-3. Construction and word usage.
For the purpose of this Administrative Code and any other ordinances or
resolutions heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context may
otherwise require:
2. Editor's Note: The Mayor-Council Plan E form of government, under N.J.S.A. 40:69A-68 et
seq., was repealed by L. 1981, c. 465. N.J.S.A. 40:69A-208.1 allows municipalities which
adopted the Mayor-Council Plan E form of government prior to January 9, 1982, to
continue to be governed by the plan.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:9
§ 3-4. Interpretation.
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future
includes the present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
C. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
D. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day, and if the last day is
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
F. "Writing" and "written" mean any visual mode of reproducing words or
numbers on paper or similar material that is in general use.
A. It is the intent of Council in enacting this Administrative Code to
exercise fully the powers delegated by the Charter to organize and
regulate the Township's internal affairs, and the provisions of this code
shall be construed liberally to that end.
B. This Administrative Code shall be interpreted and administered so as to
maintain the separation of legislative and administrative powers as
provided in the Charter.
§ 3-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 3-4
1:10
ARTICLE II
Clerk and Deputy Clerk
§ 3-5. Appointment, term and compensation. [Amended 4-11-2005
by Ord. No. 106-2005]
The Council shall appoint a Clerk qualified by education and experience
in office management or business administration to serve for three years
from January 1 of the year in which appointed and to receive an annual
salary as provided in the Salary Ordinance. No person shall be appointed
or reappointed as a Clerk unless that person holds a registered municipal
clerk certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.3 or 40A:9-133.4.
§ 3-6. Duties. [Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 106-2005]
The Clerk shall be Clerk of the Council shall have the powers and duties
enumerated in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133, shall provide such stenographic and
other staff services as the members shall require, shall select subordinate
personnel, with advice and consent of Council, to such positions as Council
may authorize and shall:
A. Attend all Council meetings, including work sessions.
B. Provide for the taking of and preparation of appropriate minutes of all
Council meetings.
C. Compile, index and preserve all ordinances, resolutions, contracts,
minutes and other documents and papers to which the Township is a
party and which require retention as public records.
D. Prepare agendas for all Council meetings and send copies of all
pertinent materials in advance of work sessions to Council members
and members-elect, the Mayor and Business Administrator and other
affected Township officials.
E. Prepare and publish notices, ordinances and other matters as required
by Charter or general law in sufficient number to meet requirements of
the public.
F. Have custody of the Township Seal and affix it to appropriate
documents without charge.
G. Issue licenses.
H. Perform such other duties as Council may assign and as are prescribed
by general law and Charter.
I. The Township Clerk is authorized to approve the granting of raffle and
bingo licenses to be held in the Township of River Vale. [Added
11-11-2019 by Ord. No. 360-2019]
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7
1:11
§ 3-7. Compilation of ordinances and resolutions.
Beginning with January 1979, the Clerk shall compile and index all
ordinances and resolutions adopted during the year and shall obtain
sufficient copies of each to satisfy normal public demand. At the close of
each year, the Clerk shall index and bind the originals of all ordinances and
resolutions and preserve them as permanent public records. The Clerk may
also provide for codification of ordinances, with assistance of the Township
Attorney and within available budgeted resources.
§ 3-8. Fees for services and copies of records.
The Clerk shall charge and receive for use of the Township such fees
for searches, transcripts and copies of official records as Council shall
authorize by resolution.
§ 3-8.1. Deputy Township Clerk. [Added 1-22-2007 by Ord. No.
173-2007]
A. Establishment of position. There is hereby created in and for the
Township of River Vale the position of Deputy Township Clerk.
B. Compensation. The Deputy Township Clerk shall be paid such salary or
compensation as shall be set forth by the Township Council in its annual
Salary Ordinance.
C. Appointment. The Deputy Township Clerk shall be appointed through
the nomination of the Council President and confirmed by a majority of
the members of the Council.
D. Powers and duties. The Deputy Township Clerk shall have all the
powers of the Township Clerk and shall perform the functions and
duties of such office at the direction of the Township Clerk and New
Jersey State statutes.
§ 3-7 RIVER VALE CODE § 3-8.1
1:12
ARTICLE III
Administrative Branch
§ 3-9. Composition; Mayor; agencies and committees.
§ 3-10. Organization and reorganization. [Amended 4-11-2005 by
Ord. No. 106-2005]
The Mayor may approve the organization and reorganization of
departments, offices and agencies on recommendation of the head thereof
and subject to available appropriations, provided that any plan calling for
changes in the number of departments, divisions or in personnel strength or
the classification and pay of employees shall be submitted to Council at least
14 days prior to a regular meeting. Council may, by way of resolution at the
next regular meeting, approve or reject the plan or return it for revision.
Failure by Council to act at that meeting shall constitute approval, and the
plan may then be adopted at once.
§ 3-11. Department directors.
A. The administrative branch shall consist of the Office of the Mayor, the
Department of Administration and Finance under his direction and
control, designated independent of quasi-independent agencies and
advisory boards and commissions. The departments and offices subject
to mayoral direction shall be the Department of Administration and
Finance, the Department of Police, the Department of Public Works, the
Department of Law, the Department of Engineering, the Department of
Athletics and the Department of Social and Cultural Affairs. [Amended
4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 106-2005]
B. The independent, quasi-independent and advisory agencies shall be:
(1) The Board of Library Trustees.
(2) The Youth Guidance Council.
(3) The Shade Tree Commission.
(4) The Local Assistance Board.
(5) The Planning Board.
(6) The Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. The above-recited independent, quasi-independent and advisory
agencies shall be continued in accordance with appropriate law and
ordinance.
D. All committees, unless otherwise provided for, shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of Council, but this provision shall
not be deemed to preclude either the Mayor or Council from separately
appointing their own committees.
§ 3-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11
1:13
§ 3-12. Employees.
Each department, office and agency shall have such employees as Council
may authorize. Employees shall be appointed and may be removed pursuant
to Charter and Township personnel rules and shall be paid in accordance
with the annual Salary Ordinance.
A. Appointment, term and compensation. The Mayor shall appoint the
Directors of all departments, with advice and consent of Council, to
serve during his term and until appointment and qualification of his
successor. Their compensation shall be as provided in the annual Salary
Ordinance.
B. Removal. In accordance with the authority set forth in Section 43(c) of
the OMCL, the Mayor may remove the Directors, subject to disapproval
by Council.
C. Powers and duties. The Director:
(1) Shall appoint subordinate officers and employees within his
department and may, with the approval of the Mayor, remove such
officers and employees.
(2) Shall plan and supervise the work of the department.
(3) Shall assign and may modify the functions and duties of
subordinates.
(4) May delegate to subordinate employees in writing such supervisory
powers as he may deem necessary for efficient administration.
(5) Shall report at least monthly to the Mayor and Council on the work
of his department in such form as the Business Administrator, the
Mayor and Council shall specify.
(6) Shall authorize all purchase requisitions or provide for their
authorization and shall certify the correctness and propriety of all
payrolls and vouchers or provide the certification.
(7) Shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Mayor,
Business Administrator or Council.
§ 3-11 RIVER VALE CODE § 3-12
1:14
ARTICLE IV
Department of Administration and Finance
§ 3-13. Director.
The Department of Administration and Finance shall be headed by the
Business Administrator who shall administer and supervise all Township
administrative functions and enforce all Township policies.
§ 3-14. Business Administrator.
§ 3-15. Functions.
The Department of Administration and Finance shall have the following
functions:
A. Appointment, term and compensation. The Mayor shall appoint a
Business Administrator, with advice and consent of Council, to serve
during his/her term of office and until the appointment and qualification
of a successor.
B. Qualifications. The Business Administrator shall be a college graduate
with previous municipal experience in a responsible administrative or
executive capacity. At the time of appointment he need not be a resident
of the Township of River Vale, but during his tenure may reside outside
the Township with Council approval.
C. Powers and duties. Under the direction and supervision of the Mayor,
the Business Administrator shall:
(1) Supervise and coordinate the administration of all departments,
divisions and offices of the Township government, in accordance
with written delegation of authority by the Mayor.
(2) Prescribe and enforce rules for efficient management and
operation of the Township government and for administrative
reporting to the Mayor and Council.
(3) Plan and direct the work of the Department of Administration and
Finance.
(4) Direct the preparation and administration of the annual operating
and capital budgets and maintain a continuing review and analysis
of budget operations, work programs and costs.
(5) Report periodically to the Mayor and Council on administration of
the government, including notable efficiencies, economies and
savings.
(6) Perform such other duties as the Mayor may prescribe or as may
follow from functions prescribed by Council for the Department of
Administration and Finance.
§ 3-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-15
1:15
A. Central services, including budget, purchasing and personnel.
B. Treasury and collections. The Treasurer is hereby designated Chief
Financial Officer and shall be appointed and certified in accordance
with state statute and regulation. The Chief Financial Officer may also
serve as Tax Collector, with proper certification, or there shall be a
separate certified Tax Collector. [Amended 2-23-1989 by Ord. No.
0-3-89; 8-26-1999 by Ord. No. 0-16-99]
C. Assessment.
D. Health, vital statistics and Advisory Health Board.
E. Local assistance and Local Assistance Board, to be established in
accordance with general law and ordinance.
F. Code enforcement. [Amended 2-23-1995 by Ord. No. 0-2-95]
(1) There shall be a Zoning Officer, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor, to serve a one-year term. This official shall have the
following duties and responsibilities:
(a) Review all building permit and change of use applications
submitted to the Construction Code Official for compliance
with Township zoning3 and issue denials when not in
compliance.
(b) Enforcement of the Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 181).
(c) Consultation with residents requesting information on zoning
regulations and functions of the Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall have the right to enter any building or
promises, pursuant to law, during reasonable daytime hours in the
course of his duties. He shall have full enforcement powers of any
and all zoning regulations, including the authority to issue
summonses, pursuant to the Code, returnable in the Municipal
Court.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall receive such salary as set by the Township
Council and shall have such work hours as determined by the
Business Administrator. His office shall be part of the Construction
Code Official's office.
(4) Those sections of the Property Maintenance Code and the Zoning
Code which provide for enforcement are hereby amended to show
the Zoning Officer as enforcement officer.
G. Civil defense.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 142, Land Use.
§ 3-15 RIVER VALE CODE § 3-16
1:16
§ 3-16. Organization.
The division shall be organized pursuant to plan approved as provided in
Article III, § 3-10.
§ 3-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-16
1:17

ARTICLE V
Department of Police
§ 3-17. Director.
The Department of Police shall be headed by a Director who shall be
qualified by training and experience.
§ 3-18. Functions.
The Department of Police shall perform all appropriate functions associated
with:
§ 3-19. Organization.
The Department of Police shall be organized pursuant to plan approved as
provided in Article III, § 3-10.
A. Maintaining all aspects of police protection and traffic control,
including school crossing guards.
B. Supervising animal control activities.
C. Operating a centralized radio communications system.
§ 3-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-19
1:19

ARTICLE VI
Department of Public Works
§ 3-20. Director.
The Department of Public Works shall be headed by a Director who shall be
qualified by training and experience.
§ 3-21. Functions.
The Department of Public Works shall perform all appropriate functions
associated with:
§ 3-22. Organization.
The Department of Public Works shall be organized pursuant to plan
approved as provided in Article III, § 3-10.
A. Maintaining, constructing and reconstructing streets, roads and
drainage facilities.
B. Maintaining public buildings and grounds, including parks and gardens
and shade trees.
C. Maintaining motorized equipment.
D. Installing, repairing and maintaining traffic signals, signs and electrical
equipment.
E. Supervising animal disposal activities.
F. Maintaining sanitary sewer system.
§ 3-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-22
1:21

ARTICLE VII
Department of Law
§ 3-23. Director.
The Department of Law shall be headed by a Director who shall be the
Township Attorney and who shall be qualified by training and experience.
This position may be part-time.
§ 3-24. Functions.
The Department of Law shall perform all appropriate functions associated
with:
§ 3-25. Succession.
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating
to the administration of the Department of Law shall be and remain the
property of the Township. Upon termination of his service with the
Township, the Attorney shall forthwith surrender to his successor all such
property, together with a written consent to substitution of his successor
in all legal actions and proceedings thus pending to which the Township is
a party. However, the Mayor, with the advice and consent of Council, may
permit the former Attorney to remain as Attorney of Record to represent the
Township in those matters to which the Mayor believes the best interests of
the Township will be served by retaining the former Attorney.
§ 3-26. Organization.
The Department of Law shall be organized pursuant to plan approved as
provided in Article III, § 3-10.
A. Being legal advisor to the Mayor, members of Council and the Business
Administrator.
B. Advising as to form and sufficiency of ordinances prior to passage;
reviewing and approving contracts, deeds, documents and instruments
prior to the execution thereof by or on behalf of the Township.
C. Conducting appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the Township as directed by the Council.
D. Entering into any agreement, compromise or settlement of any
litigation in which the Township is involved subject to the approval of
Council.
E. Rendering opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to
him by Council, the Mayor and the Business Administrator.
F. Maintaining a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters
which relate to the Township's interest and report thereon as the Mayor
and Council may require.
§ 3-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-27
1:23
§ 3-27. Deputy Township Attorney. [Added 4-26-2001 by Ord. No.
0-7-01]
§ 3-28. Conflicts Land Use Attorney. [Added 4-26-2001 by Ord. No.
0-7-01]
A. Creation. The position of Deputy Township Attorney is hereby created
within the Department of Law. The Deputy Township Attorney shall
report to the Law Director - Township Attorney.
B. Appointment. The Deputy Township Attorney shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Counsel.
C. Term. The term of the Deputy Township Attorney shall be for one year.
D. Duties. The Deputy Township Attorney shall have such duties as may be
assigned from time to time by the Law Director - Township Attorney, or
shall represent the Township in any matters from which the Township
Attorney is conflicted.
E. Compensation. The Deputy Township Attorney shall be compensated on
such terms as the Council may determine.
A. Creation. The position of Conflicts Land Use Attorney is hereby created
within the Department of Law. The Conflicts Land Use Attorney shall
report to the Law Director - Township Attorney.
B. Appointment. The Conflicts Land Use Attorney shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Counsel.
C. Term. The term of the Conflicts Land Use Attorney shall be for one year.
D. Duties. The Conflicts Land Use Attorney shall have such duties as may
be assigned from time to time by the Law Director - Township Attorney
and shall represent the Land Use Boards of the Township in any matters
from which the appointed Board Attorney is conflicted, with the consent
of the land use boards.
E. Compensation. The Conflicts Land Use Attorney shall be compensated
on such terms as the Council may determine.
§ 3-27 RIVER VALE CODE § 3-28
1:24
ARTICLE VIII
Department of Engineering
§ 3-29. Director.
The Department of Engineering shall be headed by a Director who shall
be the Township Engineer and who shall be qualified by training and
experience. This position may be part-time.
§ 3-30. Functions.
The Department of Engineering shall perform all appropriate functions
associated with:
§ 3-31. Succession.
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to
the administration of the Department of Engineering shall be and remain
the property of the Township. Upon termination of his service with the
Township, the Engineer shall forthwith surrender to his successor all such
property, together with a written consent to substitution of his successor in
all engineering matters thus pending to which the Township is a party.
§ 3-32. Organization.
The Department of Engineering shall be organized pursuant to plan
approved as provided in Article III, § 3-10.
A. Being engineering advisor to the Mayor, Council and the Business
Administrator.
B. Preparing or causing to be prepared plans and specifications for public
works and improvements undertaken by the Township.
C. Supervising the performance of contracts for public works and
certifying the amounts due and payable thereunder.
D. Maintaining maps, charts, engineering data and records as may be
required for the proper and efficient technical administration of public
works functions.
§ 3-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-32
1:25

ARTICLE IX
Department of Athletics
[Added 2-27-2003 by Ord. No. 0-01-034]
§ 3-33. Creation.
There is hereby established and created in the government of the Township
of River Vale a Department which shall be known as the "Department of
Athletics."
§ 3-34. Duties.
The Department of Athletics shall be charged with the planning,
development and implementation of athletic activities, programs, events,
and such other athletic and sporting activities as may be approved from
time to time by the government of the Township to promote athletics within
the Township, but shall not include social and/or cultural events, which shall
be the jurisdiction of the Department of Social and Cultural Affairs.
§ 3-35. Composition.
A. The Department of Athletics shall consist of a Director of Athletics, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. The Director shall hold this office for a period of four years or
until the expiration of the term of the appointing Mayor, whichever shall
first occur, unless sooner removed and until his or her successor shall
have qualified.
B. The Department shall have such other permanent or temporary
employees as may be appointed by the Director, with the approval of the
Mayor, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43(d).
C. The existence and continuance of any of the above-specified offices
shall be determined by the governing body as it may from time to time
in its sole discretion deem reasonably necessary for the efficient
operation of the Department.
4. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of original Article IX,
Department of Recreation.
§ 3-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-35
1:27

ARTICLE X
Department of Social and Cultural Affairs
[Added 2-27-2003 by Ord. No. 0-03-035]
§ 3-36. Creation.
There is hereby established and created in the government of the Township
of River Vale a Department which shall be known as the "Department of
Social and Cultural Affairs."
§ 3-37. Duties.
The Department of Social and Cultural Affairs shall be charged with the
planning, development and implementation of recreational activities,
programs, parades, events and such other activities as may be approved
from time to time by the government of the Township to promote the
cultural welfare of the residents of the Township, but shall not include
athletic or sporting events, which shall be the jurisdiction of the Department
of Athletics.6
§ 3-38. Composition.
A. The Department of Social and Cultural Affairs shall consist of a Director
of Social and Cultural Affairs, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council. The Director shall hold this office
for a period of four years or until the expiration of the term of the
appointing Mayor, whichever shall first occur, unless sooner removed
and until his or her successor shall have qualified.
B. The Department shall have such other permanent or temporary
employees as maybe appointed by the Director, with the approval of the
Mayor, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43(d).
C. The existence and continuance of any of the above-specified offices
shall be determined by the governing body as it may from time to time
in its sole discretion deem reasonably necessary for the efficient
operation of the Department.
5. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of original Article IX,
Department of Recreation.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Athletics, Department of.
§ 3-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-38
1:29

ARTICLE XI
Municipal Court
[Amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 3-39. Establishment.
A Municipal Court for the Township is established as of January 18, 1979,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended and
supplemented.
§ 3-40. Name.
The name of the Court shall be the "Municipal Court of River Vale, Bergen
County, New Jersey."
§ 3-41. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a Seal which shall bear the impress of the
name of the Court.
§ 3-42. Powers and duties.
The Municipal Court and the Judge thereof shall have, possess and exercise
all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred by the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, or by any other
law.
§ 3-43. Judge.
There shall be a Judge of the Court who shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council, who shall serve for a term of
three years from the date of his appointment and until his successor is
appointed and qualified.
§ 3-44. Municipal Court Administrator.
A. There shall be a Municipal Court Administrator who shall serve for a
term of three years from the date of his appointment and until his
successor is appointed and qualified. He shall perform such functions
and duties as are prescribed for him by law, the rules of the courts and
the Judge.
B. The Judge of a Municipal Court may designate, in writing, an Acting
Administrator or Deputy Administrator to serve temporarily for an
absent Administrator or Deputy Administrator until the absent
Administrator or Deputy Administrator returns or a new Administrator
or Deputy Administrator is appointed. The Acting Administrator or
Acting Deputy Administrator shall be paid at a rate established by the
Judge but not exceeding that established for the Administrator or
Deputy Administrator.
§ 3-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-45
1:31
§ 3-45. Holding of Court.
The Court shall be held as the business of the Court may require, subject to
the rules applicable to Municipal Courts.
§ 3-46. Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 3-47. Municipal Public Defender.
A. There shall be a Municipal Prosecutor for the Municipal Court of the
Township of River Vale who shall be appointed by the Township Council
for a term of one year commencing January 1. The Municipal Prosecutor
shall be an attorney at law in good standing in the State of New Jersey.
B. The Municipal Prosecutor shall be responsible for the prosecution of
crimes and offenses cognizable in the Municipal Court of the Township
of River Vale.
A. There shall be a Municipal Public Defender for the Municipal Court of
the Township of River Vale who shall be appointed by the Township
Council for a term of one year commencing January 1.
B. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Public Defender to represent any
defendant charged with an offense of magnitude in the Municipal Court
who is an indigent. All necessary services and facilities of
representation, including both expert and lay investigation and
testimony, as well as other preparations, shall be provided in every
case. The Municipal Public Defender shall be responsible for handing
all phases of the defense in the Municipal Court.
C. The Municipal Court of the Township of River Vale shall require every
person applying for representation by the Municipal Public Defender to
pay an application fee of $200. The Municipal Court may waive any part
of the application fee to the extent that it is determined, by a clear and
convincing showing, that the application fee represents an
unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation.
§ 3-45 RIVER VALE CODE § 3-47
1:32
ARTICLE XII
Fire Department
§ 3-48. Composition.
The River Vale Volunteer Fire Department is hereby recognized as the Fire
Department of the Township.
§ 3-49. Organization.7
The organization of the Fire Department shall be as provided in Chapter 18
of the Code of the Township of River Vale.
7. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 3-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-49
1:33

ARTICLE XIII
Citizen's Advocate
§ 3-50. Office created; duties.
There shall be an Office of the Citizen's Advocate which shall function
independently of the Mayor and Council. Its members shall serve as
ombudsmen to receive and investigate complaints made by individuals
pertinent to Township business, to speak for, on behalf of or independently
of citizens of River Vale and to inform the general public of issues vital to
residents of River Vale. The spokesperson may speak at all regular meetings
of the Council and may make known the views of the office through the
Township Newsletter.
§ 3-51. Membership.
The Office of the Citizen's Advocate shall consist of three members. One
such member shall be appointed to office by the Mayor; one such member
shall be appointed to office by the Council; and the third member shall be
appointed to office by the first two appointed members. A spokesperson
shall be appointed for each separate meeting by the members from among
the membership and shall speak on behalf of the membership at each public
meeting.
§ 3-52. Term of office.
The initial membership shall hold office for a term of one year. Thereafter,
all such members shall serve in office for a term of two years and until their
successors have been appointed and qualify to serve.
§ 3-53. Qualifications and conditions of membership.
All members of the Office of Citizen's Advocate shall be residents of the
Township of River Vale. Any such member(s) who shall be a candidate for
political or elective office or serve in any other official appointed capacity
within the Township of River Vale shall be immediately disqualified as
member(s) of the Office of the Citizen's advocate.
§ 3-54. Vacancies.
If a member(s) of office shall resign, shall fail to qualify for continued
service or shall otherwise cease to serve prior to the expiration of an
appointed term, the vacancy(ies) thereby created shall be filled by the
person(s) or by the body which appointed the member(s) whose
discontinued service creates the vacancy(ies).
§ 3-55. Removal from office.
No member of the Office of the Citizen's Advocate shall be removed from
office by any elected or appointed official of the Township of River Vale,
§ 3-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-55
1:35
except if such member shall fail to meet the qualifications and conditions of
membership provided in § 3-53 above.
§ 3-55 RIVER VALE CODE § 3-55
1:36
ARTICLE XIV
Annual Audit
§ 3-56. Independent audit.
The Council will, at least once annually, have an independent audit made of
the Township's accounts and financial records as required by law.
§ 3-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-56
1:37

ARTICLE XV
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 3-57. Delivery of funds and records to successors.
Every officer or employee shall, upon termination, deliver forthwith to his
successor or, if there is no successor, to the Business Administrator all
moneys, papers, books, memoranda, accounts, data and keys pertaining to
his office.
§ 3-58. Full-time service.
Every officer and employee whose compensation is established on a fulltime
basis shall devote his entire time during business hours to the duties
of his office.
§ 3-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-58
1:39

ARTICLE XVI
Transitional Provisions
§ 3-59. Transfer of personnel, records and property.
Except as otherwise provided herein, all personnel, all records and property
of the Township are transferred to the department or division to which the
functions, powers and duties are transferred by this chapter.
§ 3-60. Pension rights.
Pension fund membership and rights of officers and employees shall not be
adversely affected by any transfer pursuant to this Administrative Code. The
Business Administrator shall provide, by regulation, if necessary, for such
records, contribution controls and other means as will further protect such
pension fund membership and rights.
§ 3-61. Ordinances and resolutions continued.
All ordinances and resolutions adopted before the effective date of this
Administrative Code shall remain in full force and effect until repealed or
amended; provided, however, that any found to be inconsistent with the
Charter or this Administrative Code or law shall be considered repealed
or amended to comply with existing law to the extent of any such
inconsistency.
§ 3-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-61
1:41
Chapter 8
CLAIMS PROCEDURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration and
Finance — See Ch. 3, Art. IV.
§ 8-1. Treasurer to provide for method of approval. [Added
6-28-1984 by Ord. No. 0-9-84]
§ 8-2. Approval of claims by Council.
No bill, claim or demand against the Township shall be paid until it shall
have been approved by resolution of the Township Council, except in the
case of special necessity, as determined by the Business Administrator.
§ 8-3. Required documentation.
No bill, claim or demand against the Township shall be presented to the
Township Council for approval unless it shall contain or have appended
thereto:
A. The Township Treasurer shall provide for a method of prior approval of
all purchase requisitions submitted by any department, before any
purchase requisition is approved by the Business Administrator. This
method shall provide for the certification of funds being available in the
particular line item account maintained by the Treasurer, and the
encumbering of such account at the time the purchase order is issued,
so that a current balance in the other expense line item is maintained at
all times. Only emergency purchases and specified charge accounts,
specifically approved in writing by the Business Administrator, are to be
made without first encumbering funds.
B. In the event any department head shall fail to follow the procedures set
forth hereinabove, purchase orders shall not be issued and/or paid. All
Township purchase orders shall bear notice of this section.
A. A detailed statement of items and the particulars thereof.
B. A certification of the party making claim that it is a correct statement.
C. A certification of the appropriate Township official having personal
knowledge of the facts that the goods have been duly and properly
received or the services have been duly and properly rendered.
D. A certification of the Treasurer, as certifying and approval officer, that
there exist proper and sufficient appropriations and legal authority for
payment.
§ 3-61 RIVER VALE CODE § 8-4
8:42
§ 8-4. Presentation and posting of list of claims.
By no later than the Friday preceding the regular monthly meeting of the
Township Council, the Treasurer shall have prepared and provided to each
member of the Township Council and to the Mayor, and posted at the
Township offices, a detailed listing of all bills, claims or demands which
are to be presented for approval pursuant hereto. Such listing shall be of
sufficient detail as to provide for proper identification of each bill, claim or
demand set forth therein, and the documentation required by the provisions
hereof shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours
of the Township offices. Copies of such listing shall also be made available
to the public at each regular meeting of the Township Council.8
Chapter 10
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 29. Personnel Policies and Procedures
Manual — See Ch. A251.
§ 10-1. Defense to be provided by Township upon request.
Except as hereinafter provided, the Township of River Vale, hereinafter
known as the "Township" shall, upon the request of any present or former
official, employee or appointee of the Township provide for indemnification
and legal defense of any civil action brought against said person or persons
arising from an act or omission falling within the scope of their public
duties.
§ 10-2. Construal of provisions; definition of "official, employee and
appointee."
The terms of this chapter and the definition of official, employee and
appointee are to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes
of this chapter except that these terms shall not mean:
A. Any person who is not a natural person;
B. Any person while providing goods or services of any kind under any
contract with the Township except an employment contract;
C. Any person while providing legal or engineering services for
compensation unless said person is a full-time employee of the
Township; and
8. Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 161-2006, adopted 7-24-2006 and subsequently repealed on
1-22-2007 by Ord. No. 174-2007, added provisions to this chapter pertaining to the
awarding of contracts to certain campaign contributors.
§ 8-4 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 10-2
10:43
§ 10-3. Duty of Township to defend.
§ 10-4. Indemnification against punitive damages not permitted;
refusal to provide defense for civil actions.
The Township shall not indemnify any person against the payment of
punitive damages, penalties, or fines, but may provide for the legal defense
of such claims in accord with the standards set forth herein. The Township
may refuse to provide for the defense and indemnification of any civil action
referred to herein if the Township Council determines that:
§ 10-5. Standards for determining whether Township will provide
defense.
In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the
Township may provide for the defense of a present or former official,
employee or appointee, if the Township Council concludes that such
representation is in the best interest of the Township and that the person to
be defended acted or failed to act in accord with the standards set forth in
this chapter.
D. Any person who as a condition of his or her appointment or contract is
required to indemnify and defend the Township and/or secure
insurance.
A. The Township shall provide for defense of and indemnify any present or
former official, employee or appointee of the Township who becomes a
defendant in a civil action if the person or persons involved:
(1) Acted or failed to act in a matter in which the Township has or had
an interest;
(2) Acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or
authorized by law; and
(3) Acted or failed to take action in good faith.
B. For purposes of this chapter, the duty and authority of the Township to
defend and indemnify shall extend to a cross-claim or counterclaim
against said person.
A. The act or omission did not occur within the scope of a duty authorized
or imposed by law;
B. The act or failure to act was the result of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice of the person requesting defense and
indemnification; or
C. The defense of the action or proceeding by the Township would create a
conflict of interest between the Township and the person or persons
involved.
§ 10-2 RIVER VALE CODE § 10-6
10:44
§ 10-6. Control of defense; cooperation by employee.
Whenever the Township provides for the defense of any action set forth
herein and as a condition of such defense, the Township may assume
exclusive control over the representation of such persons defended, and
such person shall cooperate fully with the Township.
§ 10-7. Manner of providing attorney for defense.
The Township may provide for the defense pursuant to this chapter by
authorizing its Attorney to act in behalf of the person being defended or by
employing other counsel for this purpose or by asserting the right of the
Township under any appropriate insurance policy that requires the insurer
to provide defense.
Chapter 13
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies and Manual — See Chs. 29
and A251.
§ 13-1. Adoption of provisions by reference.
The provisions of the Local Government Ethics Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et
seq., as the same may be amended and supplemented from time to time, are
hereby incorporated herein as though set forth at length.
§ 13-2. Financial disclosure statement.
No person shall be sworn in to any office or position nor be appointed to any
office or position nor assume any office or position nor continue in any office
or position without having first complied with the provisions of the Local
Government Ethics Law regarding annual submittal of a financial disclosure
statement as set forth herein, if applicable to such office or position.
§ 13-3. Construal of provisions.
By §§ 13-2 and 13-3, the provisions of the Local Government Ethics Law are
made neither more nor less restrictive. Sections 13-2 and 13-3 are intended
only to establish a precondition of assuming or continuing in any office or
position with the Township and shall not in any way disturb the jurisdiction
of the Local Finance Board in the Division of Local Government Services in
the Department of Community Affairs as set forth in the Local Government
Ethics Law.
Chapter 17
§ 10-6 ETHICS § 13-3
13:45
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Organization of Fire Department — See Ch. 3,
Art. XII.
Fire Department bylaws — See Ch. 18.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Hazardous materials cleanup — See Ch. 128.
§ 13-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 13-3
13:46
ARTICLE I
Regulations
[Adopted 7-6-1967 as Ch. 31, Art. I, of the 1967 Code (12-3-1931)]
§ 17-1. Supervision and control.
The River Vale Volunteer Fire Department shall hereafter be, at all times,
under the control and supervision and subject to the orders of the Township
Committee of the Township of River Vale, as hereinafter provided.
§ 17-2. Appointment and terms of Commissioners.
Upon the annual organization of the Township Committee, the Chairman
of such Committee shall appoint from said Committee a Fire Committee
consisting of two members, one to be known as "Fire Commissioner," and
the other as "Deputy Fire Commissioner," each to serve for the ensuing year,
unless or until disqualified by the expiration of his office, resignation or
death or unless removed for cause.
§ 17-3. Removal of Commissioners.
Removal of either or both Commissioners from said Committee shall be
effected by a majority vote of the Township Committee.
§ 17-4. Powers of Commissioners.
The Fire Commissioner shall have full and complete control over and
direction of the equipment and personnel of said Fire Department. In his
absence or inability to serve, all his powers and duties shall be assumed by
the Deputy Fire Commissioner.
§ 17-5. Duties of Fire Commissioner.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Commissioner to report at each meeting of
the Township Committee upon the activities of his Department and to make
recommendations looking to its general efficiency and welfare.
§ 17-6. Board of Fire Officers established. [Amended 8-15-1963]
To assist the Commissioners in their work, there is hereby established in
and for the Township, a Board of Fire Officers, consisting of the officers of
the Fire Department. The Commissioners shall be ex officio members of this
Board.
§ 17-7. Annual inspection. [Amended 6-13-1974 by Ord. No. 0-8-74]
There shall be held annually one official inspection of the Fire Department
by the Township Committee, with said inspection held at such time as
determined by the Board of Fire Officers.
§ 17-1 ETHICS § 17-8
13:47
§ 17-8. Keeping of records.
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk to keep a complete roll of the
active and exempt members of the Fire Department, designating their date
of admission, age, occupation, residence, resignation and the respective
company to which they belong.
§ 17-9. Admission to firehouses. [Amended 6-13-1974 by Ord. No.
0-8-74]
No person except the members of the Township Committee or janitors of
the building shall be allowed to enter any firehouse unless accompanied by
an active member of the Department.
§ 17-10. Exemption certificates.
§ 17-11. Ownership of equipment.
All of the equipment of said Department and all fire apparatus is hereby
taken over by and declared to be the property of the Township, and in
payment therefor the Township Committee hereby agrees to pay the present
River Vale Volunteer Fire Department, Chemical Co. No. 1 (a body
corporate), of the Township of River Vale $650, which amount is hereby
appropriated for such purpose, and to raise said amount the Township is
hereby authorized to negotiate and sell its notes and bonds for such sum
payable as permitted by law.
A. Exemption certificates will be granted to those members of the Fire
Department who have served the time prescribed by law. Members will
not be granted exemption certificates unless they have served the
required time and have also performed the yearly fire duty required of
them for a period equal in years to the number of years required by the
laws of the State of New Jersey before exemption will be granted.
B. Certificates will be ordered by the Township Committee upon
recommendation of the Commissioner, the Fire Chief and Board of Fire
Officers and will be signed by the Chairman of the Township Committee
and attested by the Township Clerk. The time served and the average of
membership must be certified by the Township Clerk.
§ 17-8 RIVER VALE CODE § 17-11
13:48
ARTICLE II
Death Benefits
[Adopted 7-23-1992 by Ord. No. 0-11-92]
§ 17-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is for the Township to provide death benefits
to firemen who are not eligible for death benefits under the Constitution
and Bylaws of the New Jersey State Firemen's Association and the General
Relief Fund Rules promulgated thereunder for the sole reason that they
were confirmed as firemen at an age higher than that permitted by said
constitution, bylaws and rules. Persons entitled to death benefits under the
Constitution and Bylaws of the New Jersey State Firemen's Association and
the General Relief Fund Rules promulgated thereunder are not entitled to
benefits under this article.
§ 17-13. Eligibility; payment.
A fireman who would have been entitled to death benefits under the
Constitution and Bylaws of the New Jersey State Firemen's Association
and the General Relief Fund Rules promulgated thereunder but for the
requirement therein that the fireman be less than a certain age at the time
of his confirmation shall, upon his or her death, be eligible to be paid by the
Township of River Vale a sum equal to the benefits that would have been
paid by the New Jersey State Firemen's Association to the fireman had he
or she been eligible for death benefits in accordance with said constitution,
bylaws and rules. Payment of death benefits shall be made to the estate
of the deceased fireman upon the Fire Chief's certifying to the Township
Council that the fireman is eligible for benefits in accordance with this
article.
§ 17-12 ETHICS § 17-13
13:49

ARTICLE III
Junior Firemen's Auxiliary
[Adopted 2-23-1995 as Ord. No. 0-1-95]
§ 17-14. Establishment.
There is hereby established an auxiliary to the River Vale Fire Department
to be known as the "Junior Firemen's Auxiliary," and this Auxiliary shall
operate and be guided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-95 et seq.
§ 17-15. Age limitations. [Amended 4-22-2013 by Ord. No.
276-2013]
§ 17-16. Eligibility.
Eligibility for membership shall be as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-96 or as
set forth in other statutes of the State of New Jersey pertaining hereto.
§ 17-17. Insurance coverage.
Members of the Auxiliary shall be provided with the same insurance
coverage and in the same amounts provided for the regular volunteer
firemen of the Township of River Vale, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-97.
A. Membership for said junior Firemen's Auxiliary shall be for those who
are no less than 14 years old and no more than 17 years old, who shall
obtain permission to join the Auxiliary from their parents or guardians,
which permission must be in writing.
B. The age limitation for membership shall be 21 years of age for those
college students who are not able to maintain the required percentage
of training attendance normally required of regular volunteer firemen.
§ 17-14 ETHICS § 17-17
13:51

ARTICLE IV
Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 8-12-1999 by Ord. No. 0-14-99]
§ 17-18. Program created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388, Laws of 1997 (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.)
to reward members of the Volunteer Fire Department and Volunteer
Ambulance Corps for their loyal, diligent, and devoted services to the
residents of River Vale.
§ 17-19. Annual contributions.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Township pursuant to state law; and that such plan
shall be administered in accordance with the laws of the State of New
Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue Code and this article.
§ 17-20. Criteria for eligibility.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
that meets the criteria as follows:
§ 17-21. Prior years excluded.
The LOSAP shall not provide for contributions as credit for prior years of
services prior to enactment of this article.
§ 17-22. Annual payments.
The amount of payment each year shall be as follows:
§ 17-23. Estimated cost.
The estimated cost of the program for this first year has been calculated as
follows (approximately 40 firemen/20 ambulance corpsmen): 60 X $600 =
$36,000.
A. Volunteer Fire Department and Volunteer Ambulance Corps: A year of
service shall be credited under a Service Awards Program for each
calendar year in which an active emergency service volunteer
accumulates at least 100 points.
A. For 2000 - 2001: $600.
B. For 2002 - 2003: $850.
C. For 2004 - 2005 and thereafter: $1,150.
§ 17-18 ETHICS § 17-24
13:53
§ 17-24. Points.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
service provided to the Volunteer Fire Department/Volunteer Ambulance
Corps in accordance with the Schedules A and B attached hereto and made
a part hereof.9
§ 17-25. Approval by voters.
This article shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a public
question at the next general election.10
9. Editor's Note: Schedules A and B are included at the end of this chapter.
10.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 0-14-99 was approved at the general election held November
2, 1999.
§ 17-24 RIVER VALE CODE § 17-25
13:54
Chapter 18
FIRE DEPARTMENT BYLAWS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 17. Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
§ 17-25 ETHICS § 17-25
13:55

ARTICLE I
Name
§ 18-1. Name of Department.
The name of this organization shall be the "River Vale Volunteer Fire
Department," located at 330 River Vale Road, River Vale, New Jersey. It is
referred to in the following as "this Department" or as "the Department."
§ 18-1 ETHICS § 18-1
13:57

ARTICLE II
Purpose
§ 18-2. Purpose of Department.
The purpose of this department shall be the protection of life and property
from fire and other emergencies and the procuring of personnel.
§ 18-2 ETHICS § 18-2
13:59

ARTICLE III
Members
§ 18-3. Composition of Department.
This Department shall consist of active, probationary, inactive, exempt,
honorary and active life members.
§ 18-4. Qualification of active members.
A. An active member in good standing shall be:
(1) A citizen of the United States;
(2) A resident for at least six months prior to his/her application:
(a) Of the Township of River Vale, New Jersey; or
(b) Of a surrounding township in the State of New Jersey and
residing no more than three miles from a Department
firehouse;
(3) Able to read and write the English language;
(4) At least 18 years of age with proof of birth;
(5) Able to pass the state physical examination; and
(6) Fingerprinted and investigated by the River Vale Police
Department.
B. During the period commencing October 1 of each year through
September 30 of the subsequent year, active members in good standing
shall be required to:
(1) Accept a minimum of 60% of all calls per year;
(2) Attend a minimum of six Chief's Report meetings per year; and
(3) Participate in a minimum of 10 drills per year.
C. Any active member not attending at least 30% of fire calls (October 1 of
the preceding year to September 30 of the current year) will be
dropped from membership in the River Vale Volunteer Fire Department.
D. Each year that an active member meets the criteria set forth in
Subsection B shall be counted toward that member's active life
membership.
E. A member who attends at least 30% but less than 60% of all calls per
year (October 1 of the preceding year to September 30 of the current
year) will be deemed an active member who is not in good standing.
§ 18-3 ETHICS § 18-5
13:61
§ 18-5. Application for membership.
Each application for active membership shall be made in writing using the
state standard form. The application shall be forwarded to the membership
committee, and upon favorable report of same at the monthly meeting of the
Board of Fire Officers, the applicant shall be recommended to the Mayor for
the appointment as a probationary firefighter for a period of not less than
one year.
§ 18-6. Probationary members.
A probationary member shall be an individual whose membership has been
conditionally accepted by the Board of Fire Officers but has not completed
the necessary fire courses. Upon appointment as a probationary firefighter
by the Mayor, the member must meet the requirements of an active
member, but he/she will not be eligible to vote, nominate, hold office or
become a qualified driver. Upon determination by the Board of Fire Officers
that a probationary member has satisfactorily completed Firefighter I and
any other required courses at the Bergen County Police and Fire Academy
or equivalent, and his/her probationary period, he/she shall be accepted as
an active member.
§ 18-7. Inactive members.
A. Any active member in good standing may request to be put on the
inactive membership list. This request must be made in writing and
submitted to the Board of Fire Officers. The Board of Fire Officers will
make a determination whether the request is justified, on a case-bycase
basis, before or during its next meeting.
B. The Board of Fire Officers may grant an active member inactive
membership for a period of up to six months. At this time, the member
on inactive status may request, in writing, an extension or further
extension of up to six months.
C. No member shall be granted inactive membership for a period
exceeding 12 months unless said member:
(1) Has been a member in good standing for a period of three years
prior to his/her request;
(2) Is actively serving in the military; or
(3) Is enrolled in an accredited college or higher educational program
and is actively working in furtherance of obtaining a degree.
D. An inactive member may attend meetings and answer fire alarms.
E. An inactive member is not required to attend his/her specified
percentage of fires or meetings until he/she returns to the active list.
§ 18-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 18-7
13:62
§ 18-8. Exempt members.
An exempt membership to the Department shall be available, in accordance
with the requirements of the laws of the State of New Jersey, to any
person who shall be an active member of the Department at the time
of his/her application. No member of the Department shall be granted a
certificate as an exempt firefighter unless evidence is presented, sufficient
in law to justify such issuance. Any active member joining that is over the
state-required age will be granted exempt status through the Mayor after
completion of all state requirements for exempt status.
§ 18-9. Honorary members.
Honorary membership to the Department shall be available by election by
the members of the Department, to any person for outstanding service to
the Department. Such election shall require a favorable vote of at least 3/4
of the members present at a regular meeting.
§ 18-10. Active life members.
Upon service in the River Vale Fire Department for a period of not less
than 20 years, as an active member in good standing, said member shall
be reclassified as an active life member, who shall enjoy the privileges of
an active member, but shall not be required to attend fire calls or drills.
All requirements set forth in § 18-4 must be met in order for active life
members to nominate members for office, vote for members to hold or hold
office himself or herself.
§ 18-10.1. Civilian defense members.
A civilian defense membership to the Department shall be available to
allow the recruitment and retention of trained firefighters from other
municipalities within the State of New Jersey who either work or live in
the Township of River Vale. A civilian defense member shall be required to
comply with the following conditions:
F. An inactive member may not nominate or vote for any line officers of the
active Fire Department nor shall such member be permitted to hold
office.
G. An inactive member may request to be returned to the active list at any
time during his/her inactive membership. This request shall be made in
writing and shall be presented to the Board of Fire Officers for their
acceptance or rejection.
A. A civilian defense member must meet all qualifications for active
membership as detailed in § 18-4, Qualifications of active members.
B. A civilian defense member must be an active member in good standing
of another New Jersey fire department in order to apply to be a civilian
defense member and must provide written proof from the department
§ 18-7 ETHICS § 18-10.1
13:63
that holds his/her New Jersey State firefighter's line number at the
time of application. In addition, the applicant must provide a complete
copy of his/her records from the department holding his/her New Jersey
State firefighter's line number during the application period to the
River Vale Fire Department Investigative Committee.
C. A civilian defense member is not required to attend his/her specified
percentage of fire calls or meetings in the Township of River Vale.
However, said member shall be required to maintain his/her good
standing with the department that holds his/her New Jersey State
firefighter's line number and must provide annual proof of same to the
Board of Fire Officers.
D. A civilian defense member may not nominate or vote for any line
officers of the active Fire Department.
E. A civilian defense member may not be nominated or run for any officer
position in the active Fire Department.
§ 18-10.1 RIVER VALE CODE § 18-10.1
13:64
ARTICLE IV
Board of Fire Officers
§ 18-11. Members.
Members of the Board of Fire Officers shall consist of a Chief, Deputy
Chief, one Senior Captain, one Captain and a Lieutenant for each line
apparatus, and such other officers of the Fire Department as shall be
provided pursuant to ordinance.
§ 18-12. Members ex officio.
The members ex officio of the Board shall be the President of the River Vale
Fire Department Association and Fire Marshal.
§ 18-13. Regular meetings.
The Board shall hold regular monthly meetings; the time, date and place to
be determined by the Board Chairman with the approval of the majority of
the Board members, and the Board may hold special meetings upon notice
as hereinafter provided.
§ 18-14. Special meetings.
Special meetings may be called at the discretion of the Chairman of the
Board, and are intended to address unforeseen circumstances, including
emergency or death in the Department, where an immediate decision is
required to ensure the proper operation of the Department.
§ 18-15. Quorum.
A quorum shall consist of no less than a majority of the qualified members in
order that business may be transacted at either regular or special meetings.
§ 18-16. Rules of procedure for regular and special meetings.
A. For all regular and special meetings, the Chief shall automatically be
Chairman of the Board and, in his/her absence, the Board shall be
chaired by the Deputy Chief. In the case where both the Chief and
Deputy Chief are unavailable, and a special meeting is necessary, the
next available senior officer will act as Chairman of the Board. No
regular meeting may be held in the absence of the Chief and the Deputy
Chief. One member of the Board shall be designated by the Chairman as
Secretary to keep complete records of all regular and special meetings.
B. Transaction of business at all regular Board meetings shall proceed in
the following order:
(1) Reading of the minutes.
(2) Reading of communications.
§ 18-11 ETHICS § 18-16
13:65
§ 18-17. Interpretation of code.
Any question as to the interpretation, intention or meaning of this Code or
Code of Control of the River Vale Volunteer Fire Department, or any parts
hereof, shall be determined by a majority vote of the members of the Board,
at any regular meeting, provided a quorum is present. Any decision shall
be transmitted to the active department at its next regular meeting and a
copy retained in a separate file for future reference. It shall be the duty of
every member of the Board to respect and enforce the Code to the best of
said member's ability in order that the Board may operate efficiently and in
order to ensure that the Department shall function with due regularity and
maximum performance.
§ 18-18. Duties.
Duties shall be as follows:
(3) Chiefs report.
(a) Department conditions.
(b) New members.
(c) Grievances.
(4) Reports of committees.
(5) Unfinished business.
(6) New business.
(7) Good of the Department.
(8) Adjournment.
C. Transaction of business at all special meetings shall proceed in the
following order:
(1) Report as to the purpose of the meeting.
(2) Transaction of business for which the meeting was called.
(3) Adjournment.
D. A majority vote of Board members shall be required to pass any and all
Board decisions.
E. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable State
and local laws, regulations and ordinances.
A. To formulate, prepare and effect a code for the control and
management of the River Vale Volunteer Fire Department.
B. To determine and recommend exemption certificates for members of
the Fire Department who have served the time prescribed by law and
§ 18-16 RIVER VALE CODE § 18-18
13:66
§ 18-19. Voting requirements.
In determining decisions to be made by the Board of Fire Officers, a
majority vote shall be required, provided that a quorum is in attendance, at
any regular or special meeting, and the said members of the Board of Fire
Officers, in order to qualify to have their vote valid and effective, must be
active and qualified members entitled to vote in the River Vale Volunteer
Fire Department.
§ 18-20. Grievance process.
have performed the yearly fire duty required of them for a period equal
in years to the number of years required by the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
C. To prepare and formulate necessary rules and regulations for Board
procedures as it may deem necessary, within the guidelines laid down
herein.
D. To prescribe and determine procedure for the election of departmental
officers, determine qualification for office and report the results of
elections through the Chief and/or Director of Fire to the Mayor for his
approval.
E. The Chairman of the Board shall appoint from the active Fire
Department membership, members to serve on all existing committees.
In addition, the Chairman may create any committees which the
Chairman deems necessary to assist the Board in its.
F. The Chairman shall appoint two active Ex-Chiefs, one exempt member,
and two at large members to serve on the five member Grievance
Committee. Current members of the Board shall not serve on the
Grievance Committee.
G. To appoint three active members from the active membership of the
Department to serve on the Membership Committee.
H. To have sole jurisdiction in the assignment of members to serve fire
stations and on fire apparatus.
I. To appoint a member of the Fire Department to maintain records of
members' percentages.
A. All grievances against any elected officer or a member must be
submitted to the Chief in writing and signed by a member or members
in good standing, or brought by the Chief directly. The Chief will review
the filed grievance, and based on the supporting evidence and
seriousness of the alleged grievance, can immediately impose a
temporary suspension of a member's active status of up to 90 days or
until final disposition of the grievance by the Grievance Committee or
the Board of Fire Officers (if appealed). The member may not attend
meetings or serve at fires until the final outcome of the charges is
§ 18-18 ETHICS § 18-20
13:67
determined and made known to him in writing. If no temporary
suspension is ordered, the accused shall be entitled to continue as an
active member of the Department in all respects. The Chief's action is
not subject to appeal.
B. If the seriousness of the alleged grievances merit a letter of reprimand,
additional suspension time greater than 90 days, or termination of
membership, the Chief must submit the written grievance and a request
for review to the Grievance Committee. The Grievance Committee will
meet as soon as practicable to review the merits of the charges, and
take, by majority vote, one of the following actions:
(1) Dismiss the grievance: This action automatically returns the
member to active status, removes any letters of reprimand related
to the grievance that were filed against the member, and credits
the member for all missed fire calls, drills and mandatory meetings
while suspended;
(2) Find that the grievance is justified and impose additional penalties,
if warranted; or
(3) Find that the grievance is justified, and modify penalties imposed.
C. Appeals to the Board of Fire Officers.
(1) The member aggrieved by the decision and penalty of the
Grievance Committee can appeal said decision and penalty to the
Board of Fire Officers. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a written
appeal to the Board of Fire Officers within 10 days after notice of
the decision by the Grievance Committee.
(2) Upon receipt of the written notice of appeal, the Board of Fire
Officers shall schedule a time and date to review the findings of the
Grievance Committee as soon as practicable, and must give
adequate notice (at least seven days) to the member appealing the
decision of the Grievance Committee of the date and time of the
review.
(3) The Board of Fire Officers will, by majority vote, affirm, overturn,
or modify the decision of the Grievance Committee.
(4) The accused may appeal the decision of the Board of Fire Officers
to the Mayor within 10 days in writing directed to the Township
Clerk. The determination both as to the charges and penalty shall
be consistent with the rules and procedures of the Office of the
Mayor and decided by said Mayor, and the Mayor's decision shall
be final.
(5) In the event an alleged grievance is found to be unjustified by the
Grievance Committee, the Board of Fire Officers or the Office of the
Mayor, then he/she shall be immediately entitled to resume all
rights and privileges as a member of the Department in the event
§ 18-20 RIVER VALE CODE § 18-20
13:68
suspension has occurred, or in the event of no suspension, his/her
status shall be that of a member in good standing as though no
charges had been brought.
D. Penalties. The Grievance Committee and Board of Fire Officers shall
have the authority and the right:
(1) To suspend for any term and in any manner any member against
whom valid grievances have been filed. In the event said member is
suspended, he/she shall remain inactive and may not attend
meetings or serve at fires and any compensation from the Township
shall cease as of the date of his/her suspension;
(2) To order the removal from Department membership of any member
against whom valid grievances have been filed. In the event of
discharge of a member of the Department, the member shall no
longer be entitled to the rights and privileges of a member of the
Department and all compensation shall cease as of the date of
discharge;
(3) To submit letters of reprimand into any member's personnel file
against whom valid grievances have been filed.
§ 18-20 ETHICS § 18-20
13:69

ARTICLE V
Election of Officers
§ 18-21. Officers enumerated.
The following line officers shall be elected for a term of one year at the
regular Department meeting in the month of November:
§ 18-22. Nominations.
§ 18-23. Notice of election.
The Board shall notify all Department members of the date, time and place
of said election at least five days prior to the election.
§ 18-24. Balloting.
All elections shall be by a plurality of ballots cast and shall be by secret
ballot. Absentee ballots may be cast according to rules prescribed by the
Board of Fire Officers.
§ 18-25. Nominations to fill vacancies.
If any office shall be vacated by death, resignation or otherwise, the Board
of Fire Officers shall call a special election. Nominations shall be made to
A. Chief.
B. Deputy Chief.
C. Two Captains-at-large, one senior.
D. One Lieutenant for each piece of fire apparatus.
A. At the Chief's Report meeting held in the month of October, active
members in good standing shall nominate members to fill the offices of
Chief, Deputy Chief, Captain-at-Large and Lieutenant in accordance
with the requirements of this code and subject to the qualifications set
forth in § 18-27 of this Code.
B. No nomination will be considered after the close of the October Chief's
Report meeting.
C. The incumbent Deputy Chief shall be permitted to run for the office of
Chief without the need of a formal nomination from other active
members in good standing.
D. Members shall not run for more than one office. A member must accept
his or her nomination by letter submitted to the Chairman of the Board
or in person at the October Chief's Report meeting. Nominations not
accepted at the conclusion of the nominations portion of the Chief's
Report meeting shall be disregarded.
§ 18-21 ETHICS § 18-25
13:71
the Board of Fire Officers at a meeting to be held at least five days before
the date set in the notice of the special election meeting.
§ 18-26. Rerun in case of tie.
If no candidate for an office receives a plurality of ballots cast, an immediate
rerun election shall be held between all candidates receiving an equal
number of votes. Absentee ballots will be considered on all rerun elections.
§ 18-27. Qualifications.
§ 18-28. Appointment to fill vacancy.
The Board of Fire Officers may appoint, in the event of a vacancy in office,
a member not fully qualified to fill said office for a period of 90 days.
The Board of Fire Officers can continue to reappoint a member not fully
qualified until the vacancy is filled through regular or special election.
A. No member shall be eligible to hold office of Chief or Deputy Chief,
unless he/she shall have at least five years of active fire duty, including
at least one year in office as Captain.
B. No member shall be eligible to hold the office of Captain unless he/she
shall have served satisfactorily as a Lieutenant at least one year active
fire duty.
C. No member shall be eligible to hold the office of Lieutenant unless he/
she shall have at least two years active fire duty, said period to include
all probationary periods, and have completed the course in Firefighter I
and any other municipal, county, state, or federally required officer
training courses conducted by the Bergen County Fire Academy or
other municipal, county, state or federal agency.
D. Members running for office must be qualified drivers of any apparatus
operated by such office for a period of at least six months prior to
running for office.
§ 18-25 RIVER VALE CODE § 18-28
13:72
ARTICLE VI
Installation of Officers
§ 18-29. When installation takes place.
The duly elected officers will assume their duties on January 1 of each year
at 0001 hours (12:01 a.m.).
§ 18-29 ETHICS § 18-29
13:73

ARTICLE VII
Duties of Officers
§ 18-30. Chief.
§ 18-31. Deputy Chief.
A. The Chief shall have exclusive control and supervision at all fires,
Department inspections, drills and reviews or other fire duties.
B. The Chief shall also have supervision of all fire equipment, of all officers
and members of the Department.
C. The Chief shall hold the members and officers of the Department
strictly to account for neglect of duties, and may suspend any member
or officer at any time for refusing to obey orders or for any reason that
would promote discord or decrease efficiency in the Department.
D. The Chief shall enforce rules and regulations of the Department.
E. The Chief shall have crews drill on fire duty as often as he/she deems
necessary.
F. The Chief shall hold at least one drill each month.
G. The Chief shall check and report to the proper authority all faulty
hydrant conditions.
H. The Chief shall be required to select and submit to the Department and
the Township the names of all drivers of apparatus during his/her term
in office and in this respect, for purposes, among others, of being that of
securing insurance coverage for said appointed drivers.
I. The Chief shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Department.
J. The Chief shall appoint the Purchasing and Budget Officer, to maintain
proper records and provide monthly reports of budget and purchasing
matters to the Chief.
K. The Chief shall appoint a Training Officer and a Radio Officer. At the
end of their terms of office, both the Radio and Training Officers shall
surrender all properties of the Department to their successors in office.
L. The Chief shall appoint a Board Secretary from the Board of Fire
Officers to prepare the official minutes during all regular and special
meetings.
M. At the conclusion of his or her term in office, the Chief shall surrender
all Department property to his or her successor.
A. The Deputy Chief shall perform the duties of the Chief in the absence of
the Chief and such other duties prescribed by departmental rules.
§ 18-30 ETHICS § 18-31
13:75
§ 18-32. Captain.
§ 18-33. Lieutenants.
B. At the conclusion of his or her term in office, the Deputy Chief shall
surrender all Department property to his or her successor.
A. The Captains shall be assigned to a fire station. The fire station to which
they are assigned shall be at the discretion of the Chief.
B. Each Captain shall be responsible for the fire apparatus and all
Department equipment assigned to his/her fire station.
C. It shall be the duty of each Captain to see that the truck room is always
kept clean and in perfect order and to assume charge of his/her
respective apparatus and other appliances pertaining thereto so that
they are in complete order and working condition.
D. At every alarm of fire or emergency, each Captain is responsible for
those firefighters under his/her command and to ensure that each
firefighter does his/her duty.
E. Each Captain shall obtain the discharge of his/her station from the
Chief or officer acting as Chief after the fire has been extinguished and
the roll called.
F. Each Captain shall maintain the discipline of the station under his/her
command and instruct the members in their duties.
G. Each Captain shall carry out the orders of the Chief or officer acting as
Chief.
H. Each Captain shall report to the Chief at the time of duty at fires, the
conditions thereof and the conditions relating to positions assigned and
shall make recommendations where needed to more effectively control
said fire.
I. At the conclusion of his or her term in office, the Captain shall
surrender all Department property to his or her successor.
A. Lieutenants shall be obligated to encourage the members in
performance of duties and enforce all orders given by active officers
senior in rank.
B. It shall be the duty of each Lieutenant on his/her respective apparatus
to properly instruct the persons assigned to that apparatus in the use of
the equipment and appliances and to recommend qualified drivers to
the Chief.
C. At the conclusion of his or her term in office, the Lieutenant shall
surrender all Department property to his or her successor.
§ 18-31 RIVER VALE CODE § 18-34
13:76
§ 18-34. Temporary officers.
At an alarm of fire, the first officer to arrive at the fire acts as Chief and
performs the duties of Chief until his/her superior arrives. If no officer
arrives, then the drivers of each truck shall take charge until an officer
arrives. If no officers arrive, then the drivers shall continue in charge until
the fire is extinguished.
§ 18-35. Fire Police.
The Department can designate Fire Police to assist at the scene of an alarm,
active fire, accident, or other emergency, consistent with state law.
§ 18-34 ETHICS § 18-35
13:77
Chapter 19
FUNDS
§ 18-35 RIVER VALE CODE § 18-35
13:78
ARTICLE I
Open Space Trust Fund
[Adopted 2-23-2009 by Ord. No. 204-2009]
§ 19-1. Creation of fund.
There is hereby created a River Vale Township Open Space Trust Fund,
whose purposes are set forth below.
§ 19-2. Purpose.
The purposes of the River Vale Township Open Space Trust fund are as
follows:
§ 19-3. Funding source.
The funding source for the Township Open Space Trust Fund shall be the
establishment of a separate Township tax line item at an annual rate not
to exceed $0.01 per $100 of ratables for each and every taxable property
located within the Township. The rate shall be set every year by the
Township Council, by resolution, during the existence of the Township Open
Space Trust Fund, no later than the meeting at which the Township budget
shall be introduced. The Township Chief Financial Officer, the Township
Auditor, the Township Tax Collector and the Township Tax Assessor, where
applicable, shall assist the Mayor and Council in the annual creation/
collection of this open space tax.
§ 19-4. Allocation of funds.
The determination of how the Township Open Space Trust Fund shall be
expended at any time shall be at the sole discretion of the Mayor and
Township Council and they shall be the final determiners of the allocation(s)
of the trust fund during its existence. The Township reserves the right to
establish an Open Space Advisory Committee to assist the Township in
addressing the provisions of this article.
A. To acquire, develop and maintain lands/properties within the Township
for recreation and conservation purposes;
B. To assist in the preservation of farmland within the Township wherein
there is a funding necessity, either through matching grants for
farmland preservation/acquisition or through funding for the
reservation of farming privileges and/or the acquisition of development
rights as established by state law and/or the Bergen County Board of
Chosen Freeholders or their designees;
C. To acquire or preserve historic properties; or
D. To provide funding for the payment of debt service related to
appropriations in accordance with the subsections A through C above.
§ 19-1 ETHICS § 19-5
13:79
§ 19-5. Duration.
The provisions of taxation to create and fund the Open Space Trust Fund
and the existence of the Township Open Space Trust Fund shall be
perpetual, unless terminated by the Township Council.
§ 19-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 19-5
13:80
Chapter 20
GOLF UTILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and Recreation — See Ch. 166.
§ 20-1. Establishment of Golf Utility; purpose.
There is created and established upon the effective date of this chapter
a municipally owned utility to be known as the "Municipal Golf Course of
the Township of River Vale" (the "Golf Utility"), commonly known as the
"River Vale Country Club." The authorized operations of the Golf Utility
shall consist of the operation, management, control and maintenance of the
River Vale Country Club and all extensions and improvements hereafter
made thereto, together with all services relating to such purposes, including
the billing and collection of daily and membership fees.
§ 20-2. Administration; personnel; salaries.
The Mayor is authorized to appoint an individual or entity who shall be
responsible for the day-to-day administrative operations of the Golf Utility,
including proposing the annual budget for the Golf Utility and making
recommendations to the Township Council regarding membership and daily
rates and charges, the classification of users, general policy oversight of
Golf Utility administration and operations and the review and investigation
of grievances. The salaries of the employees or appointments of the Golf
Utility shall be paid from the Golf Utility Fund.
§ 20-3. Golf Utility Fund.
All moneys derived from the operations of the Golf Utility and other moneys
applicable to its support shall be segregated and kept in a separate fund,
known as the Golf Utility Fund, and treated as moneys held in trust for
the purposes for which the Golf Utility was created. Moneys in the Golf
Utility Fund shall be applied only to costs of the Golf Utility or as otherwise
permitted by law and shall be accounted for in accordance with the Local
Budget Law and the Local Bond Law.11
§ 20-4. Budget.
The budget of the Golf Utility and the appropriations and disbursements
from the Golf Utility Fund shall be in compliance with the Local Budget
Law12 and other applicable law.
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq., respectively.
12.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.
§ 19-5 ETHICS § 20-5
13:81
§ 20-5. Effect on other provisions.
To the extent that any previous ordinance or resolution is inconsistent
with or contradictory hereto, said ordinance or resolution is amended or
repealed to the extent necessary to make it consistent herewith. In all
other respects, this article shall be a supplement to other ordinances and
resolutions heretofore adopted relating to sewer system purposes.
Chapter 21
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advisory Health Board — See Ch. 3, § 3-15D.
§ 21-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to Chapter 349, Laws of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-9 et seq.), as
supplemented and amended, and other applicable statutes, there is hereby
created a Board of Health in the Township of River Vale.13
§ 21-2. Composition; appointments; terms; duties. [Amended
3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 102-2005]
A. Within the Division of Health Services, there shall be an Advisory
Health Board, which shall be composed of no fewer than five and no
more than seven members appointed by the Mayor. The members shall
serve for staggered terms of four years from the date of their
appointment, except that, at the time of their appointment, two shall be
appointed for a term of one year, two for a term of two years, two for a
term of three years and one for a term of four years. All members shall
serve without compensation. [Amended 8-13-2007 by Ord. No.
187-2007; 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 325-2017]
B. The Advisory Health Board, within the limitations of available
appropriations, shall:
(1) Make recommendations to the Health Officer and Mayor
concerning or relating to the operation and administration of the
Division of Health Services.
(2) Make recommendations to the Council concerning or touching
upon matters of policy or ordinance affecting the Division of Health
Services.
13.Editor's Note: See § 3-15D of Ch. 3, Administrative Code, which provides for the function
of health, vital statistics and Advisory Health Board under the Department of
Administration and Finance.
§ 20-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 21-3
13:82
§ 21-3. Powers.
The Board shall reorganize during the first week of January in each year,
and shall have power to appoint, on an annual basis, a sanitary inspector,
health officer or other official having similar duties, a plumbing inspector,
a secretary, and such other employees as it may deem necessary and to fix
the duties and compensation of such appointees, within the limits of such
amount as may be made available for the purpose in the annual budget. This
chapter shall take effect July 15, 1963, but appointments to the Board may
be made immediately after final passage and publication as required by law.
§ 21-4. Power to enforce health laws.
Said Board shall hereafter possess and enjoy all of the power and authority
conferred by law upon local health boards and be responsible for the
enforcement of said laws and local ordinances relating to the public health,
heretofore or hereafter adopted.
Chapter 29
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel Policies and Procedures
Manual — See Ch. A251.
§ 29-1. Establishment of titles and salaries by ordinance.
The Township Council of the Township of River Vale shall by ordinance
establish titles for public employment by the Township of River Vale and
salary ranges for Township employees.
§ 29-2. Adoption of policies by resolution.
The Township Council of the Township of River Vale shall by resolution
adopt and amend from time to time personnel policies and procedures
including rules concerning the hiring and termination of employees, terms
and conditions of employment, and regulations required to comply with
applicable federal and state employment-related law. The personnel policies
and procedures adopted pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be applicable to
all officials, appointees, employees, prospective employees, volunteers and
independent contractors of the Township of River Vale.14
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. A251, Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual.
§ 21-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 29-3
29:83
§ 29-3. Enforcement by Mayor.
The Mayor shall be responsible to enforce the personnel practices adopted
by resolution authorized pursuant to this chapter.
§ 29-4. Conflicts with other agreements, contracts or laws.
If there is a conflict between said personnel practices and any duly adopted
and lawful collective bargaining agreement, personnel services contract or
federal or state law, the terms and conditions of that contract or law shall
prevail. In all other cases, the practices adopted pursuant to this chapter
shall prevail.
Chapter 33
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Police — See Ch. 3, Art. V.
Police reserve — See Ch. 36.
Police Department fees — See Ch. 105, Art. I.
Personnel Policies and Procedures
Manual — See Ch. A251.
§ 29-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 29-4
29:84
ARTICLE I
Establishment; Composition; Membership
[Adopted 10-12-2006 by Ord. No. 166-200615]
§ 33-1. Department established; name; duties.
§ 33-2. Appropriate authority.
A. There shall be a full-time Police Department in and for the Township of
River Vale, in the County of Bergen.
B. The official name of said Police Department shall be "River Vale Police
Department."
C. The Police Department shall:
(1) Preserve the public peace and preserve order at all elections and
public meeting and assemblages.
(2) Protect life and property, administer and enforce laws and
ordinances to regulate, direct, control and restrict the movement of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the use of the streets by
vehicles and persons to protect the safety and facilitate the
convenience of motorists and pedestrians.
(3) Detect and arrest offenders of the laws of the State of New Jersey
and the ordinances of the Township of River Vale.
(4) Provide proper police attendance at all fires and protection during
emergencies.
(5) Provide appearances in court when necessary.
(6) Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public streets,
parks and other public places of the Township. May inspect and
observe all places of business requiring any state or municipal
license or permit and report thereon to the appropriate
department.
(7) Maintain such police training programs as may be necessary and
proper for the efficient and effective organization of the Police
Department, to improve the Police Department, the efficiency of
members of the Department, and to enforce rules and regulations
for the disposition, conduct and discipline of the Department.
(8) Perform such other duties as established by the appropriate
authority.
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed Ord. No. 162-2006, adopted 8-1-2006, which
repealed former Ch. 33, Police Department, adopted 8-22-2006 by Ord. No. 0-11-96 (Ch.
57 of the 1967 Code), as amended.
§ 33-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-2
29:85
§ 33-3. Composition.
A. The appropriate authority, as said term is used in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118,
shall be the Mayor or, in the Mayor's absence, the Business
Administrator.
B. Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the governing body and
individuals thereof shall act in all matters relating to the police function
as a body through the appropriate authority.
A. The Police Department shall consist of a police force and such other
non-sworn or civilian personnel as the appropriate authority shall
appoint. The police force shall consist of one Chief of Police, up to one
Captain, up to two Lieutenants, or up to five Sergeants, and up to 18
patrolmen. In lieu of having up to one Captain and up to two
Lieutenants, in the sole discretion of the Mayor or his designee, the
police force may consist of up to three Lieutenants. Such employees
shall carry out and obey all orders and instructions of the Chief of Police
or, in his permanent absence, a designee as appointed by the
appropriate authority. In the event of an officer in any of these positions
being on leave immediately preceding an announced retirement or a
suspension with intent to dismiss, the appropriate authority may, for the
efficiency of the Department, appoint a replacement to serve in the
vacant position. The appropriate authority may also choose to leave a
position vacant to undertake a review of whether the current table of
organization is still beneficial to the police mission. The appropriate
authority shall have up to one year from the effective date of retirement
or resignation to, in the exercise of his discretion, appoint/promote the
replacement in order to conduct a thorough, fair and competitive
search and selection process and assure adequate funding. [Amended
11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 327-2017]
B. The Mayor and Council may decrease the force for reasons of economy.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-143, if they shall deem it necessary
for reasons of economy, they may decrease the number of members and
officers of the Police Department or force or their grades or ranks. In
case of demotion from the higher ranks, the officers or members to be
so demoted shall be in the inverse order of their appointment. When the
service of members or officers is terminated, such termination shall be
in the inverse order of their appointment. Any member or officer who is
demoted or whose service is terminated by reason of such decrease
shall be placed on a special employment list, and in the case of
subsequent promotions, a person so demoted shall be reinstated to his
original rank and, in the case of termination of service and new
appointment, prior consideration shall be given to the persons on said
special employment list.
C. There shall also be such clerical, secretarial and administrative
employees, community service officers, school crossing guards and
police technicians as the Mayor shall appoint. Said employees shall not
be members of the Police Department within the meaning of any
§ 33-2 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-3
29:86
§ 33-4. Chief of Police.
§ 33-5. Salaries and compensation.
Salaries and compensation of the Chief of Police may be fixed by ordinance.
Those of other employees of the Police Department shall be fixed by their
respective collective bargaining agreements or by ordinance in the absence
of a collective bargaining agreement. The Township Council shall fix the
per-diem or hourly rate of pay for special officers by ordinance.
provision of Chapter 14, Title 40A, of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey, as amended and supplemented. Such employees shall carry out
and obey all orders and instructions of the Chief of Police or, in his
absence, a designee.
D. Acting Chief. If the Chief of Police is on vacation or for other cause is
unable to exercise the powers and duties of his or her office, the next
highest ranking sworn police officer shall serve and be responsible for
the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations of the police force and
Department. In the event that there are two or more officers of next
highest rank, the Chief of Police may select the Acting Chief from
amongst them.
A. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the police force and shall be
directly responsible to the appropriate authority as provided by law for
its efficiency and day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies
established by the appropriate authority, the Chief of Police shall:
(1) Administer and enforce the rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the force
and its officers and personnel.
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the force.
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
(4) Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the
efficient operation of the force to be exercised under his/her
direction and supervision.
(5) Maintain the good order and discipline of the force.
(6) Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority, in such form
as the appropriate authority shall prescribe, on the operation of the
force during the preceding month and make such other reports as
may be requested by the appropriate authority.
(7) Perform such other duties as established by the appropriate
authority.
§ 33-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-6
29:87
§ 33-6. Qualifications for membership.
No personnel shall be appointed as a member of the Police Department
unless he/she submits satisfactory evidence that he/she:
§ 33-7. Determination of membership.
A. Is a citizen of the United States.
B. Is of good mental and bodily health sufficient to satisfy the Board of
Trustees of the Police and Firemen's Retirement System of New Jersey
that he would be eligible for membership in the retirement system.
C. Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
D. Is of good moral character and free from conviction of any crime
constituting an indictable offense or any crime or offense involving
moral turpitude.
E. Is able to pass such written, oral, physical and psychological
examinations as shall be selected by the appropriate authority and meet
essential job functions.
F. Is a graduate from a high school or shall have had formal education or
training showing attainment of the level represented by graduation
from high school and with a minimum of 60 college credits from an
accredited college. Two years of active-duty military service with an
honorable discharge can be substituted for the sixty-college-credit
requirement.
G. Is a holder of a valid New Jersey driver's license.
H. Submit to a psychological examination to be given by the Township of
River Vale. The results of said psychological examination must be
satisfactory to the appointing authority and must indicate that the
applicant can perform the police function.
I. Otherwise meets all requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122 to 40A:14-127.
A. Investigation of applicants. No applicant shall be appointed to any
position with the Police Department until after the applicant shall have
been fingerprinted and said fingerprints filed with the New Jersey State
Police and Federal Bureau of Investigation, and no applicant shall be
appointed until after there has been a thorough background and
character investigation of the candidate that will also determine the
candidate's fitness for the position.
B. Required training course; probationary status.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:I7B-66 et seq., no person shall be
permanently appointed to the police force of the Township of River
§ 33-6 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-7
29:88
Vale until after having successfully completed a police training
course at an approved school.
(a) During the period of required training, the employee shall hold
the rank of probationary officer. Employees shall be entitled to
a leave of absence with pay during the period of the police
training course. Following the completion of an employee's
police training course, he/she shall be classified as a
probationary employee with the Police Department for a period
of one year active duty on the road (not including academy
time). [Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 327-2017]
(2) The appropriate authority may waive the attendance of such
training if satisfactory certification of previous accredited
schooling under the Mandatory Police Training Act of the State of
New Jersey is presented and found satisfactory.
(a) Police officers hired pursuant to this section shall be classified
as probationary employees with the Police Department for a
period of one year from the date of hire.
(3) All non-sworn employees of the Police Department shall serve a
probationary period of six months before becoming regular
employees.
(4) Probationary employees will be evaluated on a monthly basis
throughout the entire period of their probation in an effort to
determine their suitability for continued employment. Probationary
employees will be advised of their progress and counseled when
necessary in an effort to correct any deficient performance or
behavior.
(5) The Chief of Police shall make a recommendation to the
appropriate authority concerning the suitability for transition from
probationary status to regular status for each probationary police
officer. Such recommendation shall be set forth in a written report
along with the Chief's observations and findings leading to such
recommendation. These recommendations shall be submitted to
the appropriate authority no later than 10 days prior to the end of
the probationary employee's period of probation. Nothing herein
shall prohibit the Chief of Police from submitting such
recommendation at any time during an employee's probationary
period when such employee demonstrates that he/she does not
possess the qualities and abilities to competently perform the
duties of a Township of River Vale police officer.
(6) The appropriate authority may terminate a probationary employee
at any time during or at the end of the probationary period, or
affirm the retention of the candidate as a full-time member of the
police force.
§ 33-7 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-7
29:89
§ 33-8. Promotions. [Amended 5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 198-2008]
C. Every member of the Police Department and special police officers,
before entering upon the performance of their duties, shall take and
subscribe an oath or affirmation to bear true faith and allegiance to the
government established in this state under the authority of the people,
to support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of
the State of New Jersey and to faithfully, impartially and justly
discharge and perform all the duties of their offices, which oaths or
affirmations shall be filed with the Township Clerk.
A. The Township of River Vale desires to promote the most qualified
candidates to positions of higher rank. This article establishes the
eligibility requirements and the process for promotion to all higher
ranks. The promotion process shall be on the basis of merit, experience,
education, demonstrated ability, competitive examinations (for rank of
lieutenant and below) as well as competitive written submissions (for
rank of Captain and above). In accordance with N.J.S.A 40A:14-129,
promotion of any officer shall be made from the membership of the
Department. No person shall be eligible for promotion unless he or she
shall have served as a full-time police officer in the Township of River
Vale Police Department for a period of three years (N.J.S.A.
40A:14-130). No person shall be eligible for promotion to be a superior
officer unless he or she has previously served as patrolman in such
Department or force (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129).
B. Upon receiving instructions from the Mayor or his/her designee as
provided by law to do so, the Chief of Police shall announce the
promotional process to members of the Department at least 60 calendar
days before the written examination is to be given. The announcement
shall be posted in common areas of the Department accessible to all
members. The announcement shall contain, at a minimum, the rank to
be filled, the dates of the exams, source materials or reading lists from
which exam questions will be taken or topics from which questions will
be formulated. Candidates who qualify shall notify the Chief of Police of
his or her interest in taking the examination by submitting a letter of
interest no later than 14 calendar days after the promotion
announcement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event an Officer
is on vacation or sick leave during the initial fourteen-calendar-day
notification period and, as a result, is unable to submit a letter of
interest, such officer shall be entitled to provide his or her letter of
interest to the Chief of Police within three days of his or her scheduled
date of returning to work, provided such notice must be provided in all
instances no later than 15 calendar days before the written examination
is to be given. Such letter of interest shall include a statement that such
candidate has read Chapter 33, Police Department, § 33-8, Promotions,
of the Code of the Township of River Vale, that such candidate wishes to
participate in the promotional process for the available position and
that such candidate agrees to abide by the promotional process set
forth in Chapter 33, Police Department, § 33-8, Promotions, of the Code
§ 33-7 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-8
29:90
with respect to the promotion process. In the event a candidate decides
to not continue with the process, the candidate shall promptly notify the
Chief of Police in writing of his or her decision to not continue.
C. Where two or more candidates are ranked equally pursuant to the
promotional procedure set forth herein, preference shall be given to the
candidate who is first a resident over a nonresident pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-122.6 and then with the most seniority in service pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129.
D. The Mayor or his/her designee as provided by law shall convene the
reviewing committee for Departmental promotions, which shall consist
of the Mayor or his/her designee as provided by law, the Business
Administrator and the Chief of Police (the "Reviewing Committee").
E. Promotion testing procedure. The promotion testing procedure for the
River Vale Police Department shall consist of written examination (and
for promotions to Lieutenant or Captain a written submission as well)
and an oral examination (and for promotions to Lieutenant or Captain
an oral interview as well) in which all candidates will be given the same
questions and a review of the candidates' service record, education,
merit and seniority.
(1) Written examination/written submission.
(a) The written examination shall be supplied by a professional
testing company, professional law enforcement organization or
such other written examination approved by the Mayor or his/
her designee as provided by law. To proceed to the oral portion
of the examination procedure, a candidate must achieve a
minimum score of 70% on the written portion. At their request,
candidates may review their own individual written test
answers and scores in comparison to the master copy of
questions and answers for the written portion of the exam. This
review shall take place with the Chief of Police or his or her
designee.
(b) For all positions above the rank of Sergeant, each candidate
shall provide three copies of a written submission about
themselves to the Business Administrator of the Township of
River Vale. Such submission shall include, but not be limited to,
the candidate's resume (training, education, experience,
hobbies, awards, etc.) and a statement as to why such
candidate should be promoted to the position sought.
(2) Oral examination(s)/oral interview.
(a) Candidates shall be notified, in writing, of their successful or
unsuccessful completion of the written portion of the exam by
the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
§ 33-8 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-8
29:91
(b) Candidates that successfully achieve a score of 70% on the
written examination shall be permitted to sit for an oral
examination by the Reviewing Committee. The oral
examination shall take place after the receipt of the written
examination scores.
(c) Candidates must score at least 70 out of 100 in the oral
examination to proceed to the next step in the promotional
process. At their request, candidates may review their own
individual oral examination answers and scores in comparison
to the master copy of questions and answers for the oral
examination. This review shall take place with the Chief of
Police or his or her designee.
(d) For all positions above the rank of Sergeant, the next step in
the process will be an interview with the Mayor or his/her
designee as provided by law, the Business Administrator and
the Chief of Police. Candidates for positions below the rank of
Lieutenant will proceed from the oral exam directly to the
review of service record.
(e) The interview with the Mayor or his/her designee as provided
by law, the Business Administrator and the Chief of Police shall
focus on leadership and management skills, knowledge of
River Vale's form of government, knowledge of the Police
Department Ordinance, familiarity with municipal budget
process and knowledge of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The Mayor,
Business Administrator and Chief of Police shall grade each
candidate on a one-hundred-point scale.
(3) Record review.
(a) Candidates that successfully achieve a score of 70% on the
written examination or written submission and 70% on the oral
examination shall proceed to the next step in the promotional
process, the review of service record.
(b) The Reviewing Committee shall examine the length and merit
of candidates' service. The examination process shall give
specific weight to performance evaluations, seniority, military
service, demonstrated leadership ability, education and
disciplinary history.
(4) Scoring procedure. The weight or percentage of each portion of the
process shall be as follows:
(a) Sergeant.
[1] Written test: 30%.
[2] Oral exam: 30%.
[3] Performance evaluations: 20%.
§ 33-8 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-8
29:92
[4] Leadership evaluation: 10%.
[5] Seniority: 5%.
[6] Education: 5%.
[a] Associate's degree: 2.5%.
[b] Bachelor's degree: 3.5%.
[c] Master's degree or higher: 5.0%.
[d] Two years of active-duty military experience can be
substituted for associate's degree if honorably
discharged.
[e] Associate's degree and two years of active-duty
military experience will be worth 3.5% if honorably
discharged.
[7] Police discipline shall be a minus, if within six months of
the review of the service record, the discipline has been
officially adjudicated and permanently placed in the
candidate's personnel file. A more-than-five-day
suspension shall extend the review of the service record
up to one year.
[a] Written reprimand: -1.0%.
[b] One to two days' suspension: -2.5%.
[c] Three to five days' suspension: -5.0%.
[d] More than five days' suspension: -10.0%.
(b) Lieutenant and Captain.
[1] Written test: 15%.
[2] Written submission: 15%.
[3] Oral exam: 15%.
[4] Interview with the Mayor, Chief of Police and Business
Administrator: 15%.
[5] Performance evaluations: 20%.
[6] Leadership evaluation: 10%.
[7] Seniority: 5%.
[8] Education: 5%.
[a] Associate's degree: 2.5%.
§ 33-8 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-8
29:93
[b] Bachelor's degree: 3.5%.
[c] Master's degree or higher: 5.0%.
[d] Two years of active-duty military experience can be
substituted for associate's degree if honorably
discharged.
[e] Associate's degree and two years of active-duty
military experience will be worth 3.5% if honorably
discharged.
[9] Police discipline shall be a minus, if within six months of
the review of the service record, the discipline has been
officially adjudicated and permanently placed in the
candidate's personnel file. A more-than-five-day
suspension shall extend the review of the service record
up to one year.
[a] Written reprimand: -1.0%.
[b] One to two days' suspension: -2.5%.
[c] Three to five days' suspension: -5.0%.
[d] More than five days' suspension: -10.0%.
F. The Review Committee shall rank each candidate based on the total
score as outlined above. The candidates shall then be ranked from the
highest to lowest based on score. The list shall include the candidates'
names and the final scores.
G. The Review Committee shall then submit the results of the process
listing the breakdowns and final scores of the candidates and any other
information that may be pertinent to the Mayor for final decision.
H. Candidates who achieve an overall score of 70% or greater shall be
placed on a two-year promotional list. [Amended 1-22-2018 by Ord.
No. 329-2018]
I. Eligibility for testing. All candidates for promotion must have served
three years with Township of River Vale as a full-time patrol officer by
the date of written test in order to be eligible to participate in the
promotional process. Promotions to the rank of sergeant shall be open
to patrol officers. When a vacant sergeant position exists or is
anticipated and there is a desire by the Township of River Vale to fill
such position, a promotional process shall be administered and a
separate list created and the sergeant list will consist of patrolmen who
successfully complete the process.
J. Promotions to ranks above Sergeant shall be open to members of the
next lowest rank, unless the Mayor, in the best interest of the
Department, chooses to test a wider pool of candidates, in which case
§ 33-8 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-8
29:94
§ 33-9. Chief of Police; qualifications.
Candidates for the position of Chief of Police shall participate in a
promotional procedure administered by the appropriate authority. The
reviewing committee, which shall be made up of the appropriate authority,
the Business Administrator, and the current Chief of Police, shall consider
the following: the candidates' knowledge of criminal law and procedure,
police science and police administration, leadership and management
ability, general knowledge of River Vale local government and N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118, the candidates' poise, alertness, ability to communicate clearly
and effectively, ability to effect good working and public relations and moral
character.
§ 33-10. Chain of command.
§ 33-11. Special law enforcement officers.
The Mayor may appoint special law enforcement officers in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq., to be utilized by the Police Chief. Their terms
may not exceed one year. They shall possess and exercise all the powers and
duties provided by said statutes during their term in office, but shall not be
continued as regular members of the Police Department and shall not be
entitled to tenure.
he or she may open testing to the two next lowest ranks (a pool of less
than three eligible candidates will not generally be considered "in the
best interest of the Department"). An officer who tests for a higher rank
and does not achieve the 70% score necessary to make the promotion
list referred to in Subsection H is ineligible to take an exam for that
rank, or a higher rank, for a period of two years from the date of the
promotion list. [Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 327-2017]
A. The following chain of command shall exist within the Police
Department, if such position is filled.
(1) Chief of Police.
(2) Captain.
(3) Lieutenant.
(4) Sergeant(s).
(5) Patrolman.
(6) Special officer.
B. Each rank/position shall be subordinate to all higher ranks as
illustrated above.
C. Civilian employees shall report to the Chief of Police or, in his/her
absence, the ranking officer on duty.
§ 33-8 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-12
29:95
§ 33-12. Discipline.
§ 33-13. Extra-duty employment.
A. No member or officer of the Police Department shall be suspended,
removed, fined or reduced in rank other than for cause as provided
herein or in the New Jersey statutes and the Police Department's rules
and regulations.
B. Standards of conduct. No member of the Police Department and no
special officer while holding office or appointment under the authority
of this article shall at any time:
(1) Violate any criminal law of the United States or of New Jersey or
any ordinance of the Township or other municipality.
(2) Conduct himself or herself in a manner unbecoming a police officer
and a gentle person.
(3) Conduct himself or herself in a manner subversive to good order
and discipline of the Police Department.
(4) Conduct himself or herself in a manner disrespectful to a superior.
(5) Absent himself or herself from his post of duty without having
obtained prior leave from his superior officer, except in case of
emergency.
(6) Absent himself or herself from the Township, except when he/she is
off duty or on vacation pursuant to the order of the Police Chief,
without having obtained prior leave from the Chief, provided that
this regulation shall apply to special police officers only while
assigned to active duty. The Chief shall advise the appropriate
authority of his absence from the Township for any reason other
than official police business.
(7) Refuse to perform any of the duties of his office or evade the
performance of any such duties, whether on patrol or otherwise
and whether or not in uniform, provided that this regulation shall
apply to special police officers only while assigned to active duty.
(8) Contract any debts or other financial obligations without a
reasonable expectation of being able to pay or discharge the same
when due.
A. Any person or entity wishing to receive police services which the
Township is not obligated or expected to provide or does not usually
provide as part of its regular plan of police services may arrange to
receive such services within the Township through the Office of the
Chief of Police. Such person should notify the Chief of Police, in writing,
of the specific nature of the services desired at least 15 days before
such services are required, unless exigent circumstances exist. All
requests shall be subject to the availability of personnel as determined
§ 33-12 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-13
29:96
§ 33-14. Payment for extra-duty police services.
by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police is responsible for public safety
in River Vale and as such shall administer all activities pursuant to this
section.
B. All police services within the Township of River Vale shall be delivered
by officers from the Township of River Vale Police Department. If the
Chief of Police determines that the demand cannot be met by the
Township of River Vale Police Department he may request additional
police officers from outside agencies.
C. All requests for extra-duty police services will be finalized in a written
agreement between the Chief of Police and the individual or entity
requesting such services, subject to the approval of the Mayor. The
agreement shall specify the following:
(1) The scope of services that are to be provided;
(2) The commencement date of the police services to be provided;
(3) The hours of authorized operation;
(4) The number of officers requested and total man-hours needed; and
(5) The anticipated date when the need for police services will be
completed.
D. All police officers providing extra-duty services pursuant to this section
shall be considered "on-duty" and will function under the supervision of
the Chief of Police. The Township of River Vale Police Department and
its employees will maintain all employment rights while assigned to
work extra-duty assignments. Employees working extra-duty
assignments will be held to their normal standard of conduct and are
subject to disciplinary action for any violation of the rules and
regulations. Members of the Police Department are eligible to accept
extra-duty employment only during periods when they are not assigned
to regular duty and at times when such extra-duty employment will not
interfere with the efficient performance of their regularly scheduled
police duties. No officer shall work more than 12 consecutive hours in a
twenty-four-hour period between a combination of this assignment and
regular assignments.
A. All fees for extra-duty police services will be collected by the Township
of River Vale Police Department, in full, prior to the delivery of such
services. All payments for such services shall be made payable to the
Township of River Vale, in accordance with municipal ordinances and
procedures.
B. Any person or entity requesting a Township of River Vale police officer
for extra-duty employment shall deposit with the Township a sum as
§ 33-13 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-14
29:97
determined by the Business Administrator based upon a reasonable
estimate of the total costs for such services.
C. All funds remaining in the escrow account after the service is
completed and the monies have been disbursed to the officers working
extra-duty employment assignment shall be returned to the person or
entity requesting such extra-duty employment. Persons or entities
anticipating the need for additional extra-duty police services may leave
the balance in the escrow account to put towards their next use of River
Vale police. Funds on deposit will not earn interest. Upon completion of
each extra-duty work assignment, the Chief of Police shall cause a
summary of the assignment to be forwarded to the appropriate
authority to facilitate payment. Upon receipt of proof of extra-duty
police services, the Township shall disburse payment to those officers
who worked the extra-duty assignments. Payment will be based upon
the established officer's hourly rate agreed upon by the Township and
the recognized collective bargaining unit. Payment for extra-duty work
assignments shall be made to the officers at the next available pay
period.
§ 33-14 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-14
29:98
ARTICLE II
Department Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 203-2009]
§ 33-15. Establishment of Department rules and regulations.
A. Police Department authority; powers; duties: legal authorization. The
Police Department has been established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118 and Chapter 33 of the Code of the Township of River Vale.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, Chapter 33 of the Code of the
Township of River Vale designates the Mayor as the appropriate
authority responsible for adopting and promulgating rules and
regulations for the government of the police force and the discipline of
its members.
B. Rules and regulations established.
(1) Rules and regulations. The appropriate authority of the Township
hereby adopts and promulgates the Department rules and
regulations, known as the "River Vale Police Department Rules and
Regulations."
(2) Right to amend or revoke. For the good of the service, in accord
with New Jersey Statute 40A:14-118, the right is reserved by the
appropriate authority, as the representative of the governing body,
to amend or revoke any of the rules and regulations contained
herein.
(3) Previous rules, regulations, policies and procedures. All rules and
regulations previously issued, and policies and procedures that
conflict with the rules and regulations contained herein, are hereby
revoked to the extent of any such inconsistency. All other rules,
regulations, policies, procedures and general orders not in conflict
with those contained in this manual shall remain in full force unless
expressly revoked by competent authority.
(4) Application.
(a) Department rules and regulations, policies and procedures and
written directives are applicable to all police officers of the
Department and, where appropriate, to all civilian employees
of the Department.
(b) An employee who violates any Department rule, regulation or
written directive, or who fails to perform the duties of one's
rank or assignment, either willfully or through negligence or
incompetence, is subject to disciplinary action.
(5) Distribution. One copy of these rules and regulations shall be
distributed to each member and employee of the Police
Department.
§ 33-15 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-15
29:99
§ 33-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACTING — Assigned temporarily to serve in a position to which the member
is not ordinarily assigned, usually in a position of higher rank. All the
authority, responsibilities and duties of the officer in the higher position
devolve upon the acting member.
ANNUAL LEAVE — The combination of vacation, personal and
compensatory leave granted to all employees annually in accordance with
the River Vale Township Code and all applicable collective bargaining
agreements.
APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY — Mayor of the Township of River Vale.
AUTHORITY — The statutory or policy-vested right to give commands, issue
orders, enforce obedience, initiate action and make necessary decisions.
Those so designated may delegate authority. Acts performed without proper
authority or authorization shall be considered in violation of this manual,
and those persons in violation shall be subject to disciplinary action.
BUREAU — A unit immediately subordinate to a division.
CHAIN OF COMMAND — The unbroken line of authority extending from the
Chief of Police through one or more subordinates at each level of command
down to the level of execution and vice versa.
COMMAND OFFICER — Police officers holding the rank of Captain or above
and assigned to a command position by the Chief of Police.
DAYS OFF — Those days determined by the Chief of Police on which a given
employee is excused from duty.
DEPARTMENT — Township of River Vale Police Department.
DEPARTMENT MANUAL — Collection of all lawfully issued rules,
regulations, policies, procedures and general orders. Such manuals in force
in the Department are issued by authority of the Chief of Police. Compliance
with the provisions of Department manuals is required without exception.
DETAIL — A temporary assignment of personnel for a specialized activity.
(6) Maintenance. Employees shall be responsible for maintaining a
current copy of the rules and regulations contained in this manual,
including all additions, revisions and amendments as may be
issued.
(7) Familiarization. Employees shall thoroughly familiarize themselves
with the provisions of the rules and regulations and policies and
procedures contained with the Department manual. Ignorance of
any of the provisions of this manual will not be a defense to a
charge of a violation of the rules and regulations.
§ 33-15 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-16
29:100
DETECTIVE — A police officer, designated as a detective, assigned to
conduct criminal and other investigations while in civilian clothes.
DIVISION — A functional unit having jurisdiction-wide coverage whose
commanding officer reports directly to the Chief of Police or Captain of
Police.
EMPLOYEE — All employees of the Police Department, whether sworn
regular or special police officers or civilian employees.
FUNCTION — The general activity of a subdivision of the Department, e.g.,
the operations function, the administrative function, etc.
GENDER — The use of the masculine gender in any directive or manual
includes the female gender, where applicable.
GENERAL ORDER — Written directive designed to announce adoption or
revision of policies and to direct procedure for the indefinite future.
HEADQUARTERS — The section that houses the headquarters staff and
employees of this Department.
INCOMPETENCE — Incapable of satisfactory performance of police duties.
INFORMATIONAL BULLETINS — Published materials containing
information regarding wanted persons, crime patterns, and other incidents
calling for police attention.
INSUBORDINATION — A course of conduct, including but not limited to
failure or deliberate refusal of any employee to obey a lawful order given
by a superior officer. Ridiculing a superior officer or his order, whether
in or out of his presence, is also insubordination. Disrespectful, mutinous,
insolent, or abusive language toward or concerning a superior officer.
LAWFUL ORDER — Any written or spoken directive issued by a superior
officer, supervisor or acting supervisor, to any subordinate or group of
subordinates in the course of police duty, which is not in violation of any law,
ordinance or Departmental rule or regulation.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE — The period of time during which a police officer is
excused from active duty and during which time he receives no pay.
MANAGER — Business Administrator of the Township.
MAY — Indicates that the action is expected and encouraged.
MEMBER — Any duly appointed police officer of the Department.
MEMORANDA — Written directive designed to facilitate and provide
direction for the smooth operation of the Department.
MILITARY LEAVE — The period of time during which an officer is excused
from duty by reason of serving in the Armed Forces of the United States in
an active capacity as provided by law.
OFF DUTY — The status of a member during the period he is free from the
performance of specified duties.
OFFICER — Any duly appointed police officer of the Department.
§ 33-16 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-16
29:101
OFFICER-IN-CHARGE — Ranking member of the Department on duty. Rank
is determined by grade first, and by seniority in grade second. Any member
up to and including the rank of Lieutenant in charge of a watch or detail.
OFFICIAL CHANNELS — Through the hands of superior officers in the
chain of command.
ON DUTY — The status of a member during the period of the day when he is
actively engaged in the performance of his duties. A police officer is subject
to call at all times.
ORDER — Any written or spoken directive issued by a superior officer to a
subordinate or group of subordinates in the course of police duty.
PERSONNEL ORDER — Written directive designed to announce
promotions, transfers, assignments and other personnel action to all
Department employees.
PLATOON — A subdivision of the Patrol Bureau comprised of two patrol
squads assigned to a watch.
PLURALITY — The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
POLICE INCIDENT — An occurrence or incident suggesting or requiring
police action or service by members.
POLICE VEHICLE — All vehicles under the control of the Department,
whether marked or unmarked, with or without radio equipment.
POLICY — Written directive that summarizes the Department position on
the responsibilities, direction or limitations of Department authority in
specific matters. A policy is a component of a general order.
POST — Assignment to a specified location, for a fixed period of time, to
address a specific police purpose.
PROBATIONARY PATROLMAN — Any member of the Police Department
serving a satisfactory training and evaluation period prior to permanent
appointment to the Department.
PROBATIONARY PERIOD — Each member shall be required to serve a
probationary period of one year prior to permanent full-time appointment
to the Department, which may be extended by the Chief of Police or in his
absence the Acting Chief of the Department.
PROCEDURE — Written directives that describe expected methods of
operation. Procedures differ from policy in that they direct attention to
the performance of a specific task within the guidelines of the policy. A
procedure is a component of a general order.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Departmental legislation consisting of
detailed directives binding upon employees of all ranks in terms of
authority, responsibility and conduct.
SECTOR — A geographical area administratively designated for purposes of
investigation, supervision or patrol.
§ 33-16 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-16
29:102
SENIOR OFFICER — A member in any given rank with the longer service
in that rank. Seniority in the Department is established first by rank and
second by time served in rank. Where conflict occurs because of identical
service or dates of appointment, the member with the higher position on the
recommendation list from which the appointments were made is deemed to
be the senior. In situations requiring decision making or control, where the
officers are of equal rank and the decision or control is required in their
area of responsibility, the senior will make the decision and exercise control
unless otherwise designated by a higher-ranking command or supervisory
officer.
SHALL/WILL — Indicates that the action referred to is mandatory.
SICK LEAVE — The period of time during which an officer is excused from
active duty by reason of illness or injury by a commanding officer or watch
commander in the absence of a commanding officer.
SPECIAL DUTY — Police service, the nature of which requires the member
to be reassigned from the performance of his regular duties to perform
other duties as required from time to time by the Chief of Police.
SPECIAL ORDER — Written directive designed to give specific direction
pertaining to assignments, scheduling and special details.
SPECIAL POLICE — Persons vested with special police authority pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146, but are not members of the Department.
SQUAD — A functional unit subordinate to a bureau or under the immediate
direction of the Chief of Police. It may be commanded by any rank,
depending on its size and the nature and importance of its function.
STAFF SUPERVISION — An advisory relationship, outside the regular
hierarchy of command and responsibility, in which a supervisor may review
the work of another employee who is responsible to another superior officer.
SUBORDINATE — A member lower in rank than his superior officer.
SUPERIOR OFFICER — A person holding a higher supervisory or command
rank or position.
SUPERVISORY OFFICER — Members of the Department assigned to a
position requiring exercise of immediate supervision over the activities of
employees.
SUSPENSION — An act of temporarily denying an employee the privilege
of performing his duties, and relieving him from the duty with or without
pay for a period of time, in consequence of alleged dereliction of duty or
violation of Department rules and regulations.
TENSE OF WORDS — The words used in the present tense include the
future.
TOUR OF DUTY — The period of time during which a member of the
Department is assigned to active duty.
TOWNSHIP — Township of River Vale, New Jersey.
§ 33-16 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-16
29:103
TRAINING BULLETIN — Materials published and designed to keep officers
of this Department abreast of current police techniques and procedures.
The bulletins and their presentation act as a continuous training program
and as a stimulus for further study. The information contained therein
constitutes official Department policy on the subject matter under
consideration in the absence of instructions to the contrary.
UNIT — Any number of members and/or employees of the Department
regularly grouped together under one head to accomplish a police purpose.
WATCH/TOUR — The specified time period that a particular platoon of
officers is scheduled for duty.
WATCH/TOUR COMMANDER — The ranking Patrol Bureau officer assigned
to duty on the watch.
WRITTEN DIRECTIVE — Any written document used to guide or affect the
performance or conduct of agency employees. The term includes policies,
procedures, rules and regulations, general orders, special orders, personnel
orders, memoranda, and instructional materials.
ZONE/SECTOR — A subdivision of the Township with fixed boundaries
containing more than one sector.
§ 33-17. General rules and regulations.
A. Code of Ethics.
(1) Law enforcement is an honorable calling. Service in this field
demands a professional rather than an occupational philosophy.
Personal honor, a desire for professional status, and devotion to
service above self are the motives which compel a police officer to
discharge his responsibility in full measure.
(2) A police officer's life is one of self-sacrificing service to a high ideal,
based upon his recognition of the responsibilities entrusted to him/
her and the belief that law enforcement is an honorable vocation.
He/she fully accepts his/her responsibilities to defend the right, to
protect the weak, to aid the distressed, and to uphold the law in
public and in private living. He/she accepts the obligation to report
facts truthfully and to testify without bias or display of emotion, and
to consider all information coming to his/her knowledge by virtue of
his position as a sacred trust, to be used for official purposes only.
He/she gives his/her loyal and faithful attention to the identification
and apprehension of criminals, being equally alert to protect the
innocent and prosecute the guilty. He/she performs the functions of
his/her office without fear, favor, or prejudice and does not engage
in unlawful or improper practices.
(3) He/she does not disclose to unauthorized persons any information
concerning pending matters which might be prejudicial to the
interests of the state, Township of River Vale, or the Department.
§ 33-16 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-17
29:104
(4) He/she does not seek to benefit personally by any confidential
information which has come to him/her by virtue of his/her
assignment. He/she is respectful and courteous to all citizens. He/
she is faithful and loyal to his/her organization, constantly striving
to cooperate with and to promote better relations with all regularly
constituted law enforcement agencies and their respective in
matters of mutual interest and obligation.
(5) Rigid adherence to the principles set out above is mandatory for
anyone accepting a position in the Police Department. Acceptance
of these principles should not be perfunctory; it should be weighed
carefully. Citizens are quick to criticize any misconduct of members
of the Department; the community places a trust in police officers
and expects them to so conduct themselves as to merit this trust.
Members should be proud to hold a position that demands so much.
(6) There must be a moral philosophy and strong appreciation of the
need for service in any profession. Unwavering adherence to such a
moral philosophy will earn for police officers the respect and
support of the public.
(7) Each member of the Police Department shall conform to the Law
Enforcement Code of Ethics, as contained herein.
B. Professional conduct and responsibilities.
(1) Loyalty (Class 3 offense). Loyalty to the Department and to
associates is an important factor in Department morale and
efficiency. Employees shall maintain a loyalty to the Department
and their associates as is consistent with the law and personal
ethics.
(2) Assistance (Class 2 offense). All members are required to take
appropriate action toward aiding a fellow police officer exposed to
danger or in a situation where danger might be impending.
(3) Coordination (Class 3 offense). Employees shall endeavor to assist
members of this and other bona fide law enforcement agencies in
the pursuit of official law enforcement agency objectives consistent
with these rules and regulations.
(4) Truthfulness (Class 1 Offense). All employees are required to be
truthful at all times whether testifying under oath or when not
under oath and while reporting and answering questions posed by
superior officers and/or Internal Affairs investigators.
(5) Abuse of authority (Class 1 Offense). Willful misuse of police
powers by any member for the purpose of violating the rights of any
person is prohibited.
(6) Conduct unbecoming a police officer (Class 2 offense).
§ 33-17 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-17
29:105
(a) Due to the nature of police work, the need for organizational
cohesion and cooperation, the awesome power and public trust
granted police officers, the autonomy they often work under
and the credibility needed to sustain effective law
enforcement, police officers must be held to the highest
standard in order for a Police Department to carry out its law
enforcement mission.
(b) Accordingly, police officers shall conduct themselves at all
times, both on and off duty, with high ethical standards, so as
not to bring discredit upon themselves as police officers or
upon the Police Department. Conduct unbecoming a police
officer is grounds for disciplinary action and shall be defined as
any improper conduct which tends to weaken public respect or
confidence in the Police Department or which adversely
impacts the confidence amongst fellow officers. This conduct
includes but is not limited to:
[1] Unlawful, disorderly, immoral, deceitful, dishonest or
unethical conduct by a police officer that adversely affects
the morale, efficiency or good order of the Police
Department or damages the reputation of the officer or
Department.
[2] Cowardly or other dishonorable conduct by a police officer
that injures or puts at risk any person or which tends to
lower public confidence in the officer or Police Department
or the mutual confidence among police officers.
[3] Slander, false reporting or any means of retaliation by a
police officer against any Department employee for their
official acts.
[4] The willful violation of the code of conduct as set forth in
the Police Department manual including the Law
Enforcement Code of Ethics.
(7) Conduct unbecoming an employee in the public service (Class 2
offense). Civilian employees shall conduct themselves at all times,
both on and off duty, with high ethical standards so as not to bring
discredit upon themselves as employees of the Police Department
or upon the Department itself.
(a) Unlawful, disorderly, immoral, deceitful, dishonest or unethical
conduct by a civilian employee that adversely affects the
morale, efficiency or good order of the Police Department, or
that damages the reputation or credibility of the Police
Department, is conduct unbecoming an employee in the public
service and shall constitute grounds for disciplinary action.
(b) Slander, false reporting or any means of retaliation by an
employee against any employee for their official acts is conduct
§ 33-17 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-17
29:106
unbecoming an employee in the public service and shall
constitute grounds for disciplinary action.
C. Duty responsibilities.
(1) Responsibilities (Class 3 offense): Members of the Department are
always subject to duty and they shall at all times respond to the
lawful orders of superior officers and other proper authorities, as
well as calls for police assistance from citizens. Proper police
action must be taken whenever required. The administrative
delegation of the enforcement of certain laws and ordinances to
particular subdivisions of the Department does not relieve
members of other subdivisions from the responsibility of taking
prompt, effective police action within the scope of those laws and
ordinances when the occasion so requires. Members assigned to
special duties are required to take proper action outside the scope
of their specialized assignment when necessary.
(2) Insubordination (Class 3 Offense). Employees shall promptly obey
all lawful orders issued by supervisors and superior officers.
Employees shall not ridicule a superior officer or an order of a
supervisor or superior officer whether in or out of the officer's
presence. Employees shall not use disrespectful, mutinous, insolent
or abusive language toward or about a supervisor or superior
officer.
(3) Neglect of duty (Class 2 Offense). Employees shall faithfully and
diligently carry out all of the duties and fulfill all of the obligations
of their office. Failure to take appropriate action on the occasion of
a crime, disorder, or other action or condition deserving of police
attention or any other omission by an employee which represents
an abandonment of one's duties, obligations or assignment is
neglect of duty and will subject that employee to discipline.
(4) Questions about assignment (Class 5 offense). Members and
employees in doubt as to the nature or detail of an assignment)
order shall seek such information from their supervisors by going
through the chain of command.
(5) Knowledge of laws and regulations (Class 4 offense).
(a) Members shall familiarize themselves with their current
assignment and are required to establish and maintain a
working knowledge of all laws and ordinances in force in the
Township of River Vale, as well as all rules, regulations,
policies, procedures and general orders of the Department.
(b) In the event of improper action or a breach of discipline, it will
be presumed that the affected member was familiar with the
law, ordinance, rule, regulation, policy, procedure, or order in
question.
§ 33-17 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-17
29:107
(6) Performance of duty (Class 3 offense). Employees shall give
suitable attention to the performance of duty and shall perform
their duties as required or directed by law, Departmental rule,
regulation, policy, procedure or lawful order of a superior officer.
All lawful duties required by competent authority shall be
performed as promptly as directed, notwithstanding the
employee's general assignment of duties and responsibilities.
(7) Action off duty (Class 3 offense). While off duty, members shall take
appropriate action as needed in any police matter that comes to
their attention within their jurisdiction as authorized by New Jersey
law and Department policy.
(8) Obedience to laws, regulations and orders (penalty based on
gravity of offense/violation). Employees shall obey all laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, policies and procedures, general
orders, written directives and verbal orders of superiors of the
Department, as applicable.
(9) Reporting violations of laws, rules, policies and procedures, etc.
(Class 3 offense). Employees knowing of others violating laws,
ordinances, provisions of the Department manual or lawful orders
shall immediately report same in writing to the Chief of Police via
official channels. If the employee believes the information is of such
gravity that it must be brought to the immediate personal attention
of the Chief of Police, official channels may be bypassed.
(10) Conduct toward superior and subordinate officers and associates
(Class 4 offense). Employees shall treat superior officers,
subordinates and associates with respect. They shall be courteous
and civil at all times in their relationships with one another. When
on duty and particularly in the presence of other members,
employees or the public, employees shall demonstrate a positive
attitude and refrain from using sarcastic remarks of any kind. All
officers of the Department shall address superior officers by rank.
(11) Criticism of official acts or orders (Class 3 offense). Employees
shall not criticize any lawful official actions, instructions, or orders
of any Department member in a manner which is defamatory,
obscene, sarcastic, unlawful or which tends to impair the efficient
operation, image, authority or reputation of the Department or any
supervisor within the Department.
(12) Manner of issuing orders.
(a) Orders from a superior officer to a subordinate shall be in clear
and understandable language, and issued in pursuit of
Departmental business (Class 5 offense).
(b) When conveying polices, procedures, directives, orders, etc.,
supervisors shall adopt a positive approach and impart the
§ 33-17 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-17
29:108
information in a manner most likely to gain acceptance and
compliance (Class 4 offense).
(13) Unlawful orders (Class 3 offense). No command or supervisory
officer shall knowingly issue any order that is in violation of any law
or ordinance.
(14) Obedience to unlawful orders (penalty based on gravity of the
offense/violation). Obedience to an unlawful order is never a
defense to an unlawful action. Therefore, no employee shall obey
an order that is contrary to federal or state law, or local ordinance.
Responsibility for refusing to obey rests with the employee. The
employee shall be strictly required to justify his action.
(15) Improper orders (Class 5 offense). No supervisor shall knowingly
issue any order that is in violation of a provision of the Department
manual.
(16) Obedience to unjust and improper orders. Employees who are
given orders they feel to be unjust or contrary to a provision of the
Department manual must first obey the order to the best of their
ability and then may proceed to an appeal as provided below.
Failure to follow the order prior to appeal may result in a charge of
insubordination.
(17) Conflicting orders (Class 5 offense). Upon receipt of an order
conflicting with any previous order or instruction, the affected
employee will advise the person issuing the second order of this
fact. Responsibility for countermanding the original order or
instruction then rests with the individual issuing the second order.
If so directed, the latter command shall be obeyed first. Orders will
be countermanded or conflicting orders will be issued only when
reasonably necessary for the good of the Department or public.
(18) Reports and appeals (Class 5 offense). An employee receiving an
unlawful or improper order, shall, at first opportunity, report in
writing to the Chief of Police through official channels. This report
shall contain the facts of the incident and the action taken. Appeals
for relief from such orders may be made at the same time.
(19) Soliciting gifts, gratuities, fees, loans, etc. (Class 3 offense).
Employees shall not under any circumstances, directly or
indirectly, solicit any gift, gratuity, loan, discount or other fee for
their own personal gain where there is any connection between the
solicitation and their Department membership or employment.
(20) Acceptance of gifts, gratuities, fees, loans, etc. (Class 3 offense).
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:27-6,16 employees shall
not accept any gift, gratuity, fee, loan or other thing of value, the
acceptance of which might tend to influence, directly or indirectly,
16.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2C:27-6 was repealed by L.2003, c. 255, § 7, effective 1-14-2004.
§ 33-17 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-17
29:109
the actions of said employee or other employee in any matter of
police business; or which might tend to cast an adverse reflection
on the Department or any employee thereof,
(a) No employee of the Department shall receive any gift or
gratuity from other members or employees junior in rank, the
acceptance of which might tend to influence, directly or
indirectly, the actions of said employee or other employee in
any matter of police business; without the expressed
permission of the Chief of Police.
(b) Any employee who is found to have accepted money or any
other thing of value to influence his actions in connection with
his employment will be subject to termination of employment.
(21) Rewards (Class 4 offense). Employees shall not accept any gift,
gratuity, or reward in money or other consideration for services
rendered in the line of duty, except lawful salary and that which
might be authorized by law.
(22) Other transactions (Class 4 offense). Employees are prohibited
from buying or selling anything of value from or to any
complainant, suspect, witness, defendant, prisoner, or other person
involved in any case which has come to his attention or which arose
out of his Department employment, except as may be specifically
authorized by the Chief of Police.
(23) Disposition of unauthorized gifts, gratuities, etc. (Class 4 offense).
Any unauthorized gift, gratuity, loan, fee, reward or other thing
falling into any of these categories coming into the possession of
any employee shall be forwarded to the office of the Chief of Police
together with a written report explaining the circumstances
relevant thereto.
(24) Debts: incurring and payment (Class 5 offense).
(a) No employee shall borrow or lend any money or otherwise
become indebted to any other employee.
(b) Employees shall not solicit other employees to co-sign or
endorse any promissory note or loan,
(c) No employee shall offer to act as a co-signer or endorser of any
promissory note or other loan for another employee.
(d) Subsection C(24)(a) through (c) do not apply to transactions
among employees related to each other.
(e) Employees shall promptly pay all just debts and legal liabilities
incurred by them.
(25) Personal preferment: soliciting (Class 4 offense). Employees shall
not seek influence or intervention with the River Vale Business
§ 33-17 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-17
29:110
Administrator, Mayor, or any member of the governing body in
relation to promotions, assignments, disposition of pending
charges, or findings in a Departmental trial or related matter.
This shall not preclude, however, the right of an employee to be
represented by legal counsel or a union representative.
(26)Withholding information (Class 2 offense). Employees shall not, at
any time, withhold any information concerning criminal activity or
fail to take appropriate action in response to such information.
(27) Harassment (Class 3 offense). Employees are prohibited from any
acts that would constitute harassment, sexual or otherwise, as
defined in Department policy.
(28) Chain of command (Class 4 offense). All employees must be aware
of their relative position with the Department, to whom they are
immediately responsible, and persons accountable to them. All
employees shall follow the established chain of command when
dealing with supervisors and shall keep their supervisors informed
of their activities.
(a) Command officers are entitled to freely discuss matters of
policy and operations at the command and supervisory level.
(b) Command officers may discuss Department matters with any
employee at any level within the Department in order to
maintain rapport and interaction so needed and vital to a
successful organization.
(29) Gossip (Class 3 offense). Employees shall respect the private lives
of other employees and not engage in conversations or
communications about activities that are designed to slander or
demean their coworkers. Gossip and fabricated stories concerning
both job-related and non-job-related activities of coworkers will be
reason for disciplinary action, as such activities tend to impair the
efficient operation and harmonious work environment of the
Department.
(30) Circulating false information (Class 3 offense). Employees shall not
make false or misleading statements about Department activities,
including, but not limited to, policies, investigations, disciplinary
actions and personnel decisions, when such statements are
intended to or may tend to adversely affect the morale or good
order of the Department, or undermine the authority of any
supervisory officer.
(31) Reasonable caution in performance of duty (Class 3 offense).
Employees shall exercise reasonable and prudent judgement and
care in the performance of duty so as to minimize the risk of injury
and/or damage to all persons and/or property.
§ 33-17 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-17
29:111
(32) Supervision of subordinates (Class 3 offense). Department
supervisors shall properly monitor, instruct, counsel, supervise,
direct, and discipline the personnel assigned to their command and
enforce all Department rules, regulations, policies, procedures,
directives and orders issued by competent authority.
(a) Supervisors are required to promptly report any unsatisfactory
performance or violations through official channels.
(b) Supervisors are responsible for attempting to create a positive
attitude amongst their subordinates and in so doing must
endorse the policies, directives and decisions of their
superiors.
D. General conduct.
(1) Prohibited activity on duty. Employees who are on duty are
prohibited from engaging in activities which are not directly
related to the lawful performance of their official duties, including,
but not limited to:
(a) Sleeping (Class 3 offense).
(b) Conducting private meetings (Class 3 offense).
(c) Gambling, unless to further a police purpose (with the consent
of the Chief of Police) (Class 3 offense).
(d) Sexual activity of any kind (Class 2 offense).
(e) Conducting non-police-related activities or business (Class 4
offense).
(f) Recreational reading (except on meal breaks), loafing, idling
(Class 5 offense).
(g) Pursuing personal relationships:
[1] Without coercion created by an officer's official authority
(Class 4 offense).
[2] With coercion created by an officers official authority
(Class 1 offense).
(h) Leaving the Township without supervisory approval (Class 3
offense).
(2) Alcoholic beverages and drugs.
(a) Employees shall not report for duty under the influence of
intoxicants to any degree nor shall they have the odor of an
alcoholic beverage emanating from their person. This
condition shall cause the employee to be unfit for duty.
Superior officers shall not assign to duty any employee in an
§ 33-17 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-17
29:112
unfit condition due to the use or odor of intoxicants and shall
immediately relieve of duty and service weapon any member
found on duty in such condition (Class 2 offense).
(b) Employees shall not drink any kind of intoxicating beverage at
any time while on duty unless absolutely necessary in the
performance of duty and will not render the employee unfit;
and then only with the prior expressed permission of the Chief
of Police or his designee (Class 2 offense).
(c) Employees shall refrain from drinking intoxicating beverages
for a period of time necessary to ensure absence of alcohol in
the blood, to any degree, prior to reporting for duty (Class 3
offense).
(d) Employees shall refrain from drinking alcoholic beverages for
a period of time necessary to ensure absence of an odor of
alcoholic beverages on their person, prior to reporting for duty
(Class 4 offense).
(e) Any member who has a reasonable suspicion to believe that a
fellow member of this Department is under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or drugs must immediately report such fact
to his/her immediate supervisor (Class 2 offense).
(f) Employees shall not bring or keep any intoxicating beverage or
drugs on Department premises, except when necessary in the
performance of a police objective and then it shall be properly
identified and stored according to Department policy (Class 3
offense).
(g) Intoxicating beverages shall not at any time be consumed at
the police headquarters (Class 3 offense).
(h) Employees shall not have intoxicants on their person while on
duty or in uniform, or in any police building or vehicle, except
for evidential or other authorized purposes (Class 3 offense).
(i) Off-duty employees will not consume alcoholic beverages to the
extent (Class 4 offense):
[1] It results in inappropriate/offensive behavior tending to
discredit themselves or the Department.
[2] It renders them unable/unfit to report for their next
regular tour of duty (i.e., illness, impairment, or apparent
indication of recent alcohol use).
(j) Employees shall not drink or be under the influence of
alcoholic beverages while in the Department uniform or any
part thereof (Class 3 offense).
§ 33-17 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-17
29:113
(k) If so ordered by a supervisory officer in furtherance of an
investigation having a bearing on an officer's employment or
fitness for duty/continued employment, a member must submit
to a blood test, a breath test, or any other test to determine the
percentage of alcohol in the blood.
(l) No liquor license shall be held by any police officer, or by any
profit corporation or association in which any such member is
interested, directly or indirectly (Class 2 offense).
(m) No law or regulation promulgated by the Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control, however, prohibits members of the
Department from being employed, other than in the Township
for which they serve as police officers, by a business licensed
to sell alcoholic beverages in this state.
[1] Members shall not be employed by any business licensed
to sell alcoholic beverages in the Township (Class 2
offense).
(n) Members so employed shall not, while engaged in the selling,
serving, possessing or delivering of any alcoholic beverage:
[1] Have in his possession any firearm; or (Class 3 offense).
[2] Wear or display any uniform, badge or insignia, which
would identify him as a police officer (Class 3 offense).
(o) No member so employed shall be permitted to work in excess
of 24 hours per week in any such establishment (Class 4
offense).
(p) No member shall enter a licensed liquor establishment while
on duty, unless on official business or upon prior authorization
of the Chief of Police or his designee. Members shall not enter
a licensed liquor establishment while off duty and in any part of
the uniform (Class 3 offense).
(q) All members shall fully comply with the Departmental drug
testing policy and procedures (Class 1 offense).
(r) Medication (Class 3 offense).
[1] Employees shall not take any medication that might
diminish their alertness or impair their senses prior to or
after reporting for duty, unless otherwise directed by a
physician.
[2] When employees are required to take any prescription or
nonprescription medication that might diminish their
alertness or impair their senses, the employee shall notify
their supervisor as to the medication required, its
properties, the dosage and the period during which the
§ 33-17 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-17
29:114
employee is required to take the medication. It shall be
the responsibility of the employee to make the notification
prior to the employee being assigned to duty. This
information so provided shall remain confidential.
[3] Supervisors shall not assign to duty or allow to remain on
duty, any employee whose fitness for duty is questionable
due to the use of medication.
(3) Loitering (Class 5 offense). All employees on duty or in uniform
shall not enter taverns, theatres, or other public places, without
legitimate cause, except to perform a police task. Loitering and
unnecessary prolonged conversation in such locations is forbidden.
(4) Relief (Class 3 offense). All employees are to remain at their
assignment and on duty until properly relieved by another
employee or until dismissed by competent authority.
(5) Reporting (Class 5 offense). Employees shall promptly and
accurately prepare and submit such reports as are required by the
performance of their duties or by competent authority.
(6) False reports (Class 1 offense). Employees shall not knowingly
submit written or oral communications that are fabricated,
factually inaccurate or intentionally misleading and that could lead
to an investigation or prosecution of any person for a crime, offense
or violation of Departmental rule, regulation, policy, procedure, etc.
(7) Reporting for duty (Class 3 offense). Employees shall report for
duty, properly uniformed and equipped, on the date, time and place
specified. Employees failing to report at the date, time and place
specified without the consent of competent authority shall be
considered "absent without leave."
(8) Physical fitness for duty (Class 5 offense). All members of the
Department shall maintain good physical condition so they can
handle the strenuous physical contacts often required of a law
enforcement officer.
(9) Smoking while on duty (Class 5 offense). Employees shall not
smoke at any time while in police headquarters or in a Police
Department vehicle. Members shall not smoke on duty while
interacting with the public.
(10) Driver's license (Class 2 offense).
(a) Employees required to operate Department vehicles in the
performance of duty shall maintain a valid New Jersey driver's
license.
(b) Whenever a driver's license is revoked or suspended, the
employee shall immediately notify his immediate supervisor
giving full particulars.
§ 33-17 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-17
29:115
(11) Crimes/offenses involving moral turpitude (Class 1 offense). Any
employee who commits a first, second or third degree crime, or any
offense involving moral turpitude that touches his position as a
police officer, shall be considered unfit for continued employment.
E. Investigations.
(1) Investigations (Class 3 offense). All employees involved in any
official Department investigation of any matter will fully comply
with the policies and procedures of the Department governing
same.
(2) Confidentiality.
(a) Employees shall keep confidential any business of the
Department that is not a matter of public concern and shall not
impart confidential information to anyone except those for
whom it is intended, or as directed by their supervisor (Class 2
offense).
(b) Employees shall keep confidential information that is not
considered public information pertaining to Department
events, operations, arrests or other activities without
authorization of the Chief of Police or his designee (Class 3
offense).
(c) Employees shall not make known to any person any
Department order which they might receive, unless so
required by the nature of their assignment (Class 4 offense).
(3) Reports.
(a) Employees shall not exhibit or divulge the contents of any
Department record or report to any person, except on approval
of the Chief of Police, or under due process of law, or as
directed by Department procedure (Class 2 offense).
(b) Employees shall not destroy or permanently remove from its
proper location any official record/police report without proper
authorization (Class 2 offense).
(c) Employees may copy or remove official records/reports from
police headquarters in accordance with the procedures
established in the discovery process and with permission of the
Chief of Police (Class 3 offense).
(4) Cooperation (Class 2 offense). Employees are required to fully
answer all questions, file reports, or render material or relevant
statements, in any authorized Departmental investigation when
such questions and statements are directly related to job
responsibilities or a legitimate Departmental interest.
§ 33-17 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-17
29:116
(5) Unauthorized investigations (Class 2 offense). Employees will not
self assign any investigation (criminal, internal, civil or
private)/other law enforcement action not part of their regular
assigned duties without obtaining permission from their supervisor,
unless the situation requires immediate law enforcement action. In
those cases, a written report will be completed as soon as is
practical thereafter.
F. Compromising criminal cases.
(1) Interference with legal process (Class 2 offense). Employees shall
not attempt to interfere with the legal process, except through
official Departmental channels in situations where a manifest
injustice might otherwise occur, nor participate in or be concerned
with any activity which might interfere with the process of law.
(2) Traffic cases (Class 2 offense). Employees shall not attempt to have
any traffic summons or notice to appear stricken from the calendar,
except in connection with legitimate criminal justice interests and
then done in conformance with established court procedures. In
any instance where it becomes necessary to void a traffic or
criminal summons or warrant, officers will follow the procedure set
forth by the court.
(3) Assisting criminals.
(a) Employees shall not directly or indirectly assist persons to
escape arrest or punishment for any unlawful activity (Class 2
offense).
(b) Employees shall not directly or indirectly assist persons to
dispose of or secrete evidence of unlawful activity or money,
merchandise, or other property unlawfully obtained (Class 1
offense).
G. Prisoners.
(1) Assisting escape (Class 1 offense). Employees shall not
communicate any information that may aid a person to escape
custody or arrest, nor shall they directly or materially aid a person
to escape custody or arrest.
(2) Recommending an attorney or bail bond broker (Class 3 offense).
Employees shall not suggest, recommend, advise, or otherwise
counsel the retention of any attorney or bail bond broker to any
person coming to their attention as a result of police business. Any
person requesting this information shall be referred to the
telephone directory.
(3) Acting as bailer prohibited (Class 2 offense). Employees cannot act
as bailer for any person in custody, except relatives, or in any case
where any fee, gratuity or reward is solicited or accepted.
§ 33-17 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-17
29:117
H. Conduct toward the public.
(1) Courtesy (Class 5 offense). Employees shall be courteous and
orderly in their dealings with the public. They shall perform their
duties quietly, avoiding harsh, violent, profane or insolent
language, and always remain calm regardless of the provocation to
do otherwise. They shall attend to requests from the public quickly
and accurately, avoiding unnecessary referral to other parts of the
Department.
(2) Professional demeanor (Class 5 offense). Employees shall avoid
giving the appearance they are evading the performance of their
duty or are disinterested in problems of persons who may be
transferred for service. Employees will not belittle a seemingly
trivial request, complaint, or piece of information.
(3) Identification as a police officer (Class 5 offense). Except where
impractical or where identity is obvious, members shall identify
themselves by displaying the official badge or identification card
prior to taking any police action.
(4) Request for identification (Class 5 offense). Upon request,
employees are required to provide their name and badge numbers,
if applicable, in a courteous manner.
(5) Impartiality (Class 3 offense).
(a) Employees shall not exhibit bias or favoritism toward any
person because of race, sex, sexual orientation, creed, color,
national origin, ancestry, or influence, nor shall they allow their
personal interests to interfere with objectivity concerning
police matters.
(b) Unwarranted interference by officers under the color of law in
the private business of others when not in the interest of
justice is strictly prohibited.
(6) Use of derogatory terms (Class 3 offense). Employees shall not use
language that is derogatory to anyone because of race, sex, sexual
orientation, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, or influence.
(7) Availability while on duty (Class 4 offense). Employees while on
duty shall not conceal themselves except for some police purpose.
They shall be immediately and readily available to the public during
duty hours.
(8) Response to calls (Class 3 offense). Members shall respond without
unnecessary delay to all calls for police assistance from citizens
and other members. Members shall answer all calls directed to
them unless otherwise directed by competent authority.
(9) Public statements (Class 2 offense). Employees shall not make
public statements concerning the actions, plans, policies, or affairs
§ 33-17 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-17
29:118
of the Department which may impair or disrupt the operation of
the Department or which are obscene, unlawful, defamatory, or
otherwise prohibited by written directive or rule and regulation.
(10) Affiliation with certain organizations prohibited (Class 3 offense).
Employees shall not join, nor shall they affiliate themselves with,
any organizations whose constitution embraces provisions that
might in any way prevent the proper and efficient functioning of the
Department. This prohibition does not apply to "the active military
or naval service of the United States or of this state, in time of war
or an emergency, or during any period of training, or pursuant to or
in connection with the operations of any selective service system."
(Source: N.J.S.A. 38:23-4.)
(11) Affiliation with radical groups (Class 3 offense). No employee,
except in the discharge of police duties, shall knowingly associate
with or have any dealings with any person or organization which
advocates the violation of law, or which professes hatred, prejudice,
or oppression against any racial or religious group or political
entity.
(12) Publicity (Class 5 offense). Employees shall not seek personal
publicity in the course of their employment.
(13) Commercial testimonials (Class 4 offense). Employees shall not
permit their names or photographs to be used to endorse any
product or service that is in any way connected to law enforcement
without the permission of the Chief of Police. They shall not allow
their names or photographs to be used in any commercial
testimonial that alludes to their position or employment with the
Department without prior authorization from the Chief of Police.
(14) Recorded conversations with members of the Department (Class 2
offense). No officer shall record another member of the Department
without the officer's knowledge and consent, or without the written
permission of the Chief of Police.
I. Political activities.
(1) Political activities prohibited (Class 2 offense). Members shall not
actively engage in political campaigns and activities while in
uniform or on duty. Employees shall not directly or indirectly use or
attempt to use their official position to influence the political
activity of another.
(2) Off-duty political activities (Class 3 offense). Members may engage
in off-duty political activities except when such activities will harm
or impair the operation or discipline of the Department.
(3) Election to public office (Class 2 offense). Members shall not be
candidates for or hold office in elective public positions or political
§ 33-17 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-17
29:119
organizations within or inclusive of the Township of River Vale
unless authorized to do so by the County Prosecutor.
(4) Soliciting prohibited (Class 2 offense). Employees shall not solicit
contributions for political purposes while on duty, nor shall they
interfere with or use the influence of their office for political
reasons.
(5) Contributions. Employees may contribute funds or any other thing
of value to candidates for public office subject to the provisions of
law governing such contributions.
(6) Polling duties (Class 3 offense). Members shall not engage in any
polling duties while on duty. Any member working at a polling place
while off duty shall not have an exposed firearm or exhibit any
evidence of his employment as a police officer.
(7) Displaying of political material (Class 3 offense). Employees shall
not display any political material on any government property or on
their person while on duty or in uniform.
J. Judicial appearances and testimony.
(1) Testifying for the defense (Class 3 offense). Any employee
subpoenaed or requested to testify for the defense in any legal
proceeding or against the Township or Department in any hearing
or trial shall notify the Chief of Police immediately upon receipt of
the subpoena or request.
(2) Contact with the defense (Class 3 offense). Any employee contacted
by the defense in any legal or administrative proceeding brought by
the Township, or plaintiff in any legal or administrative proceeding
brought against the Township, shall immediately notify the Chief of
Police.
(3) Civil action — expert witnesses (Class 4 offense). Employees shall
not volunteer or agree to testify as expert witnesses in civil actions
without the prior written approval of the county prosecutor.
(4) Civil process (Class 5 offense). Employees shall not serve civil
process or assist in civil cases unless such service is approved by
their immediate supervisor.
(5) Court appearances; subpoenas (Class 3 offense). Employees shall
honor all lawfully issued subpoenas and shall promptly appear for
all scheduled judicial proceedings when notified by subpoena or
other established Departmental procedure.
K. Personnel regulations.
(1) Hours of duty. Employees shall have regular hours assigned to
them for active duty, and when not so engaged, they shall be
§ 33-17 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-17
29:120
§ 33-18. Disciplinary Code.
considered off duty. Employees are subject to be recalled to duty as
needed.
(a) Department members shall remain responsible to their
supervisor and are subject to assignment during meal breaks.
(b) Training sessions are considered a duty assignment and
members attending training are subject to assignment as
deemed necessary.
(2) Sick leave/workman's compensation (Class 2 offense). Employees
will not pretend illness or injury, falsely report themselves to be
injured or ill, or otherwise deceive or attempt to deceive a
supervisor or the Township physician as to their health.
(3) Absences without leave for five consecutive days (Class 1 offense).
Except as otherwise provided by law, any permanent member or
officer of this Police Department who shall be absent from duty
without just cause or leave of absence for a continuous period of
five days shall cease to be a member of this Police Department.
(Reference: N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.)
(4) Compensation for damages (Class 4 offense). Employees who have
sustained injury while on or off duty and who have received salary
from the Township while injured shall notify the Chief of Police in
writing of any intent to seek, sue, solicit, or accept compensation as
damages for such injury. This notice shall be filed before any action
is taken. It shall include the facts of the claim and the name of the
respondent.
(5) Fitness for duty. The Chief of Police shall have the authority, in
conjunction with his responsibility for the disposition and discipline
of the Department, to require psychological and medical
examinations for any employee for the purpose of determining the
employee's fitness for duty.
(6) Resignation. All resignations of employees must be tendered in
writing and bear the signature of the person resigning. Employees
shall provide the Chief of Police with no less than two weeks'
written notice. Once tendered, the Township has the right to rely on
the resignation and it will be considered nonrescindable unless
approved by the Mayor.
A. Departmental discipline.
(1) Purpose. The Department has established this disciplinary process
as a means of achieving the below-listed objectives through the
reasonable and consistent application of discipline to address
breaches of the code of conduct:
§ 33-17 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-18
29:121
(a) Insure the highest professional standards for law enforcement
within the agency.
(b) Providing citizens with a fair and effective avenue for redress
of their legitimate grievances against law enforcement officers.
(c) Protect employees from false charges of misconduct or
wrongdoing and provide accused officers with due process
safeguards.
(d) Monitoring officers' compliance with laws, ordinances, and
Departmental rules, regulations, policies, procedures,
directives and orders.
(e) Identifying problem areas in which increased training or
direction is necessary.
(f) In order to identify, correct, discipline or remove police officers
who are unwilling, unable, or unfit to perform the duties of
office, and to identify trends or weaknesses that need to be
corrected, an Internal Affairs Investigative Unit shall be
established. The goals of the Internal Affairs Investigative Unit
shall be to maintain the integrity of the Department, establish a
system of internal discipline, ensure fairness and justice for the
officers, complainants and witnesses, ensure that
investigations are objective and impartial, and to enhance
public confidence.
(g) The Chief of Police shall assign qualified personnel to the
Internal Affairs Investigative Unit. The assigned officers shall
be responsible for conducting internal investigations in
accordance with Departmental policy, the State of New Jersey
Attorney General Guidelines, state and federal laws, and shall
be directly responsible to the Chief of Police. Internal Affairs
investigators shall act with the full authority of the Chief of
Police.
(2) Factors. Disciplinary action shall be imposed to accomplish the
purposes of the disciplinary process and shall take into account all
of the aggravating and mitigating factors of the case, including, but
not limited to:
(a) Nature of the offense.
(b) The disciplinary record of the accused officer.
(c) The need to deter the accused officer or other officers from
similar conduct.
(d) The harm or potential for harm resulting from the conduct.
(3) Disciplinary action. Department employees, regardless of rank,
shall be subject to disciplinary action, according to the nature of
§ 33-18 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-18
29:122
the offense, for violating their oath and trust by committing an
offense punishable under the laws or statutes of the United States,
the State of New Jersey or the Township Municipal Code, or failure,
either willfully or through neglect or incompetence, to perform the
duties of their rank or assignment; or for violation of any rule,
procedure or written directive of the Department; or for failure to
obey any lawful instruction, order or command of a superior officer.
Disciplinary action in all cases will be decided on the merits of each
case and in conformity with controlling state law.
(4) Penalties. The Department shall establish a scale of penalties that
may be assessed against any employee of the Department as
disciplinary action:
(a) Minor discipline - employee not entitled to a hearing:
[1] Training.
[2] Counseling.
[3] Oral reprimand.
[4] Written reprimand.
(b) Major discipline - employee entitled to hearing before the
appropriate authority:
[1] Surrender of leave time in lieu of other action.
[2] Monetary fine.
[3] Suspension with pay.
[4] Suspension without pay.
[5] Loss of promotion opportunity.
[6] Demotion.
[7] Termination.
(5) Causes for removal. Any one of the following may be cause for
removal from the service, although removals may be made for
sufficient causes other than those listed:
(a) Neglect of duty.
(b) Incompetence or inefficiency.
(c) Incapacity due to mental or physical disability.
(d) Insubordination or serious breach of discipline.
(e) Intoxication while on duty.
(f) Illegal drug usage.
§ 33-18 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-18
29:123
(g) Chronic, pattern or excessive absenteeism.
(h) Disorderly or immoral conduct.
(i) Willful violation of any of the provisions of the rules and
regulations or other statutes relative to the employment of
public employees.
(j) The conviction of any criminal act.
(k) Negligent or willful damage to public property or waste of
public supplies.
(l) Conduct unbecoming an employee in the public service.
(m) Conduct unbecoming a police officer.
(n) The use or attempted use of one's authority or official influence
to control or modify the political action of any person.
(o) Lying, misrepresentations, falsifications in written/oral
reporting or official inquiry.
(6) Repeated violations (Class 1 offense). Repeated violations of the
rules and regulations, policies, procedures, directives or orders
shall be indicative of an employee's disregard of the obligations of
all employees and shall be cause for dismissal. This shall apply
regardless of the severity of the offense and reckoning period, and
regardless of whether the violations are of the same type.
(7) Relationship of penalties to offense. The information contained
herein is intended to guide the appropriate authority in
administering fair and uniform punishment for violations of the
rules and regulations of the Department. The suggested penalties
shall in no way limit the penalty that the appropriate authority may
elect to impose.
(8) Classes of offenses, recommended penalties.
(a) Class 1 offense. Violation of any rule designated as a Class 1
offense may result in disciplinary action as follows:
[1] First offense: dismissal.
(b) Class 2 offense. Violation of any rule designated as a Class 2
offense may result in disciplinary action as follows:
[1] First offense: three-day suspension to dismissal.
[2] Second offense: ten-day suspension to dismissal.
[3] Third or subsequent offense: dismissal.
(c) Class 3 offense. Violation of any rule designated as a Class 3
offense may result in disciplinary action as follows:
§ 33-18 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-18
29:124
[1] First offense: reprimand to six-month suspension.
[2] Second offense: three-day suspension to dismissal.
[3] Third or subsequent offense: dismissal.
(d) Class 4 offense. Violation of any rule designated as a Class 4
offense may result in disciplinary action as follows:
[1] First offense: reprimand to thirty-day suspension.
[2] Second offense: reprimand to six-month suspension.
[3] Third or subsequent offense: twenty-day suspension to
dismissal.
(e) Class 5 offense. Violation of any rule designated as a Class 5
offense may result in disciplinary action as follows:
[1] First offense: reprimand to five-day suspension.
[2] Second offense: reprimand to thirty-day suspension.
[3] Third or subsequent offense: five-day suspension to
dismissal.
(9) Authority to impose major discipline. The appropriate authority
may suspend with or without pay, demote or dismiss an employee
due to inefficiency, incompetence, misconduct, negligence,
insubordination, violation of the rules and regulations or for other
sufficient cause.
B. Disciplinary procedure.
(1) Establishing a violation. Existence of facts establishing a violation
of a law, ordinance, or rule is all that is necessary to support any
allegation of such violation as a basis for disciplinary action.
Nothing in this manual prohibits disciplining or charging
employees merely because the alleged act or omission does not
appear herein if such conduct is otherwise without lawful purpose
and violates some law, ordinance, or rule governing the officer's
conduct at the time it occurred or is otherwise such an egregious or
blatant act that would be universally recognized as misconduct.
(2) Discipline by supervisory personnel. Supervisory personnel may
take the following disciplinary measures:
(a) Counseling.
(b) Oral reprimand.
(c) Written reprimand (subject to the approval of the Chief of
Police).
(d) Emergency suspension until the next business day.
§ 33-18 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-18
29:125
(e) Written recommendations for other penalties.
(3) Emergency suspensions.
(a) Any superior officer may immediately suspend an employee
from duty if they determine one of the following exist:
[1] The employee is unfit for duty; or
[2] The employee is a hazard to any person if permitted to
remain on the job; or
[3] An immediate suspension is necessary to maintain safety,
health, order or effective direction of public services; or
[4] The member has been formally charged with a crime of the
first, second or third degree, or a crime of the fourth
degree on the job or directly related to the job.
(b) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-149.1, notwithstanding any
other law to the contrary, whenever any municipal police
officer is charged under the law of this state, another state, or
the United States, with an offense, said police officer may be
suspended from performing his duties, with pay, until the case
against said officer is disposed of at trial, until the complaint is
dismissed, or until the prosecution is terminated; provided,
however, that if a grand jury returns an indictment against said
officer, or said officer is charged with an offense which is a high
misdemeanor or which involves moral turpitude or dishonesty,
said officer may be suspended from his duties, without pay,
until the case against him is disposed of at trial, until the
complaint is dismissed or until the prosecution is terminated.
The Chief of Police shall immediately submit a report
explaining such action to the Mayor.
(4) Emergency interdepartmental disciplinary action. When the
improper conduct of a member or employee of one division/bureau/
unit is of such nature that immediate or emergency disciplinary
action is required of a command or supervisory officer of another
division/bureau/unit, such action may be taken at once within the
following limitations:
(a) Oral reprimand.
(b) Emergency suspension until the next business day.
(5) Interdepartmental oral reprimand. When the commanding or
supervisory officer of one division orally reprimands a member or
employee of another division, he shall notify the supervisor of the
member or employee so disciplined as soon as possible. He shall
also submit a written report of this action and the reason therefor
to his commanding officer and also the commanding officer of the
member or employee.
§ 33-18 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-18
29:126
(6) Follow-up on emergency suspensions. A member or employee
receiving an emergency suspension shall be required to report to
the Chief of Police on the next business day at a time scheduled by
the Chief of Police. The commanding or supervisory officer
imposing or recommending the suspension shall also report to the
Chief of Police at the same time. In the absence of the Chief of
Police, it shall be the responsibility of the Acting Chief of Police.
(7) Reports of disciplinary action taken or recommended. Whenever
any disciplinary action is taken or recommended (except for oral
reprimands), a written report must be submitted immediately to
the Chief of Police containing the following information:
(a) The name, rank, badge number, and present assignment of the
person being disciplined.
(b) The date, time and location of the incident.
(c) The section number and name of the violated rule.
(d) A complete statement of the facts of the misconduct.
(e) The punishment imposed or recommended.
(f) The written signature, badge number, and rank of the
preparing officer and his position in relation to the member or
employee being disciplined.
(8) Endorsement and forwarding of disciplinary reports. Each level in
the chain of command must review, sign and forward reports
bearing on disciplinary matters. Such endorsement may be one of
approval, disapproval, or modification. No employee shall alter or
cause to be altered or withdrawn any disciplinary report.
Disciplinary reports in transit through the chain of command shall
not be delayed, but must be reviewed, endorsed, and forwarded as
soon as possible. Disciplinary reports shall be filed in accordance
with current Departmental procedures.
(9) Informing the person being disciplined. The member being
disciplined shall be so informed of the charges, in writing, as
provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147 and Subsection D(1) of these rules
and regulations. The member shall be granted all procedural rights
and safeguards as provided by law.
(10) Misconduct observed by police personnel. Whenever any
commanding officer or supervisory officer observes or is informed
of the misconduct of another member or employee which indicates
the need for disciplinary action, he shall take authorized and
necessary action and render a complete written report of the
incident and his actions to his commanding officer.
(11) Investigator's authority. Investigators assigned to an investigation
are the direct representative of the Chief of Police and, as such,
§ 33-18 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-18
29:127
shall receive the cooperation of all employees of the Department
while conducting their investigations. The sole responsibility of the
investigator shall be the gathering of all the facts regarding the
allegations. In doing so, he must remain objective and thorough
when submitting his report. His opinions, conclusions, or
personality shall not be interjected into the case. By adhering to
the foregoing principles, the case can be concluded with optimum
fairness for all persons concerned.
C. Departmental disciplinary hearings.
(1) Charges. When an internal investigation establishes a
preponderance of evidence that a member is guilty of violating a
Department rule or regulation, penalty for which entitles the
member to a hearing as provided for in Subsection D(1), a
preliminary notice of disciplinary action shall be prepared and
personally served upon the respective member. The charges shall
contain:
(a) The name, address and title of the member against whom the
action is being instituted.
(b) The rule, regulation, law or ordinance violated, or a description
of other misconduct being charged.
(c) Specification of the alleged facts upon which the charges are
based.
(d) The time, date and place at which the hearing is scheduled to
be held.
(e) The signature of the proper authority and his official title.
(2) Hearings.
(a) The disciplinary hearing shall be scheduled during the
business day, but no sooner than 10 days and no later than 30
days after said notice is personally served upon said member,
subject of course to the granting of reasonable requests for
postponements.
(b) Where a disciplinary hearing has been postponed pending the
determination of criminal or quasi-criminal charges filed on the
basis of the same factual situation which gave rise to the
Departmental charges, said Departmental hearing must be
held within 30 days after the Department receives notice of
such disposition. The duty to advise the Department that said
judicial determination has been made is that of the respective
member.
(c) Personal service is actual service upon any employee as well as
actual service upon any member of the employee's household
over 18 years of age residing in the residence of said employee.
§ 33-18 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-18
29:128
(d) All disciplinary hearings shall be closed to the public unless the
defendant officer requests an open hearing. In such case, the
Department reserves the right to petition the hearing officer to
conduct a closed hearing if a legitimate reason exists for such
request.
(e) Every member formally charged with a violation of Department
rules and regulations shall have the opportunity to testify in his
own defense, produce relevant evidence in support of his
defense, produce competent witnesses to testify to relevant
matters in support of his defense and cross-examine any
witness who has testified against him.
(f) The Chief of Police may prosecute the complaint himself or
request the Township to appoint a qualified representative to
present the case.
(g) The Mayor shall be the hearing officer charged with the
responsibility of conducting the necessary hearings with
respect to the aforementioned charges. The Mayor may
appoint a qualified representative to serve as hearing officer to
prepare findings of fact and recommendations as to violations
and quantum and type of punishment, if any.
(h) In order that all parties may be afforded a fair and equal
opportunity to be heard and that the hearing officer may be
completely informed in the matter and enabled to render a
proper determination based on all the facts and applicable
laws and rules, all hearings shall be conducted in an informal
manner, without reference to any formal rules or procedure.
(i) The hearing officer may, at his/her discretion, clear the hearing
room of all persons, including witnesses not under examination
or testifying. When the evidence pertains to scandalous or
indecent conduct of any sort, or is such that its public
disclosure would not be in the best interest of the public and
might do irreparable harm to any person or persons not a party
to the hearing, the hearing officer may exclude all persons not
having a direct interest in the matter being heard.
(j) The hearing officer shall admit all testimony having
reasonable, probative value, but shall exclude immaterial,
irrelevant or unduly cumulative testimony.
(k) The hearing officer shall give effect to the rules of privilege as
provided by law, but no person shall be excused from testifying
or presenting evidence on the ground of possible selfincrimination
with regard to an administrative disciplinary
matter.
(l) The member is presumed innocent and the burden of proof is
upon the Department to prove the member's guilt by a
§ 33-18 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-18
29:129
preponderance of the credible evidence presented during said
hearing.
(m) All hearings may (in the discretion of the respective hearing
officer) be recorded by:
[1] A certified shorthand report; or
[2] Stenographers, duly sworn to make an accurate
stenographic recording of the proceeding; or
[3] Sound-recording device to be operated under the
supervision and direction of the hearing officer.
(n) After considering all the evidence in support and in defense of
the particular charge of misconduct, the respective hearing
officer shall consider same and render his verdict as soon as
practical thereafter.
(o) Although the verdict may be verbal at the time of the hearing,
the determination must be reflected upon a final notice of
disciplinary action that must be personally served upon the
respective member as soon as practical after the termination of
said disciplinary hearing.
(3) Appeals.
(a) Any member of the Department who has been tried and
convicted upon any disciplinary charge or charges may obtain
review in the Superior Court of Bergen County.
(b) Such review shall be obtained by serving a written notice of the
application therefore upon the appropriate authority within 10
days after the written notice to the member of his conviction.
The appropriate authority shall transmit to the court a copy of
the record of such conviction, and of the charge or charges for
which the member was tried.
(c) The court shall hear the case de novo on the record below and
may either affirm, reverse or modify such conviction. If the
member shall have been removed from his position, the court
may direct that he be restored to such position and all his
rights pertaining thereto, and may make such other ordered
judgment as said court shall deem proper.
(d) Either the Township or the member may supplement the
record with additional testimony subject to the rules of
evidence.
D. Members rights during Departmental investigations and disciplinary
hearings.
§ 33-18 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-18
29:130
(1) Hearing. Each member is entitled to a hearing before the
appropriate authority or his designee, for any charge that exposes
the employee to discipline as follows:
(a) Surrender of leave time.
(b) Monetary fine.
(c) Suspension with pay.
(d) Suspension without pay.
(e) Loss of promotion opportunity.
(f) Demotion.
(g) Termination.
(2) Confidentiality. Other than the official findings and attendant
penalties, every internal investigation and subsequent
Departmental hearing shall be considered privileged and
confidential information, and same shall not be made public and/or
released to any nongovernmental agency.
(3) Scope of interviews. Investigations shall be limited to matters of
legitimate concern to the Police Department. Those issues include:
(a) Violation of any federal or state statute or local ordinance.
(b) Violation of any rule, regulation, policy, procedure, written
directive or order of the Police Department.
(c) Activities, circumstances, conditions or events that:
[1] Threaten the safety of the public or the employees of the
Department;
[2] Threaten efficiency, discipline or good order of the
Department;
[3] Damage the reputation or integrity of the Police
Department;
[4] Diminish the ability of the Police Department to carry out
its public safety function.
(d) The fitness of continued employment of any employee.
(e) The performance of official duties of any employee of the Police
Department.
(f) The conduct of any employee that may form the basis for
disciplinary action.
(4) Conduct of interviews.
§ 33-18 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-18
29:131
(a) All employees have a duty to answer all questions truthfully
and completely.
[1] Truthfulness is the key to the proper function of any Police
Department. Officers must know that during any official
inquiry they are not at liberty to decide when they will tell
the truth. Officers must be truthful at all times. When an
officer willfully lies in an official inquiry he:
[a] Frustrates the investigative effort that he is obligated
to assist.
[b] Destroys his own credibility, which is an essential tool
for the completion of his duties.
[c] Damages the credibility of the Department and the
law enforcement community as a whole.
[d] Frustrates the law enforcement function that he is
sworn to uphold.
[2] Integrity is the most critical of all minimum requirements
to function effectively as a police officer. When it is lost,
the ability to carry out the duties of a police officer are lost
with it. For these reasons the standard penalty for lying in
any official inquiry will be termination. An officer may not
be subject to dismissal for a specific act of misconduct,
however, if he lies about it he surely will. [Employees may
not lie for any reason. "Our legal system provides methods
for challenging the government's right to ask questionslying
is not one of them," LaChance v. Erickson, United
States Supreme Court.]
(b) No questioning or investigative effort shall be initiated
arbitrarily for personal or other reasons that are unrelated to
the maintenance of Departmental efficiency or integrity.
(c) During the course of an investigation, employees have a duty to
voluntarily disclose any relevant information that may assist in
proving or disproving an allegation under investigation.
(5) Due process. Although the Department can utilize any form of
investigative procedure pursuant to an internal investigation that is
fair and reasonably calculated to achieve its objective, the nature
or utilization of same must not violate the basic concepts and
substantive due process of law.
(6) Coercion. Although cooperation of an employee is demanded under
threat of disciplinary action (including job forfeiture), said
employee shall not be questioned or subjected to investigative
efforts under circumstances that would render such statements
void as being coerced.
§ 33-18 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-18
29:132
(7) Advisement of member.
(a) Exclusive of the normal reporting duties incidental to the
performance of official duties, a member subjected to
questioning shall be advised of the following:
[1] Whether he is being questioned or required to submit to
investigative efforts as a suspect or a witness.
[2] The identity of his interrogator as well as the identity of all
persons present at the time of the interrogation.
[3] The nature of the investigation and facts sufficient to
apprise the member of the existing allegations.
(b) Nothing in this section shall prohibit any supervisory officer
from questioning an employee in an emergent situation when
such questioning appears immediately necessary to insure the
public safety or to preserve the order of the Police Department.
(c) Nothing in this or any other section shall be deemed as
justification for an employee providing false information.
(8) Time limitations. Consistent with state statute and Township Code,
a formal charge must be filed against a member within a
reasonable time after which the existence of the alleged or
suspected misconduct is made known.
(9) Representation. Employees are entitled to have a representative of
their choice in attendance during an Internal Affairs interview. The
investigator shall allow any employee a reasonable amount of time
for the desired representative to attend. The representative shall
be an observer only and may not actively participate in the
interview.
(10) Polygraph. No employee shall be ordered or asked to submit to a
polygraph (lie detector) test for any reason. Such test may be given,
however, if requested by the employee.
(11) Settlement agreement. Nothing shall prohibit a member from
directly negotiating a settlement agreement with the Chief of
Police or appropriate authority concerning the disposition of a
disciplinary matter. If a settlement is reached concerning the
disposition of a pending disciplinary matter, a stipulation and
agreement as to disciplinary action form shall be fully executed by
the effected member, Chief of Police or appropriate authority
concerning the disposition of a disciplinary matter. If a settlement
is reached concerning the disposition of a pending disciplinary
matter, a stipulation and agreement as to disciplinary action form
shall be fully executed by the effected member, Chief of Police and
appropriate authority.
§ 33-18 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-18
29:133

ARTICLE III
Employment of Off-Duty Officers
[Adopted 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 268-2012]
§ 33-19. Approval required for police-related outside employment.
Members of the Department shall not accept any police-related outside
employment during off-duty hours without the prior written approval of the
Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall have the sole discretion to approve
the police-related outside employment of any member of the Department.
§ 33-20. Procedure for requesting assignment of off-duty police
officers; liability; insurance; coverage.
§ 33-21. Fees.
A. Any company, organization or contractor that desires to hire off-duty
members of the River Vale Police Department shall submit the request
in writing to the Chief of Police on a form prescribed by the Chief of
Police.
B. Each such requesting person shall furnish a "certificate of insurance" as
soon as practicable and not less than five business days before the date
of the planned activity to the Township, naming the Township and the
Police Department as additional insureds. Said insurance shall be
written with a company maintaining a rating of at least "A-," according
to A.M. Best. Said policy shall be in an amount of not less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence. In the event said certificate of insurance is
not provided as set forth above, the request for an officer shall not be
granted.
C. Any requesting person shall be obligated to reimburse the Township of
River Vale for all reasonable attorneys' fees incurred to defend itself
against any claim, suit, demand for subrogation, or other action which
arises from the hiring of an off-duty member.
A. The company, organization or contractor that hires an off-duty member
of the Police Department shall pay a fee to the Township as follows:
(1) An officer hired for non-traffic-control or security details shall be
compensated at $60 per hour plus a 10% administrative fee
inclusive of F.I.C.A. contributions.
(2) The rate of $60 per hour established in 2012 shall increase
annually at the rate of 2.5%.
B. Officers assigned to a non-traffic-control or security detail shall receive
a minimum compensation of four hours. Details exceeding the originally
scheduled hours shall be compensated at a minimum of two-hour
increments until the completion of the detail.
§ 33-19 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 33-21
29:135
C. All cancellations require a minimum two hours' notification prior to the
scheduled start time of the detail. Noncompliance of this cancellation
notice shall result in the officer receiving a minimum of four hours'
compensation.
D. Upon the submission of a request to hire off-duty members of the Police
Department, said company, organization or contractor shall submit
funds in the estimated amount of the compensation to be paid to the offduty
police officers. The funds received by the Township shall be
deposited in an escrow account, and such funds shall be utilized to pay
the off-duty police officers. The Township shall notify the organization
or contractor upon the expenditure of 50% of the escrow funds. At that
time, a determination shall be made as to whether or not the balance is
sufficient to pay for further services that may be required. In the event
the remaining balance is insufficient, the company, organization or
contractor shall, within 24 hours of notice of the deficiency, deposit
funds in an amount sufficient to cover the additional services. Any funds
remaining in the escrow account shall be refunded to the organization,
vendor or contractor that posted said escrow funds within 60 days of
receipt by the Township of the refund request.
E. Invoices shall be paid in full within 45 days of the date of the invoice. In
the event the invoice is not paid in full within 45 days, the organization
or contractor shall, for all future hiring of off-duty police officers, pay in
advance the amount of the compensation to be paid to the off-duty
police officers.
§ 33-21 RIVER VALE CODE § 33-21
29:136
Chapter 36
POLICE RESERVE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 33.
§ 36-1. Creation.
There is hereby created the River Vale Police Reserve to act in conformity
with N.J.S.A. 40:47-19,17 and any other statute pertaining thereto, and this
chapter and rules and regulations promulgated by the municipal governing
body and the Chief of Police.
§ 36-2. Appointment of members.
Members thereof shall be appointed by the governing body for terms of not
more than one year, and proper certificates of appointment and badges shall
be given for the duration of said appointments.
§ 36-3. Qualifications for membership.
All members shall be citizens of the United States, able to read and write,
physically qualified and of good moral character. All members shall
subscribe to an oath to be administered at the time of appointment. The
qualifications of each member shall be investigated before his appointment
by the Chief of Police and shall be reported to the governing body.
§ 36-4. Direction and supervision.
The River Vale Police Reserve and all members thereof shall be under
the direction and supervision of the Chief of Police of River Vale, and
each member shall perform his duties as directed by said Chief within
the borders of the Township of River Vale and shall comply with the rules
and regulations promulgated for regular members of the River Vale Police
Department.
Chapter 38
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 29.
17.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1971, c. 197.
§ 33-21 POLICE RESERVE § 36-4
36:137

ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 9-29-2009 by Ord. No. 221-2009]
§ 38-1. Positions eligible for participation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 38-2. Positions exempt from participation.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
A. Municipal Prosecutor;
B. Municipal Court Judge.
A. Certified Health Officer;
B. Tax Collector;
C. Chief Financial Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
E. Building Subcode Official;
F. Plumbing Subcode Official;
G. Fire Subcode Official;
H. Zoning/Property Maintenance Official;
I. Electrical Subcode Official;
J. Fire Prevention Official;
K. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
L. Tax Assessor;
M. Municipal Planner;
N. Registered Municipal Clerk;
O. Principal Public Works Manager;
P. Superintendent of Water and Sewer Department;
Q. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
§ 38-1 POLICE RESERVE § 38-3
36:139
§ 38-3. Implementation and construal.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 38-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 38-3
36:140
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 43
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
§ 38-3 POLICE RESERVE § 38-3
36:141

ARTICLE I
Fair Share Housing Requirements
[Adopted 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 363-2019]
§ 43-1. Intent; statutory authority.
§ 43-2. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
given in this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Township to
administer affordable units in accordance with this article, N.J.A.C. 5:93,20
and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
A. This article addresses the Township's constitutional obligation to
provide for its fair share of low- and moderate-income housing, as
directed by the Superior Court and consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-118 et
seq., as amended and supplemented, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as
amended and supplemented, and the New Jersey Fair Housing Act of
1985.19 This article is intended to provide assurances that low- and
moderate-income units ("affordable units") are created with controls on
affordability over time and that low- and moderate-income households
shall occupy those units. This article shall apply except where
inconsistent with applicable law.
B. The River Vale Planning Board has adopted a Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. The Housing Element and Fair Share Plan have been
endorsed by the governing body. This article implements and
incorporates the adopted and endorsed Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan and addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., as
amended and supplemented, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as amended and
supplemented, and the New Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985.
18.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 43-1 POLICE RESERVE § 43-2
36:143
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a lowor
moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4,21 and, in
the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable housing development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that:
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are
not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and
E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
All the residents of the development wherein the unit is situated are 62
years of age or older; or
A.
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of
age or older; or
B.
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older
persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42
U.S.C. § 3607.
C.
21.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 43-2 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-2
36:144
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to, new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median household income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
§ 43-2 POLICE RESERVE § 43-2
36:145
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median
household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — A structure containing five or more dwelling units.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by duly adopted Regional Income Limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the median household income for
the applicable housing region.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
§ 43-2 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-2
36:146
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 43-3. Applicability.
§ 43-4. Alternative living arrangements.
§ 43-5. Inclusionary zoning.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Township of River Vale pursuant
to the Township's most recently adopted Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan.
B. The following sections shall apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and moderateincome
housing units.
C. All affordable housing developments, including those intended to be
funded through federal Low Income Housing Tax Credit programs, shall
be deed restricted to comply with COAH and UHAC rules pertaining to
the income and bedroom distributions of the units.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.822 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
court.
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the administrative agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
22.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 43-2 POLICE RESERVE § 43-5
36:147
§ 43-6. New construction.
A. Rental units. In inclusionary developments, all affordable units shall be
family rental units.
B. Phasing. In inclusionary developments, the following schedule shall be
followed. Low- and moderate-income unit fractions shall be rounded
upward to the higher whole number if 0.5 or greater and shall be
rounded down to the lower whole number if less than 0.5.
Maximum Percentage of
Market-Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
C. List of inclusionary sites. The above requirements shall apply to all
future inclusionary developments in addition to those identified in the
2019 Fair Share Plan and herein listed:
(1) The Edgewood Country Club is located at Block 1201, Lot 6, on
Piermont Avenue. The 2016 River Vale Master Plan recommended a
zone change to permit attached housing and a 20% set-aside for
affordable housing at the site while still maintaining an eighteenhole
regulation golf course.
(2) The Mesker Inclusionary Site, which is municipally sponsored, is
located at Block 701, Lots 5, 5.01, 5.02, 7, 8, and portions of 6 and
9, on Rivervale Road. The inclusionary portion of the project will
result in the construction of 12 low- and moderate-income units.
(3) The Four Corners Overlay Zone, adopted by the Township, permits
inclusionary residential units on upper floors in the area of the
"Four Corners" downtown area, at the intersection of Westwood
Avenue and Rivervale Road.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that, where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units within each bedroom
distribution shall be very-low-income units (affordable to a
household earning 30% or less of median income). The very-lowincome
units shall be counted as part of the required number of
§ 43-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-6
36:148
low-income units within the development. At least 25% of the
obligation shall be met through rental units, including at least half
in rental units available to families. A maximum of 25% may be age
restricted.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining two- and three-bedroom units may be allocated
at the discretion of the developer and Township.
(4) Affordable developments that are age restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements.
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and the following.
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B(2)(a)
through (d) can be satisfied, then an interior accessible route
§ 43-6 POLICE RESERVE § 43-6
36:149
of travel must be provided between stories within an individual
unit, but if all of the terms of Subsection B(2)(a) through (d)
above have been satisfied, then an interior accessible route
of travel shall not be required between stories within an
individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that River Vale has collected funds
from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a person with disabilities
who is purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of River Vale's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have been
constructed with adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the Township of River Vale for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an affordable
unit accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
Township of River Vale for the conversion of adaptable to
accessible entrances.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of
the Township Chief Financial Officer who shall ensure that
the funds are deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund and appropriately earmarked.
[6] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations
of site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design.
§ 43-6 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-6
36:150
(1) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
(2) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities
as the market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional weighted
average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD
and the Superior Court.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very-low-income households, earning 30% or less of the regional
median household income.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-halfperson
household; and
§ 43-6 POLICE RESERVE § 43-6
36:151
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the permitted percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase
shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed
pursuant to low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be
indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low-income housing
tax credits.
E. Minimum presumptive densities/maximum presumptive set-asides for
multifamily development; affordable housing requirements.
§ 43-6 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-6
36:152
§ 43-7. Utilities.
§ 43-8. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
§ 43-9. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
(1) For sale and rental developments: Any project not associated with a
specific density or affordable housing requirement as outlined in a
specified zone or redevelopment plan shall be required to provide a
20% set-aside for affordable housing.
(2) A project shall not be subdivided into two or more lots so as to fall
below the threshold or avoid the set-aside requirement by taking
multiple actions.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by DCA for its Section 8 program.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this article for a period of at least 30 years, until River Vale takes
action to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such action,
a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
§ 43-6 POLICE RESERVE § 43-9
36:153
§ 43-10. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 43-11. Buyer income eligibility.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this article, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its
restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture
lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this article shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See § 43-13.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
§ 43-9 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-11
36:154
§ 43-12. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
§ 43-13. Capital improvements to ownership units.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the administrative agent may,
upon approval by the Township Council, and subject to the court's
approval, permit moderate-income purchasers to buy low-income units
in housing markets if the administrative agent determines that there is
an insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers to permit
prompt occupancy of the units. All such low-income units to be sold to
moderate-income households shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for low-income units.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
D. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this Section, and the administrative agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
B. With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
§ 43-11 POLICE RESERVE § 43-13
36:155
§ 43-14. Control periods for restricted rental units.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale, provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
article for a period of at least 30 years, until River Vale takes action to
release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented. For new
projects receiving 9% low-income housing tax credits, a control period
of not less than a thirty-year compliance period plus a fifteen-year
extended use period shall be required.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Bergen. The deed shall also identify each affordable unit by
apartment number and/or address and whether that unit is designated
as a very-low-, low- or moderate-income unit. Neither the unit nor its
affordability designation shall change throughout the term of the deed
restriction. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this article despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
§ 43-13 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-14
36:156
§ 43-15. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
§ 43-16. Tenant income eligibility.
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
article.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this article.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of median
income.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
§ 43-14 POLICE RESERVE § 43-16
36:157
§ 43-17. Municipal Housing Liaison.
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsections A(1) through B(5) above
with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
A. The Township of River Vale shall appoint a specific municipal employee
to serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for administering
the affordable housing program, including affordability controls, the
Affirmative Marketing Plan, monitoring and reporting, and, where
applicable, supervising any contracted administrative agent. River Vale
shall adopt an ordinance creating the position of Municipal Housing
Liaison. River Vale shall adopt a resolution appointing a Municipal
Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by
the governing body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be approved by the court and shall
be duly qualified through a training program sponsored by Affordable
Housing Professionals of New Jersey before assuming the duties of
Municipal Housing Liaison.
B. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for River Vale,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out to the administrative agent:
(1) Serving as River Vale's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents
and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in River Vale's Fair
Share Plan;
§ 43-16 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-17
36:158
§ 43-18. Administrative agent.
The administrative agent shall be an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the municipality. For new sale and rental
developments, all of the fees of the administrative agent shall be paid by the
owners of the affordable units for which the services of the administrative
agent are required. For resales, single-family homeowners and
condominium homeowners shall be required to pay 3% of the sales price
for services provided by the administrative agent related to the resale of
their homes. That fee shall be collected at closing and paid directly to the
administrative agent. The administrative agent shall perform the duties and
responsibilities of an administrative agent as set forth in UHAC, including
those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 5:80-26.16 and 5:80-26.18 thereof,
which include:
(3) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual monitoring reports as
may be required by the court;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as needed; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
C. Subject to the approval of the court, the Township of River Vale shall
designate one or more administrative agent(s) to administer newly
constructed affordable units in accordance with UHAC. An operating
manual for each affordable housing program shall be provided by the
administrative agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the governing
body and subject to approval of the court. The Operating Manual(s)
shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Township
Clerk, in the office of the Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s)
of the administrative agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison shall
supervise the contracting administrative agent(s).
A. Affirmative marketing:
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the Affirmative Marketing Plan of
the Township of River Vale and the provisions of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15; and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household certification:
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
§ 43-17 POLICE RESERVE § 43-18
36:159
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendixes J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located; and
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of River Vale when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
C. Affordability controls:
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Bergen County Register of Deeds or County Clerk's office after the
termination of the affordability controls for each restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
D. Resales and rerentals:
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the administrative agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- and moderate-income households regarding the
availability of restricted units for resale or rerental.
E. Processing requests from unit owners:
§ 43-18 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-18
36:160
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
article;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central airconditioning
systems;
(3) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement:
(1) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
administrative agent;
(3) The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the administrative
agent, to be approved by the Township Council and the court,
setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls.
G. Additional responsibilities:
§ 43-18 POLICE RESERVE § 43-18
36:161
§ 43-19. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(1) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
(2) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet any
monitoring requirements and deadlines imposed by the court.
(3) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
A. The Township of River Vale shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative
Marketing Plan, subject to approval of the court, that is compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children, to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs marketing activities
toward Housing Region 1 and is required to be followed throughout the
period of restriction.
C. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 1, comprised of
Bergen, Hudson, Bergen, and Sussex counties.
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
Affirmative Marketing Plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The administrative agent designated by the
Township of River Vale shall implement the Affirmative Marketing Plan
to assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the administrative agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
§ 43-18 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-19
36:162
§ 43-20. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the county administration building
and/or the county library for each county within the housing region; the
municipal administration building and the municipal library in the
municipality in which the units are located; and the developer's rental
office. Preapplications shall be emailed or mailed to prospective
applicants upon request.
I. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the court to have violated any provision of the
regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment into the Township of River Vale
§ 43-19 POLICE RESERVE § 43-20
36:163
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase
money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the owner and shall be held in
such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
§ 43-20 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-20
36:164
§ 43-21. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant to
this article shall be filed in writing with the court.
§ 43-22. Reporting and monitoring requirements.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the first
purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
A. On the first anniversary of the entry of the order granting the Township
a final judgment of compliance and repose, and every anniversary
thereafter, through the end of the repose period, the Township shall
provide annual reporting of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity
§ 43-20 POLICE RESERVE § 43-22
36:165
to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on
Affordable Housing or Local Government Services, or such other entity
designated by the State of New Jersey, with copies provided to Fair
Share Housing, and posted on the municipal website, using forms
developed for this purpose by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing or Local
Government Services. The reporting shall include an accounting of
all Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the source and
amount of funds collected and the amount and purpose for which any
funds have been expended.
B. On the first anniversary of the entry of the order granting the Township
a final judgment of compliance and repose, and every anniversary
thereafter, through the end of the repose period, the Township shall
provide annual reporting of the status of all affordable housing activity
within the Township through posting on the Township website with
copies provided to Fair Share Housing Center, using forms previously
developed for this purpose by the Council on Affordable Housing or any
other forms endorsed by the court-appointed Special Master and Fair
Share Housing Center.
C. For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1, 2020, as
required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Township shall post on its
Township website, with copies provided to Fair Share Housing Center, a
status report as to its implementation of its plan and an analysis of
whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to present
a realistic opportunity. Such posting shall invite any interested party to
submit comments to the Township, with copies provided to Fair Share
Housing Center, regarding whether any sites no longer present a
realistic opportunity and should be replaced. Any interested party may,
by motion, request a hearing before the court regarding these issues.
D. For the review of very-low-income housing requirements required by
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of the third anniversary of the
entry of the order granting the Township a final judgment of compliance
and repose, and every third year thereafter, the Township shall post on
its Township website, with copies provided to Fair Share Housing, a
status report as to its satisfaction of its very-low-income requirements,
including the family very-low-income requirements referenced herein.
Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments to
the Township, with copies provided to Fair Share Housing, on the issue
of whether the municipality has complied with its very-low-income
housing obligation.
§ 43-22 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-22
36:166
ARTICLE II
Development Fees
[Adopted 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 361-2019]
§ 43-23. Findings and purpose.
§ 43-24. When effective; approval to spend fees.
A. In Holmdel Builder's Ass'n v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990),
the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 40:55D-8.7), COAH was authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of the Council or a court of competent jurisdiction and
have an approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
C. In Re: Adoption of N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:9723 by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing, 221 N.J. 1 (2015), also known as the Mount Laurel
IV decision, the Supreme Court remanded COAH's duties to the
Superior Court. As a result, affordable housing development fee
collections and expenditures from the municipal affordable housing
trust funds to implement municipal Third Round Fair Share Plans
through July 1, 2025, are under the court's jurisdiction and are subject
to approval by the court.
D. This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32-38. Fees collected
pursuant to this article shall be used for the sole purpose of providing
low- and moderate-income housing. This article shall be interpreted
within the framework of COAH's prior round rules on development fees,
codified at N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.24 and P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7).
A. This article shall not be effective until approved by the court.
B. The Township of River Vale shall not spend development fees until the
court has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1(c).25
23.Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97 expired 6-2-2015.
24.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 43-23 POLICE RESERVE § 43-25
36:167
§ 43-25. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100%
affordable development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.26
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5 and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through N.J.S.A. flow or
54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 43-26. Residential development fees.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning district(s), residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for
residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
25.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
26.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 43-25 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-26
36:168
§ 43-27. Nonresidential development fees.
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a
site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1.5% of the
equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the specified
higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed value for the
two additional units, provided zoning on the site has not changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance
application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions, and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, unless the owner resided in the previous dwelling for
a period of one year or more prior to obtaining a demolition permit,
or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise exempt from the
development fee requirement. The development fee shall be
calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed value of the
improved or replaced structure as compared to the previous
structure.
(4) Homes replaced as a result of a natural disaster (such as a fire or
flood) shall be exempt from the payment of a development fee.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value
of the land and improvements, for all new nonresidential
construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted below, shall also pay a fee equal
§ 43-26 POLICE RESERVE § 43-27
36:169
§ 43-28. Collection procedures.
to 2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from
any additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e.,
made an improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions, and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the 2.5% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within the existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
Certification/Exemption form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Township of River Vale as a lien against the real property of
the owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
§ 43-27 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-28
36:170
staff to notify the construction official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption, to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The tax assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Township of River Vale fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the
amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Except as provided in § 43-27A(3) above, 50% of the development fee
shall be collected at the time of issuance of the building permit. The
remaining portion shall be collected at the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy. The developer shall be responsible for paying the difference
between the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at
issuance of certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
§ 43-28 POLICE RESERVE § 43-28
36:171
§ 43-29. Affordable housing trust fund.
§ 43-30. Use of funds.
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Township of
River Vale. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made
to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State
Uniform Tax Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by the Township of River Vale. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Uniform Tax Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1
et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination.
Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the
prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Township of River Vale Chief Financial Officer
for the purpose of depositing development fees collected from
residential and nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with the Township of River
Vale's affordable housing program.
C. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible housing activities approved by the court.
§ 43-28 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-30
36:172
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by the court. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by the court to address the Township of River
Vale's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving
loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited to,
preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or
implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of
affordable housing units and related costs, accessory apartment,
market to affordable, or regional housing partnership programs,
conversion of existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable
units, green building strategies designed to be cost saving and in
accordance with accepted national or state standards, purchase of land
for affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable
housing, extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.1627 and specified in the approved
spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township of River Vale
for past housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. The Township of River Vale may contract with a private or public entity
to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance.
27.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 43-30 POLICE RESERVE § 43-30
36:173
§ 43-31. Monitoring.
On an annual basis commencing with the first anniversary of the entry
of the order granting a final judgment of compliance and repose to River
Vale, the Township of River Vale shall report all activity in connection
with its Affordable Housing Trust Fund to the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs [either the Division of Local Government Services or
the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), whichever entity is designated
by the State of New Jersey], with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees,
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing
program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of
the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for
such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for
income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and
rental units, and compliance with the reporting and monitoring
requirements that have been approved by the court. Legal or other fees
related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to or
appealing the court's approval of River Vale's Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan are not eligible uses of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
F. In the event of a failure by the Township of River Vale to comply with
trust fund monitoring and reporting requirements or to submit accurate
monitoring reports; or a failure to comply with the conditions of the
judgment of compliance or a revocation of the judgment of compliance;
or a failure to implement the approved spending plan and to expend
funds within the applicable required time period as set forth in In re Tp.
of Monroe, 442 N.J. Super. 565 (Law Div. 2015) (aff'd 442 N.J. Super.
563); or the expenditure of funds on activities not approved by the
court; or for other good cause demonstrating the unapproved use(s) of
funds, the court may authorize the State of New Jersey, Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services (LGS), to
direct the manner in which the funds in the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund shall be expended, provided that all such funds shall, to the extent
practicable, be utilized for affordable housing programs within the
Township of River Vale, or, if not practicable, then within the county or
the housing region.
G. Any party may bring a motion before the Superior Court presenting
evidence of such condition(s), and the court may, after considering the
evidence and providing the municipality a reasonable opportunity to
respond and/or to remedy the noncompliant condition(s), and upon a
finding of continuing and deliberate noncompliance, determine to
authorize LGS to direct the expenditure of funds in the trust fund. The
court may also impose such other remedies as may be reasonable and
appropriate to the circumstances.
§ 43-30 RIVER VALE CODE § 43-31
36:174
Center. Under the Fair Housing Act and Approval of its Amended Spending
Plan, Docket No. BER-L-6277-15, and with a posting of same on the
municipal website, using forms previously developed for this purpose by
COAH. The reporting shall include all sources and amounts collected/
earned and the amounts and purposes for which funds have been expended.
§ 43-32. Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for the Township of River Vale to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its judgment of compliance and repose
unless the Township of River Vale has filed an adopted Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan with the court or with COAH or its successor agency
designated by the State of New Jersey, has petitioned for a judgment
of compliance and repose or substantive certification, and has received
the court's or COAH's approval of its development fee ordinance. If the
Township of River Vale fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of its judgment of compliance
and repose, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining
within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited
into the New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund established pursuant
to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). The Township of
River Vale shall not impose a residential development fee on a development
that receives preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration of
its judgment of compliance and repose, nor shall the Township of River
Vale retroactively impose a development fee on such a development. The
Township of River Vale shall not expend development fees after the
expiration of its judgment of compliance and repose.
§ 43-33. Administrative provisions.
A. It is the intent of the Township Council to incorporate the additions,
amendments and/or supplements contained in this article into the
Code.
B. If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence, phrase or
provision of this article is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the remaining
portions of this article.
C. A copy of this article shall be available for public inspection at the
offices of the Township Clerk.
D. This article shall take effect after 20 days of its final passage by the
Township Council, upon approval by the Mayor and publication as
required by law.
§ 43-31 POLICE RESERVE § 43-33
36:175
Chapter 45
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire subcode fees — See Ch. 90, § 90-4D. Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
§ 45-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of burglar, fire, smoke and other emergency alarm devices
within the Township.
§ 45-2. Scope.
This chapter shall apply to any person who operates, maintains or owns any
burglar, fire, smoke or other emergency alarm device designed to summon
the Police Department, Fire Department or other municipal agencies to any
location in response to the alarm.
§ 45-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — A device or an assembly of equipment which emits an
audible response, which is intended to alert persons outside a premises
to the existence of a hazard or emergency or which is intended to alert
emergency agencies by automatically dialing an emergency agency or
which is connected to a business which offers the service of receiving
emergency signals, monitoring said signals and relaying them to an
emergency agency.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL ALARMS — An alarm which is activated in the
event of a medical emergency.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm activated by or resulting from inadvertence,
negligence or an unintentional act of someone other than an intruder and
shall include, as well, alarms caused by malfunction of the alarm device.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 45-4. Exemptions.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to emergency medical
alarms.
B. Permits shall be required for alarm systems located in buildings of
federal, state or local governmental agencies or authorities or in public
§ 43-33 RIVER VALE CODE § 45-4
45:176
§ 45-5. Permit required.
No person shall own, use, lease, operate or maintain an alarm system within
the Township unless such person shall have first obtained from the Police
Department an alarm user permit for such alarm as herein provided.
§ 45-6. Application for permit.
In order to obtain an alarm user permit, any person who operates an alarm
system shall submit an application for such permit in the form designated by
the River Vale Chief of Police, which application shall contain the following:
§ 45-7. Permit issuance; conditions.
Upon receipt of a properly executed permit application, the Chief of Police
shall issue an alarm user permit to the applicant. Alarm user permits shall
not be transferable, shall be kept on the premises where the alarm system is
located and shall be made available for inspection by the Police Department.
§ 45-8. Fees. [Amended 4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 0-5-93; 8-26-2004 by
Ord. No. 0-9-04]
§ 45-9. Penalties for false alarms.
elementary schools, but said alarm systems shall be exempt from the
permit fee, but said alarms shall be subject to the fines and penalties
herein provided for false alarms.
A. The name, home address and telephone number of the person applying
for the permit.
B. The address of the premises upon which the alarm system is or will be
located.
C. The type of alarm system for which the permit is sought.
D. The name, address and telephone number of one or more persons who
can be reached at any time and who are authorized by the owner of the
premises in which the system is installed to open the premises.
E. Any other information relating to the alarm system or the user as the
Chief of Police may require.
A. Every application for an alarm user permit shall be accompanied by a
fee of $50 or $15 for applicants over the age of 65.
B. There shall be required an annual renewal of the alarm user permit, at a
fee of $10 per annum; said renewal procedure to be administered by
the Chief of Police.
A. In the case of a false alarm, the Police Department shall cause an
investigation to be made and shall keep a record of said alarms on file.
§ 45-4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 45-9
45:177
§ 45-10. Liability.
§ 45-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person not complying with any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, in
addition to the fees as set forth in § 45-8 and the penalties for false alarms
as set forth in § 45-9 of this chapter.
Chapter 49
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 166,
Art. II.
B. For such false alarms, the following penalties are prescribed:
(1) For the first and second false alarms in any given calendar year,
there shall be a written warning issued.
(2) For the third false alarm in the same calendar year, a fine of $25
shall be paid to the Township of River Vale.
(3) For the fourth false alarm in the same calendar year, a fine of $50
shall be paid to the Township of River Vale.
(4) For the fifth false alarm and each false alarm thereafter in the same
calendar year, a fine of $150 shall be paid to the Township of River
Vale.
A. The Township of River Vale shall be under no duty or obligation to
maintain the police panel alarm system equipment or any equipment or
device connected thereto by a permit holder under this chapter.
B. The Police Department of the Township of River Vale shall be under no
obligation whatsoever for the installation, connection, adequacy,
operation or maintenance of the alarm, equipment, device or systems so
installed or connected.
C. The Township of River Vale shall not be liable for any failure of such
alarm system or equipment.
§ 45-9 RIVER VALE CODE § 45-11
45:178
ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 5-7-1936 (§§ 6-1 to 6-12 and 6-14 to 6-17 of the 1967
Code)]
§ 49-1. License required.
No person, firm or corporation, association or other organization shall
sell, expose for sale or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages, unless and
until such person, firm or corporation, association or other organization
shall first obtain a license for that purpose, issued pursuant to "An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," passed December 6, 1933, as amended
and supplemented (N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.).
§ 49-2. Application.
Any person, firm or corporation, association or other organization desiring
a license to sell, expose for sale or dispense alcoholic beverages shall make
application for that purpose to the Township Council of the Township of
River Vale. Such application shall be delivered personally to the Township
Clerk and shall set forth the following facts and, in addition thereto, such
other information as may be required by the Township Council:
A. The full name and address of the person, persons or, in case a
corporation is the applicant, the officers of such corporation, who or
which shall constitute the applicant for such license.
B. The exact location of the building in or from which such business is to
be conducted.
C. Whether the applicant is the owner of the premises from which such
business is to be conducted or a tenant thereof and, in case such
applicant is a tenant, the period for which the lease shall run.
D. The name and address of persons upon whom process may be served in
the event of an alleged violation of any of the provisions of this article or
any of the rules and regulations of the State Commissioner of Alcoholic
Beverage Control or the statutes of the State of New Jersey or of the
United States affecting, in any manner, the distribution or sale of
intoxicating liquors. Service upon such persons shall not be deemed
necessary to acquire jurisdiction over the license.
E. Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a violation of any
statute of the United States or the State of New Jersey, any rule or
regulation of the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control or any
municipal ordinance.
F. Whether or not any member of the Township Council of the Township of
River Vale has any interest, directly or indirectly, in the business for
which such license is sought.
§ 49-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 49-2
45:179
§ 49-3. Application hearing.
Upon receipt of such application, the Township Clerk shall present the same
at a meeting of the Township Council, which Council, upon investigation by
any person, persons or committee designated by and for such purpose, shall
consider the same and either grant such license or reject such application.
§ 49-4. Conditions of license.
The holders of licenses herein designated shall be entitled, respectively, to
sell, expose for sale and dispense alcoholic beverages in the manner and
under the conditions outlined by an Act of the Legislature of the State of
New Jersey, entitled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," comprising
Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, and the several supplements thereto and
acts amendatory thereof (N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.).
§ 49-5. Fees. [Amended 5-14-1970; 5-19-1983 by Ord. No.
0-6-83;5-28-1987 by Ord. No. 0-9-87; 11-23-1993 by Ord. No.
0-20-93; 8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
The following fees are hereby fixed and determined as the fees to be
charged for the type of license hereinafter indicated:
§ 49-6. When fee required.
Each and every application for a license shall be accompanied by the fee
hereinbefore fixed and determined for such type of license.
§ 49-7. Revocation and suspension.
Any license issued under and by virtue of the provisions of this article may
be revoked or suspended for the violation of any of the provisions hereof or
the violation of any statute of the United States or the State of New Jersey
regulating the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages or the violation
of any regulation or rule prescribed by the Commissioners of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
G. Any other information which is now or may hereinafter be required by
the laws of the United States, the State of New Jersey or the
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
A. Plenary retail distribution and consumption license fees:
(1) Plenary retail distribution license: $1,500.
(2) Plenary retail consumption license: $2,000.
B. Club license: $188 per year.
§ 49-2 RIVER VALE CODE § 49-8
45:180
§ 49-8. Privileges suspended upon revocation.
No person, firm or corporation, association or other organization shall
exercise any privilege granted by such license after the revocation or
suspension thereof.
§ 49-9. Hours.
§ 49-10. Age limitations.
A. The hours permitting the sale, consumption, delivery and service of
alcoholic beverages shall be as follows: [Amended 5-25-1995 by Ord.
No. 0-13-95; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 303-215]
(1) The sale, consumption, delivery and service of alcoholic beverages
on the premises of the holder of a plenary retail consumption
license shall be permitted as follows: Monday 7:00 a.m. to Tuesday
1:00 a.m.; Tuesday at 7:00 a.m. to Wednesday 1:00 a.m.;
Wednesday 7:00 a.m. to Thursday 1:00 a.m.; Thursday 7:00 a.m. to
Friday 1:00 a.m.; Friday 7:00 a.m. to Saturday 2:00 a.m.; Saturday
7:00 a.m. to Sunday 3:00 a.m.; Sunday 10:00 a.m. to Monday 1:00
a.m.; provided, however, that on New Year's Day, each year, the sale
of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted until 5:00 a.m. of that day
and resume as set forth above.
(2) The sale and delivery of alcoholic beverages by the holder of a
plenary retail distribution license shall be as follows: Monday
through Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
and Sunday, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
B. The hours herein fixed shall be prevailing time, that is, Eastern
standard time, except when Eastern daylight saving time is in effect by
authority of the law of this state.
C. The licensed premises shall be closed promptly at the closing hour fixed
herein, and all patrons, customers and other persons shall be removed,
and said premises shall remain closed until the opening hour next
following, during which period no person, except the licensee or his
regular, bona fide paid employees, shall be permitted in or upon said
premises; provided, however, that food or meals may be served after
7:30 a.m. in the dining room or dining booths provided on said premises
for that purpose, but no alcoholic beverages of any type shall be sold,
delivered, suffered or permitted to be consumed therein and thereon
before the regular opening hour.
D. Any person violating any of the provisions hereof shall be liable to the
penalties prescribed in § 49-16, and such penalties shall be in addition
to any disciplinary action which may be instituted or maintained against
the licensee by any state or municipal officials charged with the
enforcement of the Alcoholic Beverage Law.
§ 49-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 49-10
45:181
§ 49-11. Requirements for employment.
§ 49-12. Number of licenses issued. [Amended 12-15-1977 by Ord.
No. 0-16-77]
No more than seven plenary retail consumption licenses, one plenary retail
distribution license and one club license shall be issued by the Township
Council and/or be in effect in the Township of River Vale at any one time.
A. No person under the age permitted by New Jersey statutes shall sell,
serve, dispense or receive alcoholic beverages, nor shall any person
under the age permitted by the New Jersey statutes be permitted to
enter or frequent any room or rooms in which alcoholic beverages are
dispensed, except when such underage person shall be accompanied by
his or her parent or legal guardian. [Amended 9-15-1977 by Ord. No.
0-12-77; 5-19-1983 by Ord. No. 0-6-83]
B. Any person violating any of the provisions hereof shall be liable to the
penalties prescribed § 49-16, and such penalties shall be in addition to
any disciplinary action which may be instituted or maintained against
the licensee by any state or municipal officials charged with the
enforcement of the Alcoholic Beverage Law.28
A. No licensee shall employ or permit to work in or upon the licensed
premises any bartender, waiter, waitress or other person involved in
serving liquor unless such person shall have filed with the Township
Police Department, within 60 days after employment with respect to a
new employee, a statement indicating that he or she is of good moral
character and has not been convicted of any crime involving moral
turpitude and unless such person shall further submit to fingerprinting
and photographing and the furnishing of such other pertinent
information in connection with the person's background and proposed
employment as may reasonably be required by the Chief of Police or
person acting on his behalf; provided, however, that nothing in this
subsection shall be deemed to disqualify from employment a person
whose criminal disqualification shall have been lifted and removed by
the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control. [Amended
9-15-1977 by Ord. No. 0-12-77]
B. Any person violating any of the provisions hereof shall be liable to the
penalties prescribed § 49-16, and such penalties shall be in addition to
any disciplinary action which may be instituted or maintained against
the licensee by any state or municipal officials charged with the
enforcement of the Alcoholic Beverage Law.
28.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 49-10 RIVER VALE CODE § 49-13
45:182
§ 49-13. Certain premises exempt. [Amended 12-15-1977 by Ord.
No. 0-16-77]
No person shall consume or have in his possession or possess alcoholic
beverages or offer to another for consumption any alcoholic beverage in, on
or upon any place to which the public at-large is generally invited; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the consumption
or sale of alcoholic beverages within the premises of an establishment
having a plenary retail consumption liquor license or club license.
§ 49-14. Nonapplicability to Volunteer Fire Department and
Ambulance Corps. [Added 12-15-1977 by Ord. No. 0-16-77]
The provisions set forth in this article shall not be construed to prohibit
the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages, which are sold, by
members of the River Vale Volunteer Fire Department and Ambulance Corps
or their guests within any of the buildings of said organizations.
§ 49-15. Special permits. [Added 12-15-1977 by Ord. No. 0-16-77]
Special permits may be issued by the Township Council for certain
designated areas of the municipality and by the Board of Recreation
Commissioners for recreational areas, authorizing the dispensing and
consumption of alcoholic beverages during certain designated dates and
times during the course of a picnic or other activity sponsored by a
nonprofit corporation or organization holding a permit for the use of said
area on said date and time.
§ 49-16. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-15-1977 by Ord. No.
0-16-77]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or fail to comply
therewith shall severally, for each and every violation and noncompliance,
forfeit and pay a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I, § 1-14, at the discretion of the court imposing sentence pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29.
§ 49-13 ALARM SYSTEMS § 49-16
45:183

ARTICLE II
Consumption in Public
[Adopted 4-7-1960; amended 12-15-1977 by Ord. No. 0-16-77
(§ 6-13 of the 1967 Code); amended in its entirety at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 49-17. Public consumption restricted.
No person shall consume or offer to another for consumption alcoholic
beverages in, on or upon any public street, road, alley, sidewalk, park or
playground or in, on or upon any land or building owned or occupied by
the federal, state, county or municipal government, including the Board of
Education.
§ 49-18. Consumption in places where public is invited.
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or offer to another for
consumption any alcoholic beverage in, on or upon any place to which
the public at-large is generally invited; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be construed to prohibit the consumption or sale of alcoholic
beverages within the licensed premises of a plenary retail consumption
liquor licensee.
§ 49-19. Closed containers on public land.
No person shall have in his possession or possess any alcoholic beverage
in, on or upon any public street, road, alley, sidewalk, park or playground
or in, on or upon any land or building owned or occupied by a federal,
state, county or municipal government unless the same is contained within
a closed or sealed container.
§ 49-20. Closed sealed containers in public places.
No person shall have in his possession or possess any alcoholic beverage
in or upon any place to which the public at-large is generally invited
unless the same is contained within a closed or sealed container; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the possession
of alcoholic beverages within the licensed premises of a plenary retail
consumption liquor licensee.
§ 49-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or fail to comply
therewith shall severally, for each and every violation and noncompliance,
forfeit and pay a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I, § 1-14, at the discretion of the court or jurisdictional officer before
whom a conviction may be found.
§ 49-17 ALARM SYSTEMS § 49-21
45:185

ARTICLE III
Possession or Consumption by Underage Persons on Private
Property
[Adopted 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 107-2005]
§ 49-22. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages
prohibited; penalties; suspension of driving privileges.
A. Any person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages who
knowingly possesses, without legal authority, or who knowingly
consumes any alcoholic beverage on private property shall be subject,
upon conviction, to a fine of $150 for a first offense and a fine of $350
for any subsequent offense.
B. The Court may, in addition to the sentence authorized for the offense,
suspend or postpone, for up to six months, the driving privilege of the
defendant. Upon the conviction of any person under this article, the
Court shall forward a report to the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission vehicles (the "MVC") stating the first and last day of the
suspension or postponement period imposed by the Court pursuant to
this article. If a person, at the time of the imposition of a sentence, is
less than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement, including
a suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized
bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall
run for a period of six months after the person reaches the age of 17
years.
C. If a person, at the time of the imposition of a sentence, has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the Court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the MVC, along with the report. If for any
reason the license cannot be collected, the Court shall include in the
report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color and sex of
the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the court.
D. The Court shall inform the person orally and in writing that, if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of
license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
E. If the person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey resident,
the Court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the MVC the required report. The Court shall not collect the
license of a nonresident convicted under this section. Upon receipt of a
report by the Court, the MVC shall notify the appropriate officials in the
licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
§ 49-22 ALARM SYSTEMS § 49-23
45:187
§ 49-23. Exception for religious observance; presence of parent or
guardian.
§ 49-24. Exception performance of employment.
Nothing in this article shall prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by
any such person while actually engaged in the performance of employment
pursuant to an employment by a person who is licensed under Title 33
of the Revised Statutes, or while actively engaged in the preparation of
food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a
county vocational school or postsecondary educational institution; however,
nothing in this article shall be construed to preclude the imposition of
a penalty under this article, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law
against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on
or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
A. Nothing in this article shall prohibit an underaged person from
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a
religious observance, ceremony or rite, or consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in the presence of, and with the permission of a
parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase
or consume alcoholic beverages.
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underaged person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment, or
other applicable laws, as determined by the court.
RELATIVE — The underaged person's grandparent, aunt, uncle, sibling
or any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 49-23 RIVER VALE CODE § 49-24
45:188
Chapter 53
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 81.
Noise — See Ch. 159.
Park and recreation facilities — See Ch. 166.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 245.
§ 53-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to control and regulate motorcycles, dirt
bikes, snowmobiles, and all-terrain vehicles, as defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et
seq. and N.J.S.A. 39:3C-1 et seq., in order to preserve the public peace and
order and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public of the
Township of River Vale.
§ 53-2. Definitions.
§ 53-3. Operation and use restrictions.
A. Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 shall be deemed to
apply to such words and phrases used herein.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE — A motor-operated vehicle, designed to
travel over any terrain, of a type possessing between three and six
rubber tires, but shall not include golf carts.
MOTORCYCLE — Includes motorcycles, motor bikes, bicycles with
motor attached and all motor-operated vehicles of the bicycle- or
tricycle-type.
PUBLIC HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and all real property which is owned or
controlled by a governmental entity, including conservation areas,
utility easements and drainage easements.
SNOWMOBILE — Any motor-operated vehicle, designed primarily to
travel over ice or snow, of a type which uses sled-type runners, skis, an
endless belt tread, cleats or any combination of these or other similar
means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated, but does
not include any farm tractor, highway or other construction equipment,
or any military vehicle.
§ 49-24 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES § 53-3
53:189
A. Public lands.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be
operated a dirt bike or an all-terrain vehicle, as defined herein, on
any public grounds or property, including playgrounds and
recreational areas.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be
operated a motorcycle on public grounds or property (including
playgrounds and recreational areas) except on public streets or
highways as defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 and public parking areas.
B. Limited access highways. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle
upon limited access highways or within the right-of-way limits thereof.
C. Public streets or highways. No person shall operate an all-terrain
vehicle upon the main traveled portion of any public street or highway
or within the right-of-way limits thereof except as follows:
(1) Properly registered all-terrain vehicles may cross, as directly as
possible, public streets or highways, except limited access
highways, provided that such crossing can be made in safety and
that it does not interfere with the free movement of vehicular traffic
approaching from either direction of such public street or highway.
Prior to making any such crossing, the operator shall bring the allterrain
vehicle to a complete stop. It shall be the responsibility of
the operator of the all-terrain vehicle to yield the right-of-way to all
vehicular traffic upon any public street or highway before crossing
the same.
(2) Wherever it is impracticable to gain immediate access to an area
adjacent to a public highway where an all-terrain vehicle is to be
operated, it may be operated adjacent and parallel to such public
highway for the purpose of gaining access to the area of operation.
This subsection shall apply to the operation of an all-terrain vehicle
from the point where it is unloaded from a motorized conveyance to
the area where it is to be operated or from the area where operated
to a motorized conveyance when such loading or unloading cannot
be effected in the immediate vicinity to the area of operation
without causing a hazard to vehicular traffic approaching from
either direction on said public highway. Such loading or unloading
must be accomplished with due regard to safety, at the nearest
possible point to the area of operation.
D. Written consent. No person shall operate a motorcycle or all-terrain
vehicle on the property of another without receiving the consent of the
owner of the property or the person who has a contractual right to the
use of such property. No person shall continue to operate a motorcycle
or all-terrain vehicle on the property of another after consent has been
withdrawn. The consent as required herein shall be by the written
consent of the owner of the property or the person who has contractual
right to the use of such property and must be in the possession of the
§ 53-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 53-3
53:190
§ 53-4. Age requirement.
operator during the period of operation for which the consent has been
granted.
E. Harsh, objectionable or unreasonable noise. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or permit to be operated a motorcycle or all-terrain
vehicle in such manner as to cause a harsh, objectionable or
unreasonable noise so as to disturb or interfere with the peace and
quiet of other persons.29
F. Careless, reckless or negligent operation. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or permit to be operated a motorcycle or all-terrain
vehicle in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger
the safety or property of any person.
G. Protective helmets. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or to
permit to be operated, or to ride as a passenger on, any motorcycle or
all-terrain vehicle without wearing a protective helmet approved by the
Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles in the Department of Law and
Public Safety of the State of New Jersey. Any such helmet shall be of a
type acceptable for use in conjunction with motorcycles as provided in
N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.7 through N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.10.
H. Headlights, taillights, brakes and mufflers. It shall be unlawful for any
person to operate or permit to be operated a motorcycle or all-terrain
vehicle that is not equipped with working headlights, taillights, brakes
and proper mufflers as supplied by the motor manufacturer for the
particular model without modifications.
I. Pursuit of wildlife. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
permit to be operated a motorcycle or all-terrain vehicle at any time and
in any manner intended or reasonably to be expected to harass, drive or
pursue any wildlife.
J. Lighted headlights and taillights. It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate or permit to be operated a motorcycle or all-terrain vehicle
without lighted headlights and lighted taillights.
K. Railroads. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be
operated a motorcycle or all-terrain vehicle upon railroad or right-ofway
of an operating railroad, except railroad personnel in the
performance of their duties.
L. Rules and regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to
this chapter.
29.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 159, Noise.
§ 53-3 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES § 53-4
53:191
§ 53-5. Insurance requirement.
§ 53-6. Snowmobiles.
All provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the operation of
snowmobiles within the Township of River Vale.
§ 53-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 57
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
A. A person under the age of 14 years shall not operate or be permitted to
operate any snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle on public lands or waters
or across a public highway.
B. A person less than 16 years of age shall not operate on public lands or
waters or across a public highway of this state an all-terrain vehicle
with an engine capacity greater than 90 cubic centimeters.
C. A person less than 18 years of age shall not operate an all-terrain
vehicle registered in this state on public lands or waters or across a
public highway of this state unless the person has completed an allterrain
vehicle safety education and training course established or
certified by the Director pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:3C-15. At all times
during the operation of the all-terrain vehicle the person shall have in
his possession a certificate indicating successful completion of the
course.
A. No person shall operate or permit to be operated an all-terrain vehicle
unless the owner has obtained a policy of insurance from a carrier
authorized to do business in this state. Each policy shall contain
minimum policy limits of $15,000, exclusive of interest and costs, for
the death or injury of one person in any one accident and limits of
$30,000, exclusive of interest and costs, on account of injury to or death
of more than one person in any one accident.
B. Proof of insurance shall be produced and displayed by the owner or
operator of an all-terrain vehicle upon the request of any law
enforcement officer.
A. Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter or any rule
or regulation promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $200 for a first offense.
For a second or subsequent violation of this section, a fine of not less
than $200 nor more than $500 shall be imposed.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 53-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 57-1
57:192
§ 57-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT GAME — Any machine which may be
operated by the public for entertainment or amusement, whether the
machine is coin-operated or not and whether or not it registers, scores
or tallies. Mechanical amusement games include but are not limited to
pinball machines, electronic games, bowling machines, mechanical grab
machines, Skee-Ball machines, pokerino machines, commercial pool tables
and similar devices. This enumeration is intended to be typical and shall not
be construed as exclusive.
OPERATOR — Any person in whose place of business any mechanical
amusement game is placed or kept for operation by the public.
PERSON — Any person, firm, corporation or partnership.
PLACE OF BUSINESS — Any commercial establishment, store, building or
other place where the public may enter, or any building or other place
wherein any club or organization meetings are held.
§ 57-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to license, regulate, control and permit the
operation of mechanical amusement games in places of business as a use
accessory to the principal permitted use.
§ 57-3. License required.
No person shall maintain, possess, operate or permit to be operated any
mechanical amusement games in any place of business without first
obtaining a license therefor.
§ 57-4. Application.
A. All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made and
delivered to the Township Clerk in duplicate on forms to be supplied for
the purpose and shall be subscribed and sworn to by the applicant.
B. The application for the license shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name under which the place of business is being operated and
the location of the same.
(3) The number and type of alcoholic beverage licenses, where
applicable.30
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 49, Alcoholic Beverages, Art. I, Licensing.
§ 57-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 57-4
57:193
§ 57-5. Fees.
§ 57-6. License term; transferability.
(4) The number and type of mechanical amusement games sought to
be licensed.
(5) The location where each mechanical amusement game is to be
located if different from Subsection B(2) above.
(6) Description of each mechanical amusement game sought to be
licensed, including, for each device, the name of the manufacturer,
model number and serial number.
(7) The primary use of the place of business within which the
mechanical amusement games are to be operated, used or
maintained.
(8) The applicant shall submit as a sketch at a scale of one inch equals
10 feet showing the physical location of proposed amusement
machine(s) and its (their) relationship to other activities within the
place of business.
(9) Any other information which the Mayor or his designee may deem
necessary and proper for the full protection of the interests of the
public.
A. The application fee for each application for license pursuant to this
chapter shall be $50 in addition to all licensing or transfer fees.
[Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
B. The fee for a license to operate a mechanical amusement game shall be
$200 per machine, per annum. [Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No.
0-9-04]
C. Nonprofit, charitable or religious organizations are exempted from
paying a fee for obtaining a license or licenses to maintain, operate or
possess mechanical amusement games, but such organizations shall
remain subject to all other provisions of this chapter.
D. This chapter shall not apply to jukeboxes or similar music-playing
devices.
A. All licenses issued hereunder shall be for a term of one year or part
thereof and shall expire on December 31 of each year.
B. A license may be transferred from one mechanical amusement game to
another by giving to the Township Clerk notice of the proposed transfer,
a description of the new mechanical amusement game, including
manufacturer, model number and serial number. The fee for all such
transfers shall be $50 per mechanical amusement game. [Amended
8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
§ 57-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 57-7
57:194
§ 57-7. Gambling prohibited.
No person shall, in his place of business, permit gambling in connection
with the playing of any mechanical amusement game.
§ 57-8. Investigation.
The Chief of Police shall make an investigation of the place of business
and of the applicant to determine the truth of the facts set forth in the
application. The Fire Subcode Official shall inspect the place of business
to determine whether it complies with existing fire regulations of the
Township. The Chief of Police and the Fire Subcode Official shall, upon
completion of their inspections, attach to said application their reports
thereon in writing. Upon receipt of said application and inspection reports,
if any, the Mayor or his designee shall determine whether or not the
applicant has complied with all terms and conditions of this chapter and,
if so, shall approve the application and direct the Township Clerk to issue
the necessary license upon the receipt of the license fee or fees as herein
provided.
§ 57-9. General regulations.
A. The Mayor or his designee may revoke an operator's license for just
cause. An operator whose license is proposed to be revoked shall be
given 10 days' written notice of such proposed revocation and an
opportunity to be heard by the Mayor or his designee. A written request
for a hearing must be filed with the Township Clerk within said ten-day
notice period, and the hearing shall be held within 10 days of receipt of
said notice.
B. Posting and display. An operator's license granted pursuant to this
chapter shall:
(1) Be posted in a conspicuous place at the location for which said
license was granted.
(2) State the name and address of the licensee.
(3) State the manufacturer, model number and serial number for each
and every mechanical amusement game for which said license was
issued.
C. Number of machines. The maximum number of mechanical amusement
games for any place of business shall be four.
D. Location, No mechanical amusement games may he operated within
500 feet of the property line of any school, house of worship, hospital,
nursing home, convalescent home or rehabilitation center.
E. Location within building or place of business. Mechanical amusement
games shall not be located so as to obstruct aisleways, entranceways or
exits. No machine shall be located within 15 feet of any exit doorway.
§ 57-7 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 57-9
57:195
§ 57-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter or who fails
to comply herewith shall, for each and every violation or noncompliance,
pay a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14.
Each day a violation exists under this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense under this chapter. The application of the above penalty shall not be
held to prevent any proceeding for suspension or revocation of licenses.
Chapter 61
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise made by animals — See Ch. 159,
§ 159-2J.
Hunting or injuring animals in parks — See
Ch. 166, Art. II, § 166-11E.
Dogs prohibited in parks — See Ch. 166,
§ 166-11G.
F. Expiration and renewal of license. All licenses issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December
31 next succeeding the date of the issuance thereof, and all persons
desiring to renew such license granted hereunder shall make
application before November 1, for a new license for the following year
and shall pay the license fees in like manner and amount as for the
review and issuance of the original license.
§ 57-9 RIVER VALE CODE § 57-10
57:196
ARTICLE I
Dog Licensing and Impoundment
[Adopted 11-6-1941 (Ch. 25, Art. I, of the 1967 Code ]
§ 61-1. Definitions.
The definitions set forth in Chapter 151 of the Laws of 1941 (N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.1 et seq.) and constituting a uniform act relating to the licensing of
dogs and kennels, among other things, are hereby adopted and approved.
§ 61-2. Enforcement. [Amended 2-23-1984 by Ord. No. 0-4-84]
The Chief of Police or the Animal Control Officer, as the case may be,
is hereby designated as the official charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of said Act.
§ 61-3. License fees. [Amended 9-20-1979 by Ord. No. 0-24-79;
10-15-1981 by Ord. No. 0-18-81; 11-18-1982 by Ord. No. 0-17-82;
2-23-1984 by Ord. No. 0-4-84; 10-24-1991 by Ord. No. 0-22-91]
§ 61-4. Additional fees and license restrictions; penalty. [Amended
10-4-1951; 3-13-1969]
A. The sum of $7 shall be paid annually for a dog license and every
renewal thereof. In addition there shall be a statutory fee of $1.20,
which shall be forwarded to the State Department of Health, as
required by statute. [Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No. O-9-04;
3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 101-2005; 4-11-2005 by Ord. No.
106-2005]
B. In addition to the above fees, there shall be collected for each dog
licensed, an additional fee of $3 if such dog is not spayed or neutered,
said fee to be forwarded to the State Department of Health Animal
Population Control Fund, as required by statute. [Amended
8-26-2004 by Ord. No. O-9-04; 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 101-2005]
C. As authorized by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3, Seeing Eye dogs, dogs used to
assist handicapped persons and commonly known as "service dogs" and
dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known as "hearing ear"
dogs are exempt from the license fees provided for in this section.
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 106-2005]
A. The following fees shall be collected by the Animal Control Officer and
forwarded to the Treasurer to be placed in a special fund for the
enforcement of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-1 et seq. and this article:
[Amended 2-23-1984 by Ord. No. 0-4-84]
(1) For issuance of each individual dog license: the fee set forth in
§ 61-3.31
§ 61-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 61-4
57:197
§ 61-5. Disposition of fees.
All fees or other moneys collected shall be accounted for and paid over to
the Treasurer as required by said Act, and the fees above provided shall be
billed to the Township monthly, on properly approved vouchers, and paid by
warrant of the Township out of such funds.
§ 61-6. Establishment of pound. [Amended 9-20-1979 by Ord. No.
0-24-79]
The Township Council may by resolution contract with a duly organized
animal shelter for the seizure, impounding and care of dogs, in which
instance such shelter shall be regarded as the "person appointed" for the
specific purpose of seizure, impounding and caring for such dogs.
(2) A late charge of $5 shall be collected for the issuance of dog license
after January 31. [Added 2-23-1984 by Ord. No. 0-4-84;
amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 106-2005]
B. No more than five individual dog licenses shall be issued to any one
person or for the keeping of more than five dogs at or upon any address,
premises or plot of land within the Township of River Vale, except at
duly licensed kennels. The keeping, maintaining or harboring of more
than five dogs by any one person as set forth herein shall constitute a
violation of this article, and the person or persons guilty thereof shall be
liable to the penalties in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14.
[Amended 7-10-1969]
31.Editor’s Note: Former Subsections A(2), (3) and (4), which immediately followed this
subsection, were removed and the remaining subsections renumbered following the
adoption 3-13-2006 of Ord. No. 145-2006; see now Ch. 105, Art. III, for fees for pet shops
and kennels.
§ 61-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 61-6
57:198
ARTICLE II
Animal Control and Prevention of Rabies
[Adopted 4-24-1942 (Ch. 25, Art. II, of the 1967 Code); amended in
its entirety 10-14-2008 by Ord. No. 201-2008]
§ 61-7. Applicability.
All dogs and all other animals owned, boarded, kept or found within the
Township of River Vale, in the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey,
and all dogs and other animals transported or lead through or exercised
upon any highway or thoroughfare of said Township, and all persons,
whether the owner or temporarily in charge of such animals, shall be
subject to the provisions of this article.
§ 61-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of correct interpretation in the enforcement of this article
and the rules and regulations of the Health Department of the Township
of River Vale, the terms used herein are hereby defined to mean and to
include:
ANIMALS and OTHER ANIMALS — Applies to and includes cats, foxes,
squirrels, goats and other such quadrupeds.
BOARD — The Health Department of the Township of River Vale and the
Executive Health Officer thereof, when in the performance of his official
duty.
CONFINED — Includes any means whereby a dog or other animal is kept
upon the premises of its owner or caretaker, and thereby is prevented from
straying upon a road or any place or other property, public or private.
DOGS — Any breed of such animal, any age and any sex, regardless of its
having been desexed.
INDIGENT PERSON — One who is unable to maintain himself or the
members of his family lawfully dependent upon him for support; or one who
is ordinarily able to maintain himself and/or his family, but because of his
illness or the illness of some member of his family or for any other reason is
or becomes unable to do so.
KENNEL — Any place, enclosure, building or collection of buildings or dog
houses in which more than one dog is kept, boarded, reared or housed, for
whatever purpose, and shall apply also to the dogs kept therein.
LEASH — A strong leather strap or a metal chain, which shall not exceed
six feet in length; such leash to be used when exercising, leading or
transporting a dog.
MUZZLE — A mechanical device of the humane "basket" type, which shall
prevent a dog from biting. No muzzles shall be used except those approved
by the Board.
§ 61-7 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 61-8
57:199
OBSERVATION PERIOD — A period of isolation by secure confinement of
not less than 10 days after such dog or other animal has attacked and bitten
a person, dog or other animal.
OWNER — Includes the actual owner, the person in charge or the person in
control of any dog or other animal.
QUARANTINE PERIOD — Periods of confinement, which for dogs shall be
not less than 14 days nor more than six months and for other animals shall
be not less than 14 days nor more than 60 days, which period shall begin
with the day such animal has been bitten.
SECURELY CONFINED — Isolating a dog or other animal within an
enclosure or building in such a manner that such animal cannot come,
directly or indirectly, in contact with nor bite a person, dog or other animal,
nor can it be bitten by any other animal.
STRAY DOG or STRAY OTHER ANIMAL — Any dog or other animal that is
not confined but is found roaming upon any property other than that of its
owner, or which has broken away from the control of a leash.
§ 61-9. Persons that have been bitten to report.
§ 61-10. Animals that have been bitten to be reported.
A. Adults. It shall be the duty of every adult person who has been bitten by
a dog or other animal, the owner of which is known, to report to the
Board or the Police Department within 12 hours the name, age, sex,
color and precise address of the person so bitten and also the name and
address of the owner of the dog or other animal which has bitten such
person, in addition to such other information as may be required by the
Board and/or the Police Department.
B. Minors. If any child has been so attacked and bitten, then the parent or
person in charge of such child and the minor shall report as required in
the preceding section.
C. Physicians. Every physician shall, within 12 hours after his first
professional attendance upon any person bitten, report to the Board or
the Police Department the name, age, sex, color and precise address of
the person or child that has been so bitten, with full particulars of the
case, and, if known, the name and address of the owner of the dog or
other animal.
D. Should any person have been bitten or attacked by a stray dog or other
animal, then the persons enumerated in Subsections A, B and C of this
section shall include in their report, if possible, a description of the
stray animal and the place where the attack occurred and such other
particulars of the attack as from whence the animal came and the
direction in which it went.
A. The owner of every dog or other animal that has been bitten by any dog
or other animal, the owner of which is known, shall at once report to the
§ 61-8 RIVER VALE CODE § 61-10
57:200
§ 61-11. Notice to quarantine animal.
Board or the Police Department the name and address of the owner of
both dogs or other animals.
B. The owner of a dog or other animal that has been bitten by a stray dog
or other animal shall, in addition to the report as required as in the
preceding subsection, give a description of the stray dog or other
animal and the location or direction from which it came and to which it
went.
C. When a veterinarian is in attendance of any animal which has been
attacked or bitten by a dog or other animal, a report shall be made by
him as required in § 61-9C and D.
A. Any person owning or having possession or control of a dog or other
animal that has bitten a person, dog or other animal must within 10
days after the attack (or immediately at the request of the Police
Department or Board) provide for the examination and observation of
such animal by a licensed veterinarian of the State of New Jersey. Said
veterinarian shall immediately report his finding the Board or Police
Department by telephone and shall confirm such report in writing
within 24 hours.
B. Unless an animal is rabid or suspected to be rabid, the veterinarian
shall release the animal to the person from whom it was received. Upon
taking possession of the animal, the owner or person having possession
must securely confine the animal for the observation period.
C. Upon receipt of a notice as stated in §§ 61-9 and 61-10 above, the Board
or the Police Department shall at once serve upon the owner of the dog
or other animal injured a notice in writing to quarantine such dog or
other animal. The Board or Police Department shall also serve upon the
owner of the dog or other animal that has bitten a person, dog or other
animal a notice, in writing, to securely confine such dog or other animal
for the observation period.
D. Upon receipt of a notice of injury from the bite of a stray dog or other
animal, the Board or Police Department shall serve a notice in writing
upon the owner of the dog or other animal bitten by a stray dog, if
known, to securely confine such animal for a quarantine period as
determined by the Board or Police Department; provided, however, that
in the event a six-month quarantine is determined appropriate but such
six months' quarantine cannot be properly maintained, the Board or
Police Department may order such animal destroyed or removed to a
place designated by the Board or Police Department for the required
period, at the expense of the owner thereof.
E. No person shall kill or remove from confinement or secure confinement,
or lead on a leash, any animal which has been ordered confined as
required by Subsections C and/or D above.
§ 61-10 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 61-12
57:201
§ 61-12. Procedure in event of rabies.
§ 61-13. Confinement of vicious dogs.
§ 61-13.1. Right of access.
A. When an animal shows signs of rabies, either of the furious or paralytic
(dumb) type, the Board or Police Department shall, at once, order such
animal removed, and upon the death of such animal shall have its head
removed for examination at the Bergen County Laboratory.
B. The result of the laboratory examination shall, at once, be forwarded to
the owner of the rabid animal, to the owner of the animal attacked and
bitten by such rabid animal, to the person or to the parent, in case of a
minor bitten by such rabid animal, and to the physician or veterinarian
in attendance.
C. The Board may, at once, furnish Pasteur treatment, to any indigent
person within the Township who has been bitten by an animal known or
suspected to be affected by rabies; provided, however, that where
dangerous wounds have been inflicted, Pasteur treatment may be
ordered before the final result of the laboratory examination is known.
D. When a dog or other animal has died of rabies, then all equipment, such
as bedding, coop, kennel, pen or run, of said animal shall be destroyed
or disinfected at the order of and under supervision of the Executive
Health Officer of the Board.
A. Any dog or other animal that has attacked and bitten a person or
persons on more than one occasion is hereby declared to be a vicious
animal and dangerous to the life of the inhabitants of the Township of
River Vale and may be ordered by the Board or Police Department to be
securely confined, and such owner or person in possession or control of
such animal shall so securely confine it.
B. If the order of this Board or Police Department is not complied with, in
addition to the penalty herein provided, the Board or Police Department
may order such animal removed or destroyed.
A. The Executive Health Officer of the Board and the Police Department
each shall have the right of full and unobstructed access, ingress,
egress and regress to and from all public or private property or
premises, to the end that they may freely examine and observe any
animal coming within the terms of any law of this state or of this article
as often, during reasonable hours and during the period of quarantine
and observation, as may be necessary for the purpose of determining
the condition of such animal.
B. No person shall, directly or indirectly, obstruct or interfere with said
Health Executive in the enforcement of this article or refuse to furnish
him with any and all information required. All orders and directions in
§ 61-12 RIVER VALE CODE § 61-13.1
57:202
§ 61-13.2. Dogs running at large.
No dog shall be permitted to run at large off the premises of the owner or
persons in charge of the dog. No dog shall be walked on the public streets
or public places in the Township except other than when the dog is securely
tethered by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under supervision
or control of a person able to control said dog at all times.
§ 61-13.3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or the provisions of
any notice served upon him by the Board, its Executive Health Officer or the
Police Department shall be liable to a fine of not more than $150 for a first
violation, $350 for a second violation or $500 for any subsequent violations
or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 61-13.4. Effect on ordinances of Mayor and Council.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to change or affect the provisions
of any ordinance passed by the Mayor and Council of the Township of
River Vale relating to the registration, licensing and confinement of dogs in
general within said Township.
such connection which may be given by said Executive Health Officer
shall be considered as having been given by the Board itself.
§ 61-13.1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 61-13.4
57:203

ARTICLE III
Cats
[Adopted 4-11-1974 by Ord. No. 0-7-74; amended in its entirety
10-22-1987 by Ord. No. 0-16-1987 (Ch. 22 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 61-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED CAT — A cat of any age which shall be left unattended and at
large for a period of 72 hours or more.
CAT — Any animal of the feline species, male or female.
KEEPER — Any person having custody or control over a cat or permitting a
cat to remain on the premises under his control.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — Every person having a right of property in such cat, and every
person keeping or harboring such cat or feeding such cat for more than 48
hours.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association of
persons.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of cats taken into custody
by the Animal Control Officer.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — A cat that damages either public or private property
or harms the lawful users or occupants thereof.
STRAY CAT — A cat having no known owner or custodian or known place of
care or shelter.
§ 61-15. Enforcement officer.
The Animal Control Officer is hereby designated as the official charged with
the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
§ 61-16. License and vaccination required.
No person shall own, keep or harbor any cat over four months of age
within the Township of River Vale unless such cat has been licensed and
vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with the
latest Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for
Immunization, published by the National Association of State Public Health
Veterinarians.
§ 61-17. Vaccination certificate.
A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each cat
vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
§ 61-14 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 61-18
57:205
§ 61-18. License and application.
§ 61-19. License fee. [Amended 10-24-1991 by Ord. No. 0-22-91;
8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04; 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 101-2005]
A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of $10 for each unneutered
cat and $7 for each neutered cat. A late charge of $5 shall be charged for
any license issued after January 31.
§ 61-20. License tags; replacement fee.
§ 61-21. Care and control.
Any person who owns, keeps or harbors any cat located within the Township
of River Vale or permits a cat to enter the corporate limits of the Township
of River Vale shall exercise sufficient and proper care and control over such
animal at all times so as to prevent the animal from becoming a public
nuisance or otherwise violating this article.
A. Written application for a cat license shall be made to the Township and
shall include the name and address of the owner and the name, breed,
color, age and sex of the cat. The applicant shall pay the prescribed
licensing fee and provide proof of current rabies vaccination.
B. The licensing period shall be for one year. Licenses shall be renewed by
January 31 of each year. Application for a license must be made within
30 days after obtaining a cat over four months of age. New residents
must apply for a license within 30 days of establishing residence. All
other cats must be licensed upon or prior to the cat reaching four
months of age.
A. Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the Township shall
issue a durable license tag, including an identifying number, the year of
issuance, the municipality and the state. The license tag shall be
attached to the collar of the cat so as to assist in the identification of a
lost cat.
B. In case a license tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by
the Clerk upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the
license fee for the current year and the payment of a fee of $1 for such
duplicate. [Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04; 3-14-2005 by
Ord. No. 101-2005]
C. License tags shall not be transferable from one cat to another, and no
refunds shall be made should any owner leave the Township before
expiration of the license period.
D. The provisions of this section shall not be intended to apply to cats
whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the Township.
§ 61-18 RIVER VALE CODE § 61-22
57:206
§ 61-22. Responsibility of owner.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any cat shall permit it to soil, defile
or commit any nuisance on any place where people congregate or walk
or upon any public property whatsoever. This provision shall apply to all
privately owned property in the Township except the property of the owner
or keeper of the cat and the property owned or controlled by persons who
have invited or permitted the owner or keeper of a cat to bring such cat
upon the premises.
§ 61-23. Nuisances.
No person owning or keeping a cat shall permit such cat to become a public
nuisance as defined herein.
§ 61-24. Abandonment.
No person shall abandon any cat of any age or permit a cat to become a
stray.
§ 61-25. Female cats.
Every female cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure
in such a manner that such female cat cannot come into contact with
another cat except for planned breeding.
§ 61-26. Pound established; appointment of Animal Control Officer.
The Township Council may, by resolution, establish a pound and appoint
an Animal Control Officer whose duties shall include the enforcement of
the provisions of this article. The Township Council may, when authorized
by resolution, contract with the Animal Control Officer for the collection,
keeping, redemption or disposition of cats when taken into custody in
accordance with the provisions hereof. The Animal Control Officer or
authorized agent shall be empowered to take into his custody and impound
cats reasonably believed to him to be stray or abandoned as defined herein
and otherwise enforce the requirements of this article.
§ 61-27. Investigation of complaints; impoundment.
The Animal Control Officer designated and authorized by the Township
Council to enforce the provisions of this article shall, upon receipt of a
complaint that a violation has taken place, investigate the complaint and,
if a violation is found by him to exist, issue a summons to the owner or
keeper or, if the cat is a stray or abandoned cat, take such cat into custody
for a period of seven days prior to disposition by him in accordance with
the provisions of this article. In addition, any cat that is the subject of
a complaint may be taken into custody if it bears any identification of
ownership and has a known owner or keeper but such owner or keeper
cannot be located after reasonable efforts are made by the Animal Control
Officer to deliver such cat to the owner or keeper.
§ 61-22 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 61-28
57:207
§ 61-28. Notification of owner.
If a cat bearing identification or evidence of ownership or place of abode
is taken into custody pursuant to the provisions of this article, the Animal
Control Officer or other authorized person shall immediately thereafter
notify the owner or occupant of such place where the animal was found
and taken into custody and that it may be claimed at a designated location
subject to the charges and fees hereinafter set forth. The Animal Control
Officer shall maintain a record of such notifications, including the date and
name and address of persons notified.
§ 61-29. Redemption of impounded cats. [Amended 8-26-2004 by
Ord. No. 0-9-04; 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 101-2005]
During the aforementioned seven-day custodial period, any cat so taken into
custody may be claimed by its owner upon payment to the Animal Control
Officer or other authorized person of all reasonable expenses incurred by
reason of its detention and care, not to exceed the sum of $5 for the taking
into custody and maintenance of the said cat for the first 12 hours, plus the
sum of $1 for each additional day or any fraction thereof that said cat has
been in custody. In addition to the foregoing fees and charges a summons
may be issued for the violation of a person who claims such cat as its owner
or keeper.
§ 61-30. Unclaimed cats.
Any cat which has been taken into custody pursuant to this article and
which has not been reclaimed during the custodial period may be claimed
by any person willing to assume the responsibility of ownership and
custodial charges as set forth above. Otherwise, the cat may be disposed
of in as humane a manner as possible and in accordance with euthanasia
procedures recommended by the American Veterinary Medical Association.
§ 61-31. Right of entry.
The Animal Control Officer or his authorized agent or any municipal officer
or agent authorized and empowered to perform any duty under this article
is hereby authorized to enter upon any premises to enforce the provisions
of this article.
§ 61-32. Limit on number of cats kept.
No more than four cats shall be kept, maintained or harbored for more than
90 days in any residential housing unit or on its grounds. This provision
shall not apply to cats which have been owned prior to the effective date of
this article.
§ 61-28 RIVER VALE CODE § 61-33
57:208
§ 61-33. Violations and penalties. [Added 1-23-1992 by Ord. No.
0-29-91]
Any person who violates or who fails to comply or refuses to comply with
§§ 61-16, 61-20 through 61-25 or 61-38 shall be liable to the penalty in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14. Each and every day a
violation continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
§ 61-33 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 61-33
57:209

ARTICLE IV
Removal of Pet Solid Waste
[Adopted 7-25-1983 by Ord. No. 0-11-83 (Ch. 25, Art. III, of the
1967 Code; amended in its entirety 4-11-2005 by Ord. No.
113-2005]
§ 61-34. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in Township of River Vale, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 61-35. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 61-36. Requirement for disposal.
A. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall
cause, suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any
nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath,
play area, park or any place where people congregate or walk or upon
any public property whatsoever or upon any private property without
the permission of the owner of said property without immediately
§ 61-34 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 61-36
57:211
§ 61-37. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 61-38. Enforcement.
The Police Department and Division of Building and Code Enforcement of
Township of River Vale shall enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 61-39. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $ 1,000.
removing all feces deposited by such dog. This restriction also applies
to that portion of the street lying between the curblines.
B. All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 61-36 RIVER VALE CODE § 61-39
57:212
ARTICLE V
Feeding of Wildlife
[Adopted 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 112-2005]
§ 61-40. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by Township
of River Vale, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply with said ordinance.
§ 61-41. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 61-42. Prohibited conduct.
§ 61-43. Enforcement.
A. No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by Township of River Vale, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife.
B. No person shall purposefully or knowingly, as said terms are defined in
Title C of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, feed wild white-tailed deer
(Odocoileus Virginianus) or any other wildlife in the Township of River
Vale on lands either publically or privately owned. [Added 3-26-2018
by Ord. No. 334-2018]
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and Division of
Building and Code Enforcement of the Township of River Vale.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 61-40 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 61-44
57:213
§ 61-44. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No.
334-2018]
Any person who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this article,
after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $500 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day or part of each day during which a violation occurs
or continues.
§ 61-44 RIVER VALE CODE § 61-44
57:214
Chapter 70
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 152.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 181.
Collection of solid waste — See Ch. 210, Art. I.
§ 61-44 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 61-44
70:215

ARTICLE I
Height of Weeds and Grass
[Adopted 11-13-1969; amended in its entirety 9-20-1979 by Ord. No.
0-22-79 (Ch. 36 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 70-1. Responsibility of owner or occupant.
It shall he unlawful for any owner or owners, tenant or tenants, occupant or
occupants of any lot or tract of land or any part thereof in the Township of
River Vale to permit or maintain on any such lot or tract of land any growth
of grass exceeding 12 inches in height or any growth of ragweed, poison ivy,
poison sumac or noxious growth injurious to health.
§ 70-2. Compliance with notice of removal required.
It shall be the duty of such owner or owners, tenant or tenants, occupant or
occupants of any such lot or tract of land or any part thereof to maintain and
cut any grass thereon to a height not to exceed 12 inches and/or to cut and
remove or otherwise destroy any and all ragweed, poison ivy, poison sumac
and growth noxious or injurious to health within five days after receiving
notice to do so from the public health official of the Township of River
Vale or his agent. Such notice may be effected by personal service or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, in which case the redelivery by
proper official authorities of the return receipt bearing the signature of the
addressee shall be presumed to be proof of such notice; provided, however,
that if notice cannot be effected in the foregoing manner, notice may be
given by the posting of same on such lot or tract of land for a period of five
days.
§ 70-3. Removal by Township; cost as lien on property.
Should the person or persons upon whom said notice is served fail, neglect
or refuse to cut such grass or refuse to cut and remove or cause to be
cut and removed or otherwise destroyed such ragweed, poison ivy, poison
sumac or noxious growth within five days after the service of such notice,
the Township of River Vale may cause such grass to be cut or such ragweed,
poison ivy, poison sumac and noxious growth to be cut and removed, and the
actual cost of such cutting and removal shall be certified by the Director of
Public Works to the Collector of Taxes and shall thereupon become and be a
lien on the property on which such ragweed, grass, poison ivy, poison sumac
or noxious growth was located and shall be added to and form part of the
taxes next to be assessed on said lot or tract of land and shall be collected
and enforced by the same office and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 70-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, or any
amendment or supplement hereto, shall be liable to a penalty as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14. Each day such violation is
§ 70-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 70-4
70:217
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 70-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 70-4
70:218
ARTICLE II
Trimming of Brush Near Roadways
[Adopted 8-13-1970 (Ch. 82 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 70-5. Height restricted near roadways and intersections.
The owner, tenants or persons legally in possession of any land within the
Township of River Vale shall keep all brush, hedges and other plant life
growing within 10 feet of any roadway and 25 feet of the intersection of
two roadways cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet, where it shall
be necessary and expedient for the preservation of public safety, within 10
days after notice to cut the same, which notice shall be given in the manner
hereinafter provided.
§ 70-6. Notice to comply.
Any notice required hereunder shall be in writing and may be served either
personally or by ordinary mail addressed to the owner, tenant or person
in possession of any premises affected by such notice. Said notice shall be
given under the hand of the Township Clerk.
§ 70-7. Remedy by Township.
In the event that any owner, tenant or person in possession fails to cut any
brush, hedges or other plant life after notice given, as herein set forth, the
same shall be cut under the direction and supervision of the Director of
the Department of Public Works, who shall certify the costs thereof to the
Township Council, as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26 et seq.
§ 70-8. Costs a lien.
The Township Council shall examine the certificate and if found correct
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands, or,
in the event that such cost is excessive, to cause the reasonable cost thereof
to be charged against said lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith
become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same
to bear interest at the same rate as other taxes, and shall be collected and
enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 70-9. Enforcement officer.
The Building Inspector of the Township of River Vale or the Police
Department of the Township of River Vale shall be the enforcement officers
charged with the administration and enforcement of this article, who are to
act in conjunction with other officers and departments of the Township of
River Vale referred to in this article.
§ 70-5 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 70-9
70:219
Chapter 72
BUILDING MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 73.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 90.
Registration of contractors — See Ch. 93.
§ 70-9 RIVER VALE CODE § 70-9
70:220
ARTICLE I
Identification of Light-Framed Construction
[Adopted 1-25-2010 by Ord. No. 225-2010]
§ 72-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIGHT-FRAME CONSTRUCTION — Prefabricated open web wood trusses,
wooden I-beam and joists, truss joists, truss rafters, laminated beams,
engineered studs and similar materials.
REFLECTIVE SYMBOL — An emblem made of reflective material, in the
shape and form designed by the River Vale Fire Department, containing
information identifying a structure as containing light-framed construction
practices.
STRUCTURE — Combination of materials used to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land. The word "structure" shall also include any
building or improvement with a roof.
§ 72-2. Reflective symbol required.
The Township Construction Official shall determine if a structure contains
light-framed construction. All structures containing light-framed
construction lumber, materials and methods must have a reflective symbol
affixed to the exterior electrical meter panel serving the structure. The
reflective symbol shall be applied by the Construction Official or Fire
Official and shall be a condition before any issuance of any certificates of
approval or occupancy.
§ 72-3. Form of reflective symbol.
The reflective symbol shall be in a form designed by the River Vale Fire
Department and will contain lettering to identify the location of any lightframed
construction materials, engineered systems or similar methods of
construction used in the structure.
§ 72-4. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all structures, whether residential, commercial or
otherwise, including structures existing at the time of the effective date of
this article and permits existing dwellings to be identified and the emblem
affixed to the exterior electric meter panel.
§ 72-5. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Construction Official and Fire Official
of the Township of River Vale.
§ 72-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 72-6
70:221
§ 72-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article by refusing to use the reflective symbol or
by removing or tampering with the reflective symbol shall be subject to a
fine in an amount of $250 per violation. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed to a separate and distinct offense.
§ 72-6 RIVER VALE CODE § 72-6
70:222
Chapter 73
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 90.
Registration of contractors — See Ch. 93.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 181.
§ 73-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXTERMINATOR — A person, corporation or partnership whose main
objective or business shall be to destroy all rats, rodents and other vermin
and similar animals and insects.
§ 73-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to demolish an existing building or
structure within the limits of the Township of River Vale without first
obtaining a demolition permit therefor as provided herein.
§ 73-3. Application.
Applicants for demolition permit under this chapter must file with the
Construction Code Official an application in writing (in duplicate) on a
form to be furnished by the Construction Code Official which shall give the
following information:
§ 73-4. Investigation.
A. Name and description of the applicant.
B. Address or location of place to be demolished including block and lot
number.
C. Name and address of persons or corporation to perform said
extermination.
A. Upon receipt of said application the original shall be referred to the
Board of Health Officer or such other person as the Board may
designate. The applicant shall then advise the Health Officer of the
name of the exterminator who shall conduct extermination within the
building or structure prior to demolition.
B. The applicant shall then have said exterminator carry out the
extermination within said building or structure to rid said building of
any rats, rodents and other vermin and similar animals and insects and
§ 72-6 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 73-4
73:223
§ 73-5. Fees. [Amended 7-25-1985 by Ord. No. 0-8-85]
In the event that said application is not approved, no portion of fees shall be
returned.32
§ 73-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon
conviction thereof be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, § 1-14.
Chapter 81
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Visual obstructions near roadways — See Ch.
70, Art. I.
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
Junk vehicles — See Ch. 241.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 245.
the applicant shall notify the Health Officer of the time said
extermination shall take place.
C. Upon completion of said extermination, the applicant shall notify the
Health Officer of said extermination in writing. The Health Officer shall
then make an inspection of said premises to determine whether or not
said extermination has been satisfactory.
D. If as a result of said investigation the Health Officer decides that the
extermination has not been satisfactory, the applicant shall
reexterminate same pursuant to the procedure set forth in § 73-4A and
B and the Health Officer shall reexamine same to determine whether or
not said reextermination is satisfactory.
E. If, as a result of said investigation, the Health Officer shall find said
extermination to be satisfactory, he shall endorse on the application his
approval and the applicant shall return said application to the
Construction Code Official for issuance of the said permit or license to
demolish said building or structure.
F. No demolition permit shall be issued until said extermination is found
satisfactory by the Health Officer.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Construction Codes, Uniform, § 90-4B(4) for current demolition
fees.
§ 73-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 73-6
73:224
ARTICLE I
Prohibited Parking
[Adopted 8-5-1965]
§ 81-1. Prohibited parking.
No person shall park a vehicle on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Cedar Lane West Between Piermont Avenue and
Cleveland Avenue
Cleveland Avenue [Added
12-20-1994 by Ord. No.
0-17-94; amended
4-27-1995 by Ord. No.
0-10-95; 7-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 0-18-95]
South Beginning at a point 290 feet in an
easterly direction from the
intersection of Cleveland Avenue
and Rockland Avenue and
continuing to a point 440 feet west
of the intersection of May Street
and Cleveland Avenue
Cleveland Avenue [Added
12-20-1994 by Ord. No.
0-17-94; amended
7-13-1995 by Ord. No.
0-18-95]
North Entire length
Dorothy Cornell Way
[Added 2-28-1991 by Ord.
No. 0-4-91]
South Entire length
Echo Glen Avenue [Added
5-22-2006 by Ord. No.
154-2006]
North From the intersection with
Rivervale Road to a point 900 feet
west of the Rivervale Road
intersection
Echo Glen Avenue [Added
5-22-2006 by Ord. No.
154-2006]
South From the intersection with
Rockland Avenue to a point 150 feet
east of Rockland Avenue
Holiday Court [Added 3-20-1980 by Ord. No. 0-7-80; repealed
5-15-1980 by Ord. No. 0-13-80]
Interglen Avenue [Added 2-28-1991 by Ord. No. 0-4-91; repealed
12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 140-2005]
Mark Lane [Added
2-28-1991 by Ord. No.
0-4-91]
East Entire length
Old Tappan Road [Added
11-25-2002 by Ord. No.
0-16-02]
North From the intersection with
Rivervale Road to the Borough of
Old Tappan
Old Tappan Road [Added
11-25-2002 by Ord. No.
0-16-02]
South From the intersection with
Rivervale Road to the Borough of
Old Tappan
§ 81-1 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-1
73:225
Name of Street Side Location
Peters Place [Added
3-22-2001 by Ord. No.
0-5-01]
East From the intersection with
Westwood Avenue in a northerly
direction to a point 50 feet north
thereof
Peters Place [Added
6-23-1994 by Ord. No.
0-6-94]
West From the intersection with
Westwood Avenue in a northerly
direction to a point 385 feet north
thereof
Piermont Avenue South
[Added 3-20-1980 by Ord.
No. 0-7-80]
West Entire length
Pine Lake Terrace [Added
11-25-2002 by Ord. No.
0-16-02]
Both From both intersections with Poplar
Road in a northerly direction to a
point 100 feet north thereof
Pine Lake Terrace [Added
11-25-2002 by Ord. No.
0-16-02]
East From a point 309 feet north of the
east intersection with Poplar Road
to a point 332 feet north of the east
intersection with Poplar Road
Pine Lake Terrace [Added
11-25-2002 by Ord. No.
0-16-02]
North From the driveway of 48 Pine Lake
Terrace to the driveway of 52 Pine
Lake Terrace
Pine Lake Terrace [Added
11-25-2002 by Ord. No.
0-16-02]
South From the driveway of 39 Pine Lake
Terrace to the driveway of 41 Pine
Lake Terrace
Pine Lake Terrace [Added
11-25-2002 by Ord. No.
0-16-02]
West From a point 303 feet north of the
west intersection with Poplar Road
to a point 403 feet north of the west
intersection with Poplar Road
Prospect Avenue [Added
7-14-2014 by Ord. No.
293-2014]
Both From the intersection with
Rivervale Road to the point 275 feet
west of Rivervale Road
River Drive [Added
7-24-1997 by Ord. No.
0-13-97]
West From the point starting 234 feet in
a southerly direction of the
southwest corner of the
intersection of Charles Court and
River Drive and continuing in a
southerly direction 92 feet to a
point 326 feet in a southerly
direction from the southwest corner
of Charles Court and River Drive
Rivervale Road [Added
11-25-2002 by Ord. No.
0-16-02]
East From the intersection with
Piermont Avenue in a northerly
direction to the intersection with
Aster Lane
§ 81-1 RIVER VALE CODE § 81-1
73:226
Name of Street Side Location
Rivervale Road [Added
5-23-1991 by Ord. No.
0-12-91]
East From a point 410 feet south of the
intersection with Westwood Avenue
in a southerly direction to a point
585 feet south thereof
Rivervale Road [Added
5-23-1991 by Ord. No.
0-12-91]
East From the intersection with
Westwood Avenue in a northerly
direction to a point 155 feet north
thereof
Rivervale Road [Added
5-23-1991 by Ord. No.
0-12-91]
East From the intersection with
Westwood Avenue in a southerly
direction to a point 140 feet south
thereof
Rivervale Road [Added
11-25-2002 by Ord. No.
0-16-02]
West From the intersection with
Piermont Avenue in a northerly
direction to the intersection with
Aster Lane
Rivervale Road [Added
5-23-1991 by Ord. No.
0-12-91]
West From the intersection with
Westwood Avenue in a northerly
direction to the intersection with
Montview Place
Rivervale Road [Added
5-23-1991 by Ord. No.
0-12-91; amended
6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
157-2006]
West From the point 270 feet south of
the Westwood Avenue intersection
to the intersection with Caruso
Lane
Rivervale Road [Added
6-24-1993 by Ord. No.
0-9-93]
-- That portion of paved area at 184
Rivervale Road, adjacent to the
loading zone and handicapped
parking spaces, 20 feet south of the
building and 42 feet from Rivervale
Road
Rivervale Road [Added
6-24-1993 by Ord. No.
0-9-93]
West From the intersection of the
curblines of Rivervale Road and
Prospect Avenue in a southerly
direction to a point 223 feet south
thereof
Westwood Avenue [Added
6-11-2007 by Ord. No.
180-2007]
North From the point 50 feet east of
Interglen Avenue to the point 50
feet west of Interglen Avenue
Westwood Avenue [Added
6-23-1994 by Ord. No.
0-6-94]
North From the intersection with Peters
Place in a westerly direction to a
point 185 feet west thereof
§ 81-1 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-1
73:227
Name of Street Side Location
Westwood Avenue [Added
5-23-1991 by Ord. No.
0-12-91; amended
6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
157-2006]
North From the intersection with
Rivervale Road in a westerly
direction to a point 330 feet west
thereof
Westwood Avenue [Added
5-23-1991 by Ord. No.
0-12-91; amended
9-14-2009 by Ord. No.
218-2009]
North From the intersection with
Rivervale Road in an easterly
direction to a point 575 feet east
thereof
Westwood Avenue [Added
6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
157-2006]
North From the point 465 feet west of the
intersection with Rivervale Road to
the intersection with Doretta Drive
Westwood Avenue [Added
5-23-1991 by Ord. No.
0-12-91; amended
6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
157-2006]
South From the intersection with
Rivervale Road in a westerly
direction to a point 82 feet west
thereof
Westwood Avenue [Added
5-23-1991 by Ord. No.
0-12-91]
South From the intersection with
Rivervale Road in an easterly
direction to a point 75 feet east
thereof
Westwood Avenue [Added
6-20-2006 by Ord. No.
157-2006]
South From the point 465 feet west of the
intersection with Rivervale Road to
the intersection with Doretta Drive
Westwood Avenue [Added
9-10-2007 by Ord. No.
188-2007]
South From the intersection with
Rivervale Road to the intersection
with Doretta Street
Westwood Avenue [Added
6-23-1994 by Ord. No.
0-6-94; amended
3-25-1999 by Ord. No.
0-4-99]
South From a point 520 feet east of the
intersection with Rivervale Road in
an easterly direction to a point on
the south side of Westwood Avenue
1,080 feet thereof
§ 81-1.1. School zones. [Added 12-16-1982 by Ord. No. 0-21-82]
No person shall park a vehicle in the following zones:
§ 81-1 RIVER VALE CODE § 81-1.1
73:228
School
Name of
Street Restricted Zones
Holdrum School Rivervale Road Area signed for bus loading zone,
all as indicated on diagram
attached to Ord. No. 0-21-82 by
reference and on file in office of the
Municipal Clerk
Holdrum School Rivervale Road Area signed for 15-minute parking,
all as indicated on diagram
attached to Ord. No. 0-21-82 by
reference and on file in office of
Municipal Clerk
Holdrum School Rivervale Road Area signed for handicapped
parking, all as indicated on diagram
attached to Ord. No. 0-21-82 by
reference and on file in office of
Municipal Clerk
Holdrum School Rivervale Road Areas signed for no parking, with
curbs painted as per regulation, all
as indicated on diagram attached to
Ord. No. 0-21-82 by reference and
on file in office of Municipal Clerk
Rivervale Road
[Added 3-27-2003
by Ord. No.
0-6-03]
West From the intersection with The
Plaza in a southerly direction to a
point 687 feet south thereof
Roberge School Westwood
Avenue
Areas signed for no parking, with
curbs painted as per regulation, all
as indicated on diagram attached to
Ord. No. 0-21-82 by reference and
on file in office of Municipal Clerk
Woodside School Rivervale Road Areas signed for no parking school
days, 11:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m., 2:30
p.m. to 3:30 p.m., all as indicated
on diagram attached to Ord. No.
0-21-82 by reference and on file in
office of Municipal Clerk
Woodside School Rivervale Road Areas signed for no parking, with
curbs painted as per regulation, all
as indicated on diagram attached to
Ord. No. 0-21-82 by reference and
on file in office of Municipal Clerk
§ 81-1.2. Fire Zones and Ambulance Zones. [Added 11-20-1984 by
Ord. No. 0-16-84]
§ 81-1.1 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-1.2
73:229
§ 81-1.3. Library parking. [Added 10-25-1990 by Ord. No. 0-15-90]
No persons other than library staff and patrons of the River Vale Public
Library shall park a vehicle in the 10 spaces adjacent to the library which
are marked as reserved for library staff and patrons of the library.
§ 81-1.3.1. Municipal parking. [Added 8-8-2011 by Ord. No.
255-2011]
All property owned by the Township of River Vale and utilized for parking
vehicles shall be reserved for only persons engaged in Township business or
activities, including town-sponsored sports and recreational activities. No
persons shall park their vehicles on any property owned by the Township
of River Vale unless actively engaged in official Township business within
a Township facility or attending a Township activity. No vehicles shall
be parked on municipal property from 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Township
parking facilities shall be posted with these restrictions.
§ 81-1.4. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-25-1990 by Ord. No.
0-15-90]
Every person convicted of a violation of this article shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $50.
§ 81-2. Application.
The provisions of this article shall apply at all times.
§ 81-3. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon publication and passage and upon being
submitted to and approved by the Director of Motor Vehicles of the State of
New Jersey as provided by law.
A. No person shall stand, park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle,
except an emergency motor vehicle, in any area or parking place which
has been specifically designated as a "Fire Zone - " or "Ambulance Zone
- No Parking Except For Authorized Personnel."
B. The designated fire or ambulance zone area shall be marked by a sign
at least 12 inches by 18 inches in dimension and by yellow markings on
the restricted curb or paved area.
C. The provisions of this article shall apply 24 hours per day, seven days
per week.
D. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by statute, any person
who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 at the discretion of
the Judge before whom such conviction is had. [Amended 4-23-1998
by Ord. No. 0-3-98]
§ 81-1.2 RIVER VALE CODE § 81-3
73:230
ARTICLE II
Through Streets and Stop Streets
[Adopted 4-5-1956]
§ 81-4. Rivervale Road.
Rivervale Road from the Harrington Park Borough line northerly to the
Montvale Borough line is hereby designated a through street.
§ 81-5. Westwood Avenue.
Westwood Avenue from the Westwood Borough line easterly to the Old
Tappan Borough line is hereby designated a through street, except at
Rivervale Road.
§ 81-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions hereof shall be liable
to a penalty not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 10 days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge before
whom such conviction may be had.
§ 81-6.1. Through streets. [Added 10-9-1975 by Ord. No. 0-13-75]
§ 81-6.2. Stop intersections. [Added 10-9-1975 by Ord. No. 0-13-75]
A. No vehicle shall enter Rivervale Road before making a full and complete
stop not less than five feet nor more than 25 feet from the near street
line of Rivervale Road.
B. No vehicle shall enter or cross Rivervale Road while the red or danger
signal shall be visible, wherever traffic lights are provided.
A. No vehicle shall enter Westwood Avenue before making a full and
complete stop not less than five feet nor more than 25 feet from the
near street line of Westwood Avenue, except at Rivervale Road.
B. No vehicle shall enter or cross Westwood Avenue while the red or
danger signal shall be visible, wherever traffic lights are provided.
A. The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets:
(1) Cleveland Avenue, between Cedar Lane and Rivervale Road. A yield
sign shall be installed on the southerly Cedar Lane approach to
Cedar Lane-Cleveland Avenue.
(2) Rockland Avenue, between Cleveland Avenue and Westwood
Avenue.
A. The following described intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections:
§ 81-4 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-6.2
73:231
Intersection Stop Sign on
Abbe Court and Orangeburgh
Road [Added 11-24-2003 by
Ord. No. 0-20-03]
North side of Abbe Court
Bailey Road and Rolling Hill
Drive [Added 2-28-1991 by
Ord. No. 0-4-91]
South side of Bailey Road
Cedar Lane and Cleveland
Avenue [Added 12-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 140-2005]
North side of Cleveland Avenue
Colonial Road and Dorchester
Drive [Added 9-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 188-2007]
East side of Colonial Road
Edward Street and Thurnau Drive
[Added 11-21-1995 by Ord.
No. 0-26-95]
Northwest corner of Edward Street
Egan Terrace and Russell Snow
Drive [Added 11-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 190-2007]
North side of Egan Terrace
Ellen Lane Court and Coopers
Lane [Added 10-11-2001 by
Ord. No. 0-13-01]
Northeast corner of Ellen Lane
Court at the intersection with
Coopers Lane
Faletti Way and Barr Court
[Added 12-21-1978 by Ord.
No. 0-21-78]
Faletti Way
Fondiller Street and Bryant Place
[Added 12-15-1977 by Ord.
No. 0-14-77R]
Bryant Place
Ford Avenue and Herrmann
Avenue
Herrmann Avenue
Highland Court and Geiger Drive
[Added 10-11-2001 by Ord.
No. 0-13-01]
Northwest corner of Highland
Court at Geiger Drive
Interglen Avenue and Montview
Place [Added 9-25-2006 by
Ord. No. 164-2006]
East side of Interglen Avenue
James Lane and Handwerg Drive
[Added 11-24-2003 by Ord.
No. 0-20-03]
South side of James Lane
Jones Road and Thurnau Drive
[Added 12-12-2005 by Ord.
No. 140-2005]
East side of Jones Road
§ 81-6.2 RIVER VALE CODE § 81-6.2
73:232
Intersection Stop Sign on
Loretta Drive and Woodside
Avenue [Added 12-15-1977 by
Ord. No. 0-14-77R; amended
2-23-1995 by Ord. No. 0-4-95]
Woodside Avenue
Mark Lane, 730 feet south of the
intersection with Piermont
Avenue at the entrance to the
parking area [Added 9-23-1999
by Ord. No. 0-18-99]
Mark Lane
Oak Avenue South and Alosio
Drive [Added 7-24-1997 by
Ord. No. 0-14-97; amended
9-25-1997 by Ord. No.
0-17-97]
Southwest corner of Oak Avenue
South
Park Place and Interglen Avenue
[Added 9-25-2006 by Ord. No.
164-2006]
South side of Park Place
Peterson Farm Road and Prospect
Avenue [Added 11-24-2003 by
Ord. No. 0-20-03]
West side of Peterson Farm Road
Pine Lake Terrace and Poplar
Road [Added 10-11-2001 by
Ord. No. 0-13-01]
Northwest corner of Pine Lake
Terrace at both the east and west
intersections with Poplar Road
Russell Snow Drive and Thurnau
Drive [Added 9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 316-2016]
Southeast corner of Russell Snow
Drive at Thurnau Drive.
Scott Drive and Cooper Lane
[Added 2-22-1990 by Ord. No.
0-3-90]
Scott Drive
Sunrise Court and Handwerg
Drive [Added 10-11-2001 by
Ord. No. 0-13-01; amended
11-24-2003 by Ord. No.
0-20-03]
South side of Sunrise Court
Thurnau Drive and Egan Terrace Egan Terrace
Tiffany Avenue and Terbell
Parkway [Added 1-26-1989 by
Ord. No. 0-23-88]
Terbell Parkway
Tulip Place and Rolling Hill Drive
[Added 2-28-1991 by Ord. No.
0-4-91]
North side of Tulip Place
§ 81-6.2 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-6.2
73:233
§ 81-6.3. (Reserved)33
Intersection Stop Sign on
Wayne Drive and Bailey Road
[Added 11-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 190-2007]
North side of Wayne Drive
Wayne Drive and High Road
[Added 11-26-2007 by Ord.
No. 190-2007]
South side of Wayne Drive
Whitenack Road and Stellman
Drive [Added 2-27-2003 by
Ord. No. 0-2-03]
Whitenack Road
Wittich Terrace and Edward
Street [Added 8-12-1976 by
Ord. No. 0-15-76]
Edward Street
Winding Way and Colonial Road
[Added 10-28-1999 by Ord.
No. 0-21-99]
Northwest corner of the
intersection of Winding Way and
Colonial Road
Winding Way and The Plaza
[Added 8-13-2018 by Ord. No.
344-2018]
Northwest and southeast sides of
Winding Way at The Plaza and
northwest side of The Plaza
33.Editor's Note: Former § 81-6.3, Stop locations, added 12-20-1994 by Ord. No. -18-94, was
repealed 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 0-18-02.
§ 81-6.2 RIVER VALE CODE § 81-6.3
73:234
ARTICLE III
Overnight Parking
[Adopted 8-14-1969]
§ 81-7. Overnight parking.
No motor vehicle or vehicle propelled by any other power shall be parked
or left standing on or along any street, highway or avenue in the Township
of River Vale from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., local governing time.
§ 81-7.1. Exemptions. [Added 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 335-2018]
All law enforcement and other emergency services vehicles as defined by
N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 either marked or unmarked and issued by their respective
agency shall be exempt from this article.
§ 81-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-23-1998 by Ord. No.
0-3-98]
Every person convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement
thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50.
§ 81-9. When effective.
This article shall become effective upon approval of the Motor Vehicle
Director and upon publication after final passage in the manner provided by
law.
§ 81-7 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-9
73:235

ARTICLE IV
Speed Limits
[Adopted 2-25-1988 by Ord. No. 0-2-8834]
§ 81-10. Streets designated.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Cleveland Avenue
[Added 4-27-1995
by Ord. No.
0-11-95]
15 From a point 290 feet east of the
intersection with Rockland Avenue to a
point 455 feet west of the intersection
with May Street
Holiday Court
[Added 2-22-2001
by Ord. No.
0-1-01]
15 Entire length
Holiday Lane
[Added 2-22-2001
by Ord. No.
0-1-01]
15 Entire length
Mark Lane [Added
6-22-1995 by Ord.
No. 0-16-95]
15 Entire length
Orangeburgh Road
[Added 6-27-2005
by Ord. No.
122-2005]
35 Entire length
Piermont Avenue
South [Added
2-22-2001 by Ord.
No. 0-1-01]
15 Entire length
Pine Lake Terrace
[Added
11-25-2002 by
Ord. No. 0-16-02]
20 Entire length
Poplar Road
Zone 1 25 From Rivervale Road to 600 feet east
thereof
Zone 2 35 From 600 feet east of Rivervale Road
to Washington Avenue
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article IV, Speed Limits, adopted
5-14-1970, as amended.
§ 81-10 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-11
73:237
§ 81-11. Erection of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 81-11.1. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon approval by the Commissioner of
Transportation.
§ 81-11 RIVER VALE CODE § 81-11.1
73:238
ARTICLE V
Bus Stops
[Adopted 10-8-1970]
§ 81-12. Steps designated. [Amended 10-14-1971 by Ord. No. 71-13]
A. Rivervale Road, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Cooper Lane (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Cooper Lane and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
(2) Ivy Lane (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of Ivy Lane
and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(3) Terbell Parkway (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Terbell Parkway and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
(4) Tiffany Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Tiffany Avenue and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
(5) Caruso Boulevard (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Caruso Boulevard and extending 120 feet northerly therefrom.
(6) Westwood Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of Westwood Avenue and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
(7) Sloat Place (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of Sloat
Place and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
(8) Florence Road (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Florence Road and extending 120 feet therefrom.
(9) Between Echo Glen and Sunset Road (mid-block), beginning 500
feet south of the southerly curbline of Sunset Road and extending
135 feet southerly therefrom.
(10) Between Piermont Avenue and Sunset Road (mid-block), beginning
150 feet north of the northerly curbline of Sunset Road and
extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
(11) Red Oak Drive (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of Red
Oak Drive and extending 120 feet northerly therefrom.
(12) Stanley Place (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Stanley Place and extending 120 feet northerly therefrom.
(13) Baylor Avenue (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Baylor Avenue and extending 120 feet therefrom.
(14) Poplar Road (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of Poplar
Road and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(15) Prospect Avenue (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Prospect Avenue and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 81-12 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-12
73:239
(16) Thurnau Drive (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Thurnau Drive and extending, 120 feet northerly therefrom.
(17) James Lane (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of James
Lane and extending 120 feet northerly therefrom.
(18)Woodside Avenue (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Woodside Avenue and extending 120 feet northerly therefrom.
(19) Sargent Road (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Sargent Road and extending 120 feet northerly therefrom.
(20) Between Delcina Drive and Sargent Road (mid-block), beginning
600 feet north of the northerly curbline of Sargent Road and
extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
(21) Blue Hill Road (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Blue Hill Road and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom. [Added
2-25-1999 by Ord. No. 0-1-99]
B. Along Rivervale Road, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Cooper Lane (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Cooper Lane extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) Terbell Parkway (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Terbell Parkway and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(3) Tiffany Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Tiffany Avenue and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
(4) Brookside Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Brookside Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(5) Westwood Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Westwood Avenue and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
(6) Sloat Place (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of Sloat
Place and extending 120 feet northerly therefrom.
(7) Between Sunset Road and Echo Glen (mid-block), beginning 400
feet south of Sunset Road and extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom.
(8) Red Oak Drive (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of Red
Oak Drive and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
(9) Stanley Place (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Stanley Place and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(10) Baylor Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Baylor Avenue and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
(11) Prospect Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Prospect Avenue and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 81-12 RIVER VALE CODE § 81-12
73:240
(12) Thurnau Drive (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Thurnau Drive and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(13) James Lane (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of James
Lane and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
(14)Woodside Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Woodside Avenue and extending 120 feet southerly therefrom.
(15) Sargent Road (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Sargent Road and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(16) Delcina Drive (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Delcina Drive and extending 120 feet northerly therefrom.
(17) Cleveland Avenue (near side), beginning at the northerly curbline
of Cleveland Avenue and extending 120 feet northerly therefrom.
[Added 2-25-1999 by Ord. No. 0-1-99]
C. Along Demarest Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Cedar Lane (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of Cedar
Lane and extending 120 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Washington Avenue (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Washington Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
D. Along Demarest Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
(1) Between Cedar Lane and Westdale Avenue (mid-block), beginning
300 feet west of Cedar Lane and extending 135 feet westerly
therefrom.
(2) Washington Avenue (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Washington Avenue and extending 120 feet westerly therefrom.
(3) Caryle Place (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of Caryle
Place and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
E. Along Westwood Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Bergen Place (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Bergen Place and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(2) Richard Drive (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Richard Drive and extending 120 feet easterly therefrom.
(3) Highland Avenue (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Highland Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(4) Beck Place (far side), beginning at the easterly curbline of Beck
Place and extending 120 feet easterly therefrom.
F. Along Westwood Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
§ 81-12 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-12
73:241
§ 81-13. When effective.
Copies of this article shall be approved by the County of Bergen and the
State of New Jersey, as required by law, and this article shall take effect
upon final passage and publication by law and the approvals set forth
herein.
(1) Bergen Place (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Bergen Place and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Rockland Avenue (near side), beginning at the easterly curbline of
Rockland Avenue and extending 120 feet easterly therefrom.
(3) Highland Avenue (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Highland Avenue and extending 120 feet westerly therefrom.
(4) Fondiller Street (far side), beginning at the westerly curbline of
Fondiller Street and extending 120 feet westerly therefrom.
G. Along Piermont Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Mark Lane (near side), beginning at the westerly curbline of Mark
Lane and extending 120 feet westerly therefrom.
H. Along Piermont Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
(1) Between Mark Lane and Cedar Lane (mid-block), beginning 300
feet west of Mark Lane and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom.
I. Along Cedar Lane, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Piermont Road (near side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Piermont Road and extending 120 feet therefrom.
(2) Brook Avenue (far side), beginning at the northerly curbline of
Brook Avenue and extending 120 feet northerly therefrom.
J. Along Cedar Lane, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Piermont Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Piermont Avenue and extending 150 feet therefrom.
(2) East Liberty Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline
of East Liberty Avenue and extending 120 feet southerly.
(3) Hillsdale Avenue (far side), beginning at the southerly curbline of
Hillsdale Avenue and extending 125 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 81-12 RIVER VALE CODE § 81-13
73:242
ARTICLE VI
Parking Prohibited Certain Hours on Certain Streets
[Adopted 9-14-1972 by Ord. No. 0-13-72]
§ 81-14. Prohibited parking: certain hours; certain streets.
[Amended 5-17-1979 by Ord. No. 0-3-79R]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule I
any day, except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the
streets described in said Schedule I, attached to and made a part of this
article, and no person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule I-A on any day upon any of the streets described in said Schedule
I-A, attached to and made a part of this article.
§ 81-14.1. No parking, stopping or standing; certain hours; certain
streets. [Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 106-2005; 5-25-1995 by
Ord. No. 0-12-95]
No person shall park, stop or stand a vehicle (as the case may be) during the
hours that organized activities are taking place on the Roberge School Field
upon any of the streets or parts of streets as set forth in Schedule I-B hereof.
("Organized activities" shall mean any activities scheduled, sponsored or
conducted by the River Vale Board of Education or the Department of
Athletics or the Department of Social and Cultural Affairs of the Township
of River Vale.)
§ 81-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-23-1998 by Ord. No.
0-3-98]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50.
§ 81-16. When effective.
This article shall take effect as provided by law and upon the approval of the
Commissioner of Transportation.
§ 81-17. Schedule I: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 81-14, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours specified upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
§ 81-14 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-17
73:243
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Bergen Place West 2:00 p.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From the southerly curbline of
Baker Court, a distance of 612
feet
Caruso Lane
[Added
4-24-2003 by
Ord. No. 0-8-03]
Both 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
From the intersection with
Rivervale Road to the
intersection with Doretta
Street
Interglen Avenue
[Added
9-10-2007 by
Ord. No.
188-2007]
East 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
and 2:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
From Westwood Avenue to
Park Place
Interglen Avenue
[Added
12-12-2005 by
Ord. No.
140-2005;
amended
9-10-2007 by
Ord. No.
188-2007]
West 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
and 2:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Entire length
Midvale Court
[Added
7-28-2014 by
Ord. No.
296-2014]
West Each day
from 5:00
p.m. to 2:00
a.m.
Entire length
Montview Place
[Added
6-11-2007 by
Ord. No.
180-2007]
South 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
and 2:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Entire length
Park Place
[Added
9-29-2009 by
Ord. No.
220-2009]
North 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
and 2:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Entire length
Rockland Avenue
[Added
11-11-2013 by
Ord. No.
284-2013]
East 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
and 2:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m
From Westwood Avenue to
Park Place
§ 81-17 RIVER VALE CODE § 81-17
73:244
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
The Plaza
[Added
12-23-2002 by
Ord. No.
0-18-02]
North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Entire length
Westwood Avenue
[Added
8-13-2018 by
Ord. No.
345-2018]
North
side,
westbound
lane
7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
From the eastern curbline of
Interglen Avenue, a distance of
505 feet east
Winding Way
[Added
12-20-1994 by
Ord. No.
0-18-94]
East 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.
From a point 20 feet north of
the intersection with
Dorchester Drive to a point 170
feet north of said intersection
Winding Way
[Added
12-23-2002 by
Ord. No.
0-18-02]
West 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From the intersection of
Colonial Road north to the
intersection with Stellman
Drive
Woodside Avenue
[Amended
11-25-2002 by
Ord. No.
0-16-02]
South 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From the easterly curbline of
Rivervale Road to Sargent
Road, a distance of 554.05 feet
§ 81-17.1. Schedule I-A: No Parking Certain Hours. [Added
5-17-1979 by Ord. No. 0-3-79R; amended 6-21-1979 by Ord. No.
0-20-79]
In accordance with the provisions of § 81-14, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and between 12:00 midnight and
2:00 a.m. on any day of the week:
Name of Street Side Location
James Lane [Repealed 2-28-1991 by Ord. No. 0-4-91]
Rivervale Road East From Orangeburgh Road south to Wittich
Terrace
Rivervale Road West From Barr Court south to Wittich Terrace
Scarangella Court [Repealed 2-28-1991 by Ord. No. 0-4-91]
§ 81-17 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-17.2
73:245
§ 81-17.2. Schedule I-B: No Parking, Stopping or Standing; Certain
Hours; Certain Streets. [Added 5-25-1995 by Ord. No. 0-12-95]
In accordance with the provisions of § 81-14.1, no person shall park, stop or
stand a vehicle during the hours that organized activities are taking place
on the Roberge School Field upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Baker Court East From the intersection with Roberge Drive
and proceeding in a northerly direction to a
point 70 feet north thereof
Baker Court West From the intersection with Roberge Drive
and proceeding in a northerly direction to a
point 55 feet north thereof
Roberge Drive North From a point beginning at the
northwestern terminus and continuing in
an easterly direction to the intersection of
Baker Court
Roberge Drive North From the intersection with Baker Court
and proceeding in an easterly direction to a
point 75 feet east thereof
Roberge Drive South From a point beginning at the
southwestern terminus of Roberge Drive
and continuing in an easterly direction for
105 feet
Roberge Drive South From a point 105 feet east of the western
terminus of Roberge Drive and proceeding
in an easterly direction to a point 205 feet
east thereof
§ 81-17.3. Schedule I-C: No Parking Certain Hours. [Added
11-24-1998 by Ord. No. 0-14-98; amended 11-25-2002 by Ord. No.
0-16-02; 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 140-2005; 9-10-2007 by Ord. No.
188-2007]
In accordance with the provisions of § 81-14, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any day school is in session:
Name of Street Side Location
Park Place South From Interglen Avenue to Rockland Avenue
§ 81-17.2 RIVER VALE CODE § 81-17.3
73:246
ARTICLE VII
No Stopping or Standing
[Adopted 5-19-1977 by Ord. No. 0-4-77]
§ 81-18. Stopping or standing certain hours prohibited.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule II any day, except Saturdays, Sundays and public holidays, upon
any streets described in said Schedule II, attached to and made a part of
this article.
§ 81-19. Effective date.
This article shall take effect as of September 1, 1977, with the approval of
the Department of Transportation.
§ 81-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-23-1998 by Ord. No.
0-3-98]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this article or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50.
§ 81-21. Schedule II: No Stopping or Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 81-18 of the Code of the Township of
River Vale, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the specified times
upon the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Rivervale Road
(Route No. 53)
Both 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
and 2:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
108 feet south of the plaza and
790 feet north of Orangeburgh
Road
Southview Plaza
[Added
11-25-2002 by
Ord. No.
0-16-02]
West 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Entire length
Sunset Road
[Amended
11-25-2002 by
Ord. No.
0-16-02]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Westerly curb of River- vale
Road to a point 450 feet west
§ 81-18 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-21
73:247
Name of Street Side Hours Location
The Plaza
[Added
4-26-2010 by
Ord. No.
230-2010]
South 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
and 2:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Entire length
Westwood
Avenue (Route
No. 110)
South 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
and 2:00
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
85 feet west of Bergen Place
and 446 feet east of Richard
Drive
§ 81-21.1. No parking, stopping or standing of certain vehicles.
[Added 11-26-1996 by Ord. No. 0-14-96]
Parking, stopping or standing a vehicle over five feet in height shall be
prohibited in the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Cleveland Avenue South Beginning at a point 250 feet east of
Rockland Avenue and proceeding to a
point 290 feet east of Rockland Avenue
Rivervale Road [Added
12-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 0-25-03]
West From the intersection with Barr Court in
a southerly direction to a point 85 feet
south thereof
§ 81-21.2. No parking, stopping or standing at any time. [Added
6-26-1997 by Ord. No. 0-12-97]
Parking, stopping or standing a vehicle at any time shall be prohibited in
the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Dorothy Cornell Way North The northerly side of Dorothy Cornell
Way beginning at a point 418 feet east
of the western curbline of Rivervale
Road and proceeding in an easterly and
northerly direction to a point 182 feet
Poplar Road [Added
9-25-2003 by Ord. No.
0-15-03]
Both From a point 575 feet east of Rivervale
Road to the Old Tappan border
Sunset Road [Added
9-25-2003 by Ord. No.
0-15-03]
North From the intersection of Rivervale Road
to a point 172 feet west thereof
§ 81-21 RIVER VALE CODE § 81-21.2
73:248
ARTICLE VIII
Vehicle Weight Limits
[Adopted 3-15-1979 by Ord. No. 0-6-79]
§ 81-22. Limitation of use of certain streets to certain vehicles.
Trucks over four tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the following
street or parts of the street, except for the pickup and delivery of materials
on such street:
Name of Street Location
Rolling Hill Drive Entire length
§ 81-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions hereof shall be liable
to a penalty not exceeding $50 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 15 days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge before
whom such conviction may be had.
§ 81-22 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-23
73:249

ARTICLE IX
No Turning Certain Hours on Certain Streets
[Adopted 2-28-1984 by Ord. No. 0-6-84R]
§ 81-24. Turning certain hours prohibited.
§ 81-25. When effective.
This article shall take effect as provided by law, and upon approval of the
Commissioner of Transportation and the County of Bergen.
§ 81-25.1. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a provision of this Article or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 15 days, or both.
A. No person shall make a left turn at any of the following locations:
Location Time
North on Rivervale Road into 819 Rivervale Road [Added 4-22-1999
by Ord. No. 0-7-99; repealed 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 103-2005]
North on Rivervale Road to west on The Plaza [Added 4-22-1999 by
Ord. No. 0-7-99; repealed 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 103-2005]
North on Rivervale Road into Woodside School (801 Rivervale Road)
[Added 4-22-1999 by Ord. No. 0-7-99; repealed 3-28-2005 by
Ord. No. 103-2005]
South on Rivervale Road to east on
Woodside Avenue
2:45 p.m. to 3:15 p.m., school
days
B. No person shall make a right turn at any of the following locations:
Location Time
North on Rivervale Road to east on
Woodside Avenue
2:45 p.m. to 3:15 p.m., school
days
§ 81-24 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-25.1
73:251

ARTICLE X
Handicapped Persons Parking
[Adopted 5-17-1979 by Ord. No. 0-15-79; amended in its entirety
12-23-1986 by Ord. No. 0-21-86]
§ 81-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the terms "special vehicle identification card,"
"handicapped person," "handicapped person identification card,"
"handicapped person placard" and "handicapped person license" have the
definitions set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 et seq.
§ 81-27. Restricted use of designated parking areas.
No person shall stand, park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle in any
area or parking space which has been specifically designated as a restricted
parking area or parking place for handicapped persons pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5 unless the person has
been issued a current handicapped person identification card and unless the
vehicle displays a handicapped person license plate or placard.
§ 81-28. Notice; marking of area.
Notice shall consist of a sign not less than 18 inches by 12 inches with
appropriate marking as determined by the Police Department and in
conformance with all pertinent statutes.
§ 81-29. Posting of notice.
Notice in the form described shall be posted at the parking area or parking
place so designated for the parking of vehicles of handicapped persons by
the owner or occupant, lessee or licensee, and, upon posting, the provisions
of this article shall apply thereto.
§ 81-30. Damaging of sign prohibited.
The damaging or defacing of such sign is hereby prohibited.
§ 81-31. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by ordinance or by state
statute, any person who shall violate any of the provisions contained within
this Article X shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $250, plus a maximum of 90 days' community service for all
subsequent offenses, at the discretion of the Judge before whom such
conviction is had.
§ 81-32. (Reserved)
§ 81-33. (Reserved)
§ 81-26 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-33
73:253

ARTICLE XI
One-Way Streets
[Adopted 4-17-1980 by Ord. No. 0-12-80]
§ 81-34. One-way streets designated.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Location
Holiday Court Clockwise Entire length, beginning at its
southerly intersection with
Piermont Avenue South and
proceeding to its northerly
intersection with Piermont Avenue
South
Interglen Avenue
[Added 12-20-1994
by Ord. No. 0-18-94]
South Beginning at its intersection with
Park Place and proceeding to its
intersection with Westwood Avenue,
between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and
3:30 p.m. on school days
Winding Way [Added
12-20-1994 by Ord.
No. 0-18-94]
South Beginning at a point 166 feet north
of its intersection with Dorchester
Drive and proceeding to its
intersection with Dorchester Drive,
between the hours of 2:30 p.m. and
3:30 p.m. on school days
§ 81-34 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-34
73:255

ARTICLE XII
Two-Hour Parking; Thirty-Minute Parking
[Adopted 5-23-1991 as Sec. 2 of Ord. No. 0-12-91]
§ 81-35. Two-hour parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours on the following
streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Rivervale Road [Added
5-10-2010 by Ord.
No. 232-2010]
East From the Westwood Avenue
intersection to the Collignon Way
intersection
Rivervale Road East From a point 140.0 feet south of the
intersection with Westwood Avenue in
a southerly direction to a point 290.0
feet south of the intersection with
Westwood Avenue
Rivervale Road [Added
6-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 157-2006;
repealed 4-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 336-2018]
Westwood Avenue
[Added 6-23-1994 by
Ord. No. 0-6-94;
amended 1-25-1996
by Ord. No. 0-2-96;
repealed 9-14-2009
by Ord. No.
218-2009]
Westwood Avenue
[Added 6-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 157-2006]
North From the point 330 feet west of the
intersection with Rivervale Road to the
point 425 feet west of the intersection
with Rivervale Road
Westwood Avenue
[Added 6-23-1994 by
Ord. No. 0-6-94]
South From a point 75.0 feet east of the
intersection with Rivervale Road in an
easterly direction to a point 350 feet
east of the intersection with Rivervale
Road
Westwood Avenue
[Added 6-20-2006 by
Ord. No. 157-2006]
South From the point 82 feet west of the
intersection with Rivervale Road to the
point 425 feet west of the intersection
with Rivervale Road
§ 81-35 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-35.1
73:257
§ 81-35.1. Thirty-minute parking. [Added 4-9-2018 by Ord. No.
336-2018]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than 30 minutes on the following
street(s):
Name of Street Side Location
Rivervale Road West From the point 190 feet
south of the intersection
with Westwood Avenue
in a southerly direction
to the point 270 feet
south of the intersection
with Westwood Avenue
§ 81-36. Violations and penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of this article shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $50.
§ 81-35.1 RIVER VALE CODE § 81-36
73:258
ARTICLE XIII
Loading Space
[Adopted 11-26-1991 by Ord. No. 0-26-91]
§ 81-37. Loading space.
§ 81-38. Violations and penalties.
Every person convicted of a violation of this article shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $50.
A. No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the following described
part of Rivervale Road except a person standing or parking a
commercial vehicle for the purpose of loading or unloading goods:
Name of Street Side Location
Rivervale Road West From a point 63.0 feet south of the
intersection with Westwood Avenue in
a southerly direction to a point 108.0
feet south of the intersection with
Westwood Avenue
B. A person standing or parking a commercial vehicle for the purpose of
loading or unloading goods upon the above-described part of Rivervale
Road shall not stand or park the commercial vehicle for a period of time
longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of the goods.
§ 81-37 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-38
73:259

ARTICLE XIV
Official Traffic Control Devices
[Adopted 11-23-1999 by Ord. No. 0-24-99]
§ 81-39. Authorization of official traffic control devices.
The following official traffic control devices at public/private intersections
are authorized:
Address Block/Lot Location Type
663 Westwood
Avenue [Repealed
6-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 157-2006]
§ 81-39 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-39
73:261

ARTICLE XV
Pedestrian Crosswalks
[Adopted 2-27-2003 by Ord. No. 0-2-03]
§ 81-40. Pedestrian crosswalks established.
The following described locations are hereby designated as pedestrian
crosswalks:
Name of Street Location
Rivervale Road 325 feet north of Sunset Road
Westwood Avenue [Added
5-22-2006 by Ord. No.
154-2006]
480 feet west of Rivervale Road
§ 81-40 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-40
73:263

ARTICLE XVI
Snow Removal and Other Emergencies
[Adopted 9-25-2003 by Ord. No. 0-17-03; amended in its entirety
12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 0-27-03]
§ 81-41. Temporary prohibited parking for snow removal and other
emergencies.
A. Snow; parking prohibited. Whenever in the opinion of the Director of
Public Works and/or his designee or the Chief of Police and/or his
designee, snowfall is imminent or has fallen and the accumulation is
such that it covers the street, no person shall park any vehicle and no
owner of any vehicle shall permit it to remain parked on any street
within the Township of River Vale or any Township-owned parking lot.
This parking prohibition shall remain in effect during the snowfall and
after the snowfall has ceased until the streets have been plowed or
otherwise cleared to the extent that a clear and unobstructed width of
not less than 15 feet upon the roadway opposite a parked vehicle is left
free for the passage of other vehicles thereon. Notice shall be posted at
all Township entrances.
B. Emergency; no parking. Whenever the Chief of Police and/or his
designee shall determine that the parking of vehicles upon Township
streets or portions thereof shall be a hazard to the public safety, he/she
shall have the authority to post “Emergency No Parking” signs to
prohibit such parking until the hazardous condition is alleviated.
Hazardous conditions shall include, but are not limited to, roadway
excavations, repaving, utility work, parades, civic events, sporting
events, fires, law enforcement investigations and disasters. The posting
of “Emergency No Parking” signs shall be accomplished so as to
provide prior notice to the public whenever possible.
C. Removal of illegally parked vehicles; payment of costs of removal and
storage.
(1) Any unoccupied vehicle parked in violation of § 81-41 shall be
deemed a nuisance to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and
any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
(2) The owner of the vehicle shall pay the reasonable cost of the
removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle. Prompt notice of such removal
shall be given to the owner of the vehicle.
§ 81-41 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-41
73:265

ARTICLE XVII
Prohibited Turns
[Adopted 12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 0-26-03]
§ 81-42. Restricted turns.
No person shall turn at any of the following locations as described:
Name of Street Prohibited Turn
Brookside Avenue East onto Caruso Lane
Caruso Lane North onto Rivervale Road
Caruso Lane South onto Rivervale Road
Rivervale Road East onto Caruso Lane
§ 81-42 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-42
73:267

ARTICLE XVIII
Lane Use
[Adopted 3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 103-2005]
§ 81-43. Lane use reservations.
The following lane locations are designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move only as indicated:
Intersection or Location Movement
Rivervale Road at Woodside Avenue Northbound center lane of Rivervale
Road reserved for left turn only
Rivervale Road at Woodside Avenue Northbound right lane of Rivervale
Road reserved for through traffic
only
Westwood Avenue at Interglen
Avenue [Added 11-5-2012 by Ord.
No. 267-2012]
Westbound left lane of Westwood
Avenue for left turn only
Westwood Avenue at Interglen
Avenue [Added 11-5-2012 by Ord.
No. 267-2012; repealed
2-11-2013 by Ord. No. 272-2013]
§ 81-43 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 81-43
73:269
Chapter 85
CHECKS, FRAUDULENT
§ 85-1. Service charge established.35
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:5-18, there is hereby established a service charge
in the amount of $20 per check or other written instrument if payment
tendered to the Township is returned for insufficient funds.
§ 85-2. Service charge to become lien.
Whenever an account owing to the Township is for a tax or special
assessment, the service charge authorized by this chapter shall be included
on whatever list of delinquent accounts is prepared by the Tax Collector for
the enforcement of the lien.
§ 85-3. Applicability; future payments.
Service charges authorized by this chapter shall pertain to any payment
made to the Township by check or other written instrument. In any case
where such checks are returned for insufficient funds, the parties so doing
shall be required to make any future payments in cash or by certified or
cashier's check.
§ 85-4. Revision of statute.
Any revision in the service charge amount approved by state statute shall
automatically revise this chapter.
Chapter 90
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 73.
Registration of contractors — See Ch. 93.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Land use — See Ch. 142.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 218.
§ 90-1. Enforcing Agency established.
A. There is hereby established in the Township of River Vale a State
Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency, consisting of a
Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode
Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 81-43 RIVER VALE CODE § 90-1
85:270
§ 90-2. Board of Appeals. [Amended 11-5-2012 by Ord. No.
266-2012]
§ 90-3. Approval of as-built drawings of foundations prior to
framing. [Added 2-22-1990 by Ord. No. 0-2-90
As-built drawings of foundations installed shall be submitted to the
Construction Official for approval prior to commencement of the
construction of the frame of a building. If the foundation is not installed
in conformance with the building permit and the plans and specifications
submitted with the application therefor, no further work shall be performed
until the nonconformity has been corrected. The Construction Official shall
manifest his approval by endorsing and signing or initialing the as-built
drawings. In the event that the applicant proceeds with construction
without the endorsement, the Construction Official shall issue a stopconstruction
order pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-132, and the applicant shall
be subject to such penalties as are provided by law.
§ 90-4. Fees. [Amended 4-21-1977 by Ord. No. 0-3-77; 3-19-1981 by
Ord. No. 04-81; 7-25-1985 by Ord. No. 0-8-85; 5-26-1988 by Ord. No.
0-9-88; 4-26-1990 by Ord. No. 0-7-90; 8-22-1991 by Ord. No.
0-15-91; 11-24-1992 by Ord. No. 0-18-92; 1-25-1996 by Ord. No.
0-3-96; 8-27-1998 by Ord. No. 0-9-98; 10-22-1998 by Ord. No.
0-13-1998; 1-25-2010 by Ord. No. 224-2010; 6-24-2019 by Ord. No.
354-2019]
and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs of the State
of New Jersey shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code. The Township Council shall appoint the
Construction Official, the subcode officials and any on-site inspection
agencies which may be appointed in lieu of a subcode official.
[Amended 4-21-1977 by Ord. No. 0-3-77]
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.), as amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in
lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may
be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such
official position may be held by the same person, provided that such
person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to
hold each such position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the Enforcing
Agency at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
A. The Township of River Vale shall use the Bergen County Construction
Board of Appeals pursuant to Chapter 217 of the laws of 1975 and
N.J.A.C. 5:23.
§ 90-1 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 90-4
85:271
A. The fee for a construction or zoning permit shall be the sum of the
subcode fees listed in Subsection A(1) through (5) of this section and
shall be paid before the permit is issued.
(1) Building subcode fees: minimum fee residential R3/R5: $70; all
other uses and commercial: $125.
(a) New construction or additions:
[1] Per cubic foot of volume: $0.05.
[2] Minimum fee (principal building): $950.
[3] Minimum fee (accessory building): $750.
[4] Modular structures: $30 per $1,000 of estimated cost.
(b) Alterations, repairs, renovations, reconstruction and change of
use:
[1] Per $1,000 of estimated cost: $25.
(c) Roofing, reroofing and siding: no permit required.
(d) Demolition:
[1] Residential.
[a] Principal building: $850.
[b] Accessory building: $300.
[2] Nonresidential/mixed use.
[a] Principal: $950.
[b] Accessory building: $400.
[3] Interior demolition, per subcode: no permit required.
(e) State surcharge: calculated upon current state fees N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.19(b).
(f) Lead hazard abatement with certificate of clearance: $145
(state mandated).
(g) Asbestos abatement with administrative certificate: $160
(state mandated).
(h) Certificate of occupancy - U.C.C.:
[1] Residential (new construction or rehabilitation): $150.
[2] Nonresidential: $250.
(i) Temporary certificate of occupancy - U.C.C., initial issuance: no
fee.
§ 90-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 90-4
85:272
[1] Each subsequent renewal and request for certificate of
occupancy: $30 (state mandated).
(j) Change of contractor: $35 plus any additional items or cost.
(k) Plan review fee: 20% of the anticipated permit fee which is
nonrefundable (state mandated).
(l) Withdrawn permit administrative fee: 20% includes plan
review (state mandated).
(m) Reinstatement of lapse permit fee: 80% of original fee.
(n) Certificate of continued occupancy - U.C.C., applicant
requested:
[1] General visual inspection by all subcode officials: $125 per
subcode.
(o) Uniform Construction Code variations:
[1] Residential: $150.
[2] Commercial/mixed use: $300.
(p) Zoning review fee (requires survey, a current survey depicts as
exists): $40.
(q) Retaining walls, plus zoning review fee:
[1] Under four feet in height, zoning permit: $40.
[2] Over four feet in height, per $1,000 of estimated cost: $22.
(r) Patios: $60 plus zoning review fee.
(s) Fences, plus zoning review fee:
[1] Not associated with pool:
[a] Fifty feet of fencing or less in length:
[i] With a current property survey: $40.
[ii] Without a current property survey: $60.
[b] More than 50 feet in length: $60.
[2] Pool fence/barrier or fence over six feet high:
[a] With a current property survey, per $1,000 of
estimated cost: $25.
[b] Without a current property survey: not permitted.
(t) Swimming pool: building permit only, does not include fence/
barrier; permit also requires zoning review fee:
§ 90-4 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 90-4
85:273
[1] Aboveground: $200.
[2] Semi-in-ground: $500. Also requires soil movement
permit.
[3] In-ground: per $1,000 of estimated cost: $25. Also requires
soil permit.
(u) Signs, plus zoning review fee:
[1] Up to 24 square feet: $85 per sign.
[2] Twenty-five to 50 square feet: $150 per sign.
[3] Fifty square feet and above: $200 per sign.
[4] Freestanding sign: $300 two sided.
(v) Trailers used for construction offices and storage, plus zoning
review fee:
[1] Residential: $100 each.
[2] Nonresidential/mixed use: $300 each.
(w) Sidewalks:
[1] Public new/replacements/repairs over 25%: $50.
[2] Private walkways: zoning review fee only.
(x) Driveways, plus zoning review fee:
[1] Resurface same size:
[a] With a current property survey: $40.
[b] Without current property survey: $70.
[2] Enlargement:
[a] With a current property survey: $70.
[b] Without a property survey: not permitted.
[c] Curb cut and/or apron: $25.
(y) Change of tenancy/occupancy zoning, plus fire prevention fees:
[1] Residential: $100 plus $50 each per additional unit.
[2] Nonresidential or mixed: $200 plus $100 per additional
unit.
(z) Shed (only two permitted if under 150 square feet), plus zoning
review fee:
§ 90-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 90-4
85:274
[1] Under 200 square feet:
[a] Under 150 square feet with a current property survey:
$60.
[b] Over 151 square feet to 199 square feet with a current
property survey: $80.
[c] Without a property survey: not permitted.
[2] Over 200 square feet up to 600 square feet, plus zoning
review fee; may also require soil movement permit and
foundation:
[a] With a current property survey: $25 per $1,000 of
estimated cost.
[b] Without a current property survey: not permitted.
(aa) Temporary tents:
[1] Over 900 square feet or 30 feet of length in one direction:
$200.
(bb) Storage tanks in gallons per installation:
[1] Up to 330: $175.
[2] 331 to 660: $250.
[3] 661 to 1,000: $400.
[4] 1,001 to 5,000: $800.
[5] 5,001 or more: $1,500.
(cc) Tank demolition, per tank:
[1] Residential: $125.
[2] All other uses and commercial: $200.
(dd) Certificate of compliance, annual inspection for public
swimming pools, spas and hot tubs: $150.
(ee) Relocation of structure, plus zoning review fee: no permit
required.
(ff) Special inspection fee request, for emergency/extraordinary
situations:
[1] Special inspection fees. Any person, partnership or
corporation who requests and obtains a required code
inspection either before or after regular Building
Department hours of business or on holidays and
weekends shall be required to pay, in addition to any
§ 90-4 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 90-4
85:275
established permit and certificate fees, the current
contractual hourly compensation rate (1 1/2 times their
normal hourly salary) for the Code Officials performing the
inspections, plus an administrative surcharge of 20% of
said calculated amount. Said fee shall be calculated and
based on the amount of time required for said inspections
with payment for a minimum inspection time of no less
than two hours with the calculated surcharge.
(gg) Search of Borough records. Current year and back two years:
no retrieval fee, only the per page copy charges. Beyond two
years from the date of request: $50 per hour or part thereof
retrieval fee, plus copy charges per page.
(2) Electrical subcode fees. Minimum fee residential R3/R5: $70. All
other uses and commercial: $125.
(a) Receptacles and fixtures (lighting fixtures, receptacles,
switches, detectors, light poles, motors-fractional horsepower,
emergency and exit lights, communication points and alarm
devices/fire alarm control panel):
[1] One to 25 units: $70.
[2] Each additional 25 or fraction thereof: $30.
(b) Motors and electrical devices over one horse power up to:
[1] One horsepower to 10 horsepower: $75.
[2] From 11 horsepower to 50 horsepower: $150.
[3] From 51 horsepower to 100 horsepower: $300.
[4] Greater than 101 horsepower: $450.
(c) Transformers and generators over one kilowatt up to
(equipment and appliances, including electrical range oven,
dishwasher, dryer, water heater, boiler, furnace, baseboard
heat, space heaters, transfer switches, or any other fixed or
plug in appliance) each:
[1] One kilowatt to 10 kilowatts: $75.
[2] Over 11 kilowatts to 45 kilowatts: $150.
[3] Over 46 kilowatts to 112.5 kilowatts: $300.
[4] Over 112.5 kilowatts: $450.
(d) Service panels, entrances and subpanels:
[1] Less than or equal to 200 amps: $100.
[2] 201 amps or equal to 400 amps: $300.
§ 90-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 90-4
85:276
[3] 401 amps or equal to 1,200 amps: $450.
[4] Over 1,201 amps: $1,000.
[5] Additional meters included in service: $75.
(e) Air-conditioning units (disconnect, compress/condenser and
air handler):
[1] Each: $75.
[2] Replacement of any system part: $50.
(f) Burglar alarm system (complete): $75.
(g) Hydromassage tub (interior whirlpool tub/spa): $50.
(h) Swimming pools (includes receptacle, switch, trench, bonding
and equip potential bonding matt):
[1] Aboveground: $100.
[2] Semi-in-ground: $150.
[3] In-ground: $300.
[4] Light, each: $50.
(i) Hot tub or spa (exterior): $150.
(j) Certificate of compliance (annual inspection for public
swimming pools, spas and hot tubs): $150.
(3) Plumbing subcode fees. Minimum fee residential R3/R5: $70. All
other uses and commercial: $125.
(a) Water closet/toilet/urinals/bidets: $25.
(b) Bathtub: $25.
(c) Lavatory/sink: $25.
(d) Shower: $25.
(e) Floor drain: $25.
(f) Dishwasher: $25.
(g) Drinking fountain/water cooler: $25.
(h) Washing machine: $25.
(i) Hose bibb: $25.
(j) Stacks: $25.
(k) Water heater:
§ 90-4 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 90-4
85:277
[1] Residential: $70.
[2] Commercial: $125.
(l) Fuel oil piping: $70.
(m) Gas piping: $25 per connection.
(n) Steam/hot water boiler/furnace:
[1] Residential: $75.
[2] Commercial: $125.
(o) Sewer pump/ejector: $75.
(p) Interceptor/separators: $75.
(q) Backflow preventer:
[1] Residential: $75.
[2] Commercial with test ports: $125.
(r) Grease trap: $75.
(s) Sewer connection/replace/repair:
[1] Residential: $75.
[2] Commercial: $125.
(t) Water service connection:
[1] Two-inch or less: $75.
[2] Over two-inch: $100.
(u) Refrigerant units: $75.
(v) Active solar system: $75.
(w) Garbage disposal: $25.
(x) Indirect connection: $25.
(y) Humidifier: $25.
(z) Condensate line/drain: $25.
(aa) Roof drains: $50.
(bb) Septic connection: $75.
(cc) Water softener: $75.
(dd) Swimming pool:
§ 90-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 90-4
85:278
[1] Above ground: $75.
[2] Semi-in-ground: $100.
[3] In-ground: $150.
(ee) Annual testing of commercial backflow devices: $50 per
device.
(4) Fire protection subcode fees. Minimum fee residential R3/R5: $75.
All other uses and commercial: $125.
(a) Installation of flammable/combustible/liquid storage tanks:
[1] Up to 350 gallons: $100.
[2] Over 350 gallons to 1,000 gallons: $150.
[3] Over 1,000 gallons to 5,000 gallons: $350.
[4] Over 5,000 gallons to 10,000 gallons: $750.
[5] Over 10,000 gallons: $1,500.
(b) Alarm/supervisory/signaling devices (smoke, heat, carbon
monoxide, pull stations, water flow, tampers, low/high air,
horn/strobes and bells) each:
[1] One through six: $75.
[2] Each additional device: $10.
(c) Wet and dry sprinkler heads:
[1] One through 19: $200.
[2] 20 through 100: $400.
[3] 101 through 200: $600.
[4] 201 through 400: $800.
[5] 401 through 1,000: $1,500.
[6] Over 1,000: $2,000.
(d) Standpipes: $500.
(e) Kitchen hood exhaust system: $300.
(f) Pre-engineered systems:
[1] Wet chemical: $250.
[2] Dry chemical: $250.
[3] CO2 suppression: $250.
§ 90-4 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 90-4
85:279
[4] Foam suppression: $250.
[5] FM200 suppression: $250.
(g) Smoke control systems: $750.
(h) Gas- or oil-fired appliance: $75.
(i) Fireplaces: $85.
(j) Fire sprinkler component fee costs in addition to sprinkler
heads:
[1] Hydraulic calculations or alterations to pipe schedule, plan
review: $100.
[2] Dry pipe alarm, pre-action and similar devices: $100.
[3] Supervisory devices, each: $30.
[4] Water service for fire line:
[a] Up to two-inch: $200.
[b] Two-inch to five-inch: $400.
[c] Six-inch or larger: $600.
[5] Fire pump: $1,000.
(k) Fire alarm system components fees in addition to alarm
devices:
[1] Fire alarm panel, new installation or replacement: $100.
[2] Fire alarm system security and other devices (i.e., door
locks, electromagnetic releases, hold-open devices,
elevator control valves and floor control valves): $15 each.
(l) Metal chimney or liners:
[1] R3/R5 each: $75.
[2] Mixed use/commercial: $150.
(m) Emergency lights and exit signs, each: $10.
(5) Mechanical subcode fees.
(a) R3/R5 structure/use group minimum fee: $70.
[1] Water heater: $70.
[2] Fuel oil piping connections: $70.
[3] Gas piping connections: $25 per connection.
§ 90-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 90-4
85:280
[4] Steam boiler with backflow: $130.
[5] Hot-water boiler with backflow: $130.
[6] Hot-air furnace: $130.
[7] Oil tank with piping: $100.
[8] LPG tank: $100.
[9] Fireplace/woodstove: $85.
[10] Hydronic piping: $75.
[11]Radiant heat piping: $75.
[12] Chimney liner: $100.
[13] A/C unit coils/condensers: $15.
(b) Minimum fee mixed use/commercial: no permit required.
B. Certificate fee schedule shall be:
(1) For a certificate of continued occupancy (CCO):
(a) Residential: $100.
(b) Commercial: $200.
C. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Township Council biannually a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq.).
D. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the State Uniform Construction Code Act and
regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified hereinbefore, a surcharge of $0.00190 per cubic foot of
volume of new construction and additions. The fee for all other
construction shall be $0.00371 per $1,000 of value of construction.
E. Exemption from fees for improvements to aid disabled persons.
(1) Definition. "Disabled person" means a person who has the total and
permanent inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by
reason of any medically determinable physical or mental
impairment, including blindness, and shall include, but not be
limited to, any resident of this state who is disabled pursuant to the
Federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 416) or the federal Railroad
Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. § 231 et seq.), or is rated as
having a 60% disability or higher pursuant to any federal law
administered by the United States Veterans' Act. For purposes of
§ 90-4 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 90-4
85:281
§ 90-5. Construction and landscaping activities prohibited during
certain hours. [Amended 12-21-1993 by Ord. No. 0-21-93; 5-9-2005
by Ord. No. 115-2005]
§ 90-6. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-21-1977 by Ord. No.
0-3-77]
this subsection "blindness" means central visual acuity of 20/200
or less in the better eye with the use of a correcting lens. An eye
which is accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision such
that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no
greater than 20 degrees shall be considered as having a central
visual acuity of 20/200 or less.
(2) No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement designed and undertaken solely to
promote accessibility by disabled persons to an existing public or
private structure or any of the facilities contained therein.
(3) A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, shall
not be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in order to
secure a construction permit for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement which promotes accessibility to his own
living unit.
A. As used herein, "construction activities" shall mean the erection,
demolition, repair, construction or excavation of a property or building
and shall include, but is not limited to, the arrival of trucks or
construction vehicles, the loading and unloading of such vehicles and
the running of generators or machines in conjunction with any
construction or landscaping activities.
B. Construction and landscaping activities shall be limited as follows:
(1) State legal holidays: 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(2) Sundays: 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(3) Saturdays: 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(4) Weekdays: 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
C. In the event of an emergency or in the interests of public safety, the
Construction Code Official may permit construction activities at such
hours as may be necessary.
A. Any person or corporation, including an officer, director or employee of
a corporation, who: [Amended 2-22-1990 by Ord. No. 0-2-90]
(1) Violates any of the provisions of the act or rules promulgated
thereunder;
§ 90-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 90-6
85:282
Chapter 93
CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 73. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 90.
(2) Constructs a structure or building in violation of a condition of a
building permit;
(3) Fails to comply with any order issued by the Enforcing Agency; or
(4) Makes a false or misleading written statement or omits any
required information or statement in any application or request for
approval to the Enforcing Agency;
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Subsection E of this
section.
B. Anyone who knowingly refuses entry or access to an inspector lawfully
authorized to inspect any premises, building or structure pursuant to
this ordinance or who unreasonably interferes with such an inspection
shall be subject to a penalty as provided in Subsection E of this section.
[Amended 2-22-1990 by Ord. No. 0-2-90]
C. With respect to Subsection A(3) of this section, a person shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each day that he fails to comply with a stopconstruction
order validly issued by the Enforcing Agency and for each
week that he fails to comply with any other order validly issued by the
Enforcing Agency. With respect to Subsection A(1) and A(4) of this
section, a person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each violation
of any provision of the Act or rules promulgated thereunder and for
each false or misleading written statement or omission of required
information or statement made on any application or request for
approval to the Enforcing Agency. With respect to Subsection A(2) of
this section, a person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each
violation of the conditions of a construction permit.
D. The above-mentioned penalties are subject to change through
amendments or supplements to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. Payment of
a money judgment pursuant hereto brought to the municipality shall be
remitted to the Municipal Treasurer of the Township of River Vale.
E. Any person or corporation who violates the provisions of § 79-5 of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, § 1-14. Each day that a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. [Added 12-21-1993 by Ord. No.
0-21-93]
§ 90-6 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 93-1
93:283
§ 93-1. Registration required.
§ 93-2. Registration classes.
For the purpose of this chapter, there shall be the following classes for
registration:
A. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
constructing, erecting, altering, repairing, restoring, reroofing, residing,
moving or demolishing the whole or any part of buildings or
structures or engaged in the construction and installation of swimming
pools or engaged in the business of erecting or altering signs, for any of
which a permit is required by the applicable ordinances of the
Township, shall be required to register the name of such a person or
firm or corporation with the Building Inspector.
B. The owner or occupant of a building or structure applying for a permit
required by a Township ordinance shall not be required to register,
provided that he intends to do and supervise his own work.
A. Contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business of the
construction of a building or structure from start to finish or the
alteration, addition to or repair of any building or structure. This class
of contractor shall be equipped to handle such work by and through his
own work or his own organization or employees.
B. Demolition contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business of
demolishing any building or structure in whole or in part.
C. General contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business of the
construction of a building or structure from start to finish or the
alteration, addition to or repair of any building or structure. This class
of contractor shall be equipped to handle such work either by and
through his own organization or appropriate subcontractors and, in the
latter event, must be completely responsible for his subcontractors'
work.
D. Miscellaneous contractor. A contractor who is engaged in work of a
special character as determined by the Building Inspector.
E. Moving contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business of
moving any buildings or structures.
F. Roofing and siding contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the
business of the application of roofing and siding materials to existing or
new buildings or structures.
G. Sign or billboard contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the
business of the erection, alteration or maintenance of signs or
billboards.
§ 93-1 RIVER VALE CODE § 93-2
93:284
§ 93-3. Submission of application; contents.
Applications for registration under this chapter shall be submitted to the
Building Inspector on forms supplied by him and shall include, in addition
to any information he may deem necessary, a statement giving the name or
corporate firm name of the contractor and, in the case of a firm, corporation
or partnership, the name and address of the principal officer or member
of said firm, corporation or partnership. This application shall also contain
the number of years such person, firm or corporation has been in business
or in existence at the current locations, including the address of such prior
locations, if any. The applicant shall state in which class he desires to be
registered, choosing one or more of the classes designated in § 93-2 of this
chapter.
§ 93-4. Prerequisites for registration.
To register as a contractor with the Township of River Vale so as to be able
to work as a contractor within the Township of River Vale, the following
requirements must be satisfied:
§ 93-5. Notice of violation; revocation of registration.
H. Swimming pool contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business
of the installation of swimming pools, their equipment and
appurtenances.
A. A registration fee of $30 must be submitted.
B. A current certificate of insurance indicating amounts of coverage for
product liability and workmen's compensation must be submitted. Such
insurance coverage must be kept in place at all times while the
contactor is registered with the Township and shall be updated annually
by the contractor.
C. Vehicle insurance as required by that New Jersey Department of Motor
Vehicles must be submitted.
A. If any person, firm or corporation registered under the provisions of
this chapter shall fail, in the execution of any work, to comply with the
applicable ordinances and regulations of the Township relevant to the
construction, erection, alteration, repair, restoration, re-siding,
reroofing, moving or demolition of any building, structure, swimming
pool, sign or billboard, or part thereof, the Building Inspector shall
cause a notice of violation to be served upon such person or principal
member or officer of any such firm or corporation. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(3) State that unless, within 10 days from service of the notice, a
written request is made for a hearing before the Building Inspector,
§ 93-2 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 93-5
93:285
§ 93-6. Registration after revocation.
Any person, firm or corporation whose registration has been revoked under
provisions of § 93-5 of this chapter may reregister and have his or its
name reentered upon the registration list upon filing with the Building
Department a certification by the Building Inspector to the effect that
all violations with reference to which conviction was secured have been
corrected or are nonexistent and upon payment of the fee prescribed in
§ 93-4.
§ 93-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, § 1-14.
Chapter 97
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD CHECKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 29. Parks and recreation — See Ch. 166.
§ 97-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Identification Division, and the State Bureau of Identification
in the Division of State Police.
said notice shall, at the expiration of such ten-day period, be
deemed an order to cease and desist from and to abate the
described violation.
(4) Prescribe a reasonable time within which such person shall be
required to cease and desist from and to abate such violation.
B. Upon conviction for such violation at a requested hearing or upon
failure to correct such violation within the period of time stated in the
notice of violation, the registration of such person, firm or corporation
shall be revoked by the Building Inspector, who shall strike the name of
such person, firm or corporation from the registration list and shall not
reenter or reinstate such registration during such time as said violation
exists or remains.
§ 93-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 97-1
93:286
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION or CHRI — Information
collected by criminal justice agencies concerning persons and stored in the
computer databases of the New Jersey State Police SBI Criminal History
Information System, the National Law Enforcement Telecommunications
System or other states' computerized depositories containing criminal
history record information consisting of identifiable descriptions and
notations of arrests, indictments or other formal criminal charges, and
any dispositions arising therefrom, including convictions, dismissals,
correctional supervision and release.
DEPARTMENT — The Township of River Vale Police Department.
NONCRIMINAL JUSTICE PURPOSE — Any purpose, other than
administration of criminal justice or criminal justice purpose, including
employment and licensing, for which applicant fingerprints and search
requests are submitted by authorized requesters, as required or permitted
by a federal or state statute, rule or regulation, executive order,
administrative code provision, local ordinance, resolution or by this chapter,
to the State Bureau of Identification for the dissemination of criminal
history record information.
NONPROFIT YOUTH-SERVING ORGANIZATION or ORGANIZATION — A
corporation, association or other organization established pursuant to Title
15 or 15A of the New Jersey Statutes, or other law of this state, but
excluding public and nonpublic schools, and which provides recreational,
cultural, charitable, social or other activities or services for persons
younger than 18 years of age, and is exempt from federal income taxes. For
the purpose of this chapter, all independent River Vale sports associations,
including but not limited to the River Vale Baseball and Softball Association,
the River Vale Basketball Association and River Vale Soccer Association,
shall be considered to be nonprofit youth-serving organizations.
REVIEW COMMITTEE — A three-member committee consisting of one of
the athletic directors, the Business Administrator or a designee of the
Mayor and the Chief of Police or designee. The Committee shall be charged
with the review of all appeals of any volunteer whose criminal history
background check reveals a disqualifying criminal conviction.
STATE BUREAU OF IDENTIFICATION or SBI — The New Jersey State
Bureau of Identification created by P.L. 1930, c. 65 (N.J.S.A. 53:1-12 et seq.).
VOLUNTEER COACH — Any person involved with coaching or supervising
participants in a nonprofit youth-serving organization, whether the title
is coach, assistant coach, manager or another title consistent with these
terms.
VOLUNTEER REVIEW OPERATION (VRO) — The unit located within the
State Bureau of Identification that is responsible for administering criminal
background checks for volunteer coaches as specified in this chapter.
§ 97-2. Request for background checks; costs.
§ 97-1 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 97-2
93:287
§ 97-3. Conditions for disqualification from service.
Any prospective or current volunteer coach of a nonprofit youth-serving
organization who refuses to consent to this procedure shall not be permitted
to participate in any sponsored or cosponsored programs involving
nonprofit youth-serving organizations.
§ 97-4. Submissions required; exchange of information.
A. The Township requires that all employees and volunteers, including a
volunteer coach, of a nonprofit youth-serving organization request,
through the Department, that the State Bureau of Identification in the
Division of State Police conduct a criminal history record background
check on each prospective and current employee or volunteer of the
organization in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq. and with the
procedures and guidelines adopted by the VRO. No person will be
permitted to act as a volunteer coach until the results of the
background checks have been received and reviewed by the
Department. Each employee or volunteer under this section shall also
have an ongoing duty to report to the Township any new information
which would be revealed by such a search.
B. The Division of State Police shall inform the Department whether the
person's criminal history record background check reveals a conviction
of a disqualifying crime or offense as specified in § 97-3 of this chapter.
C. The Recreation Department shall request a criminal history record
background check only upon receipt of the written consent to the check
from the prospective or current employee or volunteer.
D. The employee, volunteer or nonprofit youth-serving organization shall
bear the cost associated with conducting criminal history background
checks in accordance with fees established by the State Bureau of
Identification and the Division of State Police and in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-2d.
E. Criminal history background checks will be performed for individuals
under the age of 18 in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq. and
with the procedures and guidelines adopted by the VRO.
A. A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer
of a nonprofit youth-serving organization if that person's criminal
history record background check reveals a disqualifying record in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq.
B. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute a disqualifying record in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. may also constitute grounds for
disqualification.
A. Prospective or current employees and volunteers of nonprofit youthserving
organizations shall submit their name, address, fingerprints
§ 97-2 RIVER VALE CODE § 97-4
93:288
§ 97-5. Limitations on access and use.
§ 97-6. Determination by Review Committee; challenges to
determination.
and written consent to the recreational organization for which the
criminal history record background check to be performed. The
organization shall submit this documentation to the Department, which
shall transmit such information to the VRO. Thereafter, all information
required for subsequent background checks shall be submitted to the
Department, which shall coordinate criminal background checks every
30 to 36 months, not to exceed 36 months after the date of the initial
check.
B. The Department shall act as a clearinghouse for the collection and
dissemination of information obtained as a result of conducting criminal
history record background checks pursuant to this chapter.
A. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal-justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
Department and the Review Committee, on a need-to-know basis, as
authorized by federal or state statute, rule or regulation, executive
order, administrative code, local ordinance or resolution regarding
obtaining and dissemination of criminal history record information
obtained under this chapter.
B. Such persons or organizations shall limit their use of criminal history
record information solely to the authorized purpose for which it was
obtained, and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. Any person violating
federal or state regulations governing access to criminal history record
information may be subject to criminal and/or civil penalties.
A. The VRO shall make a recommendation based on the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. as to whether the prospective or current
volunteer coach is being recommended. The VRO will provide the
Department with a letter of recommendation or non-recommendation
for each individual for whom the VRO completed a background check.
B. The Department shall promptly notify a prospective or current
volunteer coach who receives a letter of non-recommendation from the
VRO. Individuals who receive a letter of non-recommendation from the
VRO will not be permitted to participate as a volunteer coach. Such
individuals may obtain a copy of their criminal history by contacting the
VRO in writing. The individuals shall then have 20 days from the receipt
of notification from the Department to petition the Review Committee
for a review and to cite reasons substantiating the review.
§ 97-4 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 97-6
93:289
C. Individuals who receive a letter of non-recommendation from the VRO
may be permitted to serve as a volunteer coach if they affirmatively
demonstrate rehabilitation to the Review Committee. In determining
whether a person has affirmatively demonstrated clear and convincing
evidence of rehabilitation, the Review Committee may consider the
following factors in conjunction with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1
et seq.:
(1) The nature and responsibility of the position which the convicted
person would hold or has held, as the case may be;
(2) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(3) The circumstances under which the offense occurred;
(4) The date of the offense;
(5) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(6) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
(7) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the offense;
and
(8) Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or
the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received,
acquisition of additional academic or vocational schooling,
successful participation in correctional work release programs or
the recommendations of those who have had the person under their
supervision.
D. In all instances, the final determination of whether an individual will be
permitted to serve as a volunteer coach will lie in the sole discretion of
the Review Committee.
E. The Review Committee shall promptly advise the prospective or current
volunteer coach whether he or she is qualified to serve as such.
F. When the Department receives a letter of non-recommendation from
the VRO, the Department may file that letter and keep the written
notification on file for three years from the date it was issued.
G. No person or entity shall be held liable in any civil or criminal action
brought by any party based on any written notification on file with the
Department pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 97-6 RIVER VALE CODE § 97-6
93:290
Chapter 105
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 3, Art. XI.
Golf Utility — See Ch. 20.
Police Department — See Ch. 33.
Police Reserve — See Ch. 36.
§ 97-6 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 97-6
93:291

ARTICLE I
Police Department Records
[HISTORY: Adopted 2-14-1974 by Ord. No. 0-1-74 (Ch. 57B of the
1967 Code); amended in its entirety 11-22-2004 by Ord. No.
0-17-04]
§ 105-1. Fees for documents other than Municipal Court discovery.
[Amended 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 101-2005]
The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Township of
River Vale for the documents provided:
A. Seventy-five cents per page for each of the first 10 pages.
B. Fifty cents per page for the 11th to the 20th page.
C. Twenty-five cents per page for all pages over 20.
D. Five dollars for mailed accident reports (N.J.S.A. 39:4-131).
E. Five dollars for each audio or video tape reproduction.
§ 105-1 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 105-1
93:293

ARTICLE II
Municipal Court Discovery
[Adopted 11-8-2004 by Ord. No. 0-14-04]
§ 105-2. Requests for discovery.
All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Township of River Vale
Municipal Court shall be submitted through the Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 105-3. Fees established.
The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Township of
River Vale for the discovery provided:
§ 105-4. Discovery by other entities.
Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Township of River Vale, e.g., another police department, the actual costs
paid to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
A. Seventy-five cents per page for each of the first 10 pages photocopied.
B. Fifty cents per page for each of the next 10 pages photocopied.
C. Twenty-five cents for each of the pages photocopied thereafter.
D. Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
E. Twenty-five cents for the envelope for any discovery sent by mail.
F. Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of making
the photographs shall be charged.
G. Duplication of videotapes constitute an extraordinary duplication
process and will be charged at the rate of $5 per videotape.
H. On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Township copy machine
or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the actual cost incurred
in making the copy shall be charged.
§ 105-2 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 105-4
93:295

ARTICLE III
Township Fee Schedule
[Adopted 3-13-2006 by Ord. No. 145-2006]
§ 105-5. Fee schedule.
A. Board of Health fees.
License/Permit/Certificate Fee
Animals
1 to 3, total $70
4 to 9, total $150
Bakery $255
Barber or beauty parlor $90
Boarding houses or lodging houses $255
Dry cleaning (self-service establishment) $130
Food establishments, retail
1,500 square feet or less $255
More than 1,500 square feet $425
Home for the aged (non-nursing type) $255
Hotel or motel $255
Health clubs $130
Ice machine $90
Laundromat $70
Milk (stores and vehicles) $60
Milk depot $60
Nursing home for adults (kitchen network) $425
Pet shops/kennels $255
Poultry, pigeons and other fowl (6 limit — each
animal)
$30
Restaurants, seating capacity
1 to 25 seats $255
26 to 50 seats $380
Over 50 seats $465
Catering halls $800
Swimming pool, public (year-round indoor) $550
Swimming pool, public (seasonal-outdoor) $400
Swimming pool, wading and nonprofit $200
§ 105-5 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 105-5
93:297
License/Permit/Certificate Fee
Temporary toilet, per toilet $20
Trucks
Mobile vending trucks (ice cream, etc.) $130
Food delivery trucks (milk, etc.) $60
Vending machine $40
Wells (deep well drilling or boring) $90
Miscellaneous transcript fees:
Birth $10
Death $10
Marriage $10
B. Recreation.36 [Amended 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 247-2011;
5-12-2014 by Ord. No. 290-2014; 5-8-2017 by Ord. No. 324-2017;
3-25-2019 by Ord. No. 351-2019]
Camp
Fee
(per camper)
Camp Have Some Fun
Monday to Friday $375
Monday, Wednesday and Friday only $335
Tuesday and Thursday only $290
*There will be a multi-child discount for Camp Have Some Fun
campers only.*
Kindergarten Camp $270
Safety Town $85
C. Farmers market vendor fees: [Amended 5-9-2016 by Ord. No.
314-2016]
$740 (full time).
$370 (part time).
$35 (guest vendor).
D. Whenever, pursuant to the provisions of this Code, a license, permit or
certificate is required and no specific fee is established, the fee therefor
shall be $40.
36.Editor’s Note: See also § 166-7.
§ 105-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 105-5
93:298
ARTICLE IV
Mayor's Expenses for Marriage and Civil Union Ceremonies
[Adopted 5-14-2007 by Ord. No. 179-2007]
§ 105-6. General provisions.
Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures
for the collection of fees associated with the performance of marriage or
civil union ceremonies by the Mayor.
§ 105-7. General regulations.
A. Collection of fees.
(1) Persons seeking to be married or joined in civil union by the Mayor
of River Vale shall remit the applicable fee delineated below to be
paid to the Township of River Vale.
(a) Residents of River Vale: $150.
(b) Nonresidents of River Vale: $250.
(c) Active (and or retired) military: no charge.
(d) An administrative fee of $25 shall be added to the above
established fee.
(2) Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the Mayor shall
be authorized to waive any fee set forth above in his discretion.
B. Compensation and reimbursement of expenses incurred through the
performance of marriage and civil union ceremonies.
(1) Receipt of fees. The fee shall be paid by check, payable to the
Township of River Vale. Fees collected shall be deposited into the
Township of River Vale's current fund.
(2) Disbursement of fees.
(a) Fees for service may be disbursed to the Mayor or to a
designated program of the Mayor's choice through the
appropriate budget line item and with appropriate
authorization.
(b) Fees for reimbursement of appropriate and reasonable
expenses (travel, tuxedo rental, direct cost reimbursement)
may be disbursed to the Mayor in accordance with River Vale's
established procedure for reimbursement, including vouchers
with receipts documenting the expenses, duly authorized and
with expenditure from the appropriate line item.
(3) Eligible persons. The Township of River Vale shall reimburse only
proper and reasonable expenses incurred directly by and for the
§ 105-6 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 105-7
93:299
Mayor. Under no circumstances shall the Township reimburse
expenses or expenditures on behalf of or because of any spouse,
child, guest or other person.
§ 105-7 RIVER VALE CODE § 105-7
93:300
ARTICLE V
Golf Course Fees
[Adopted 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 241-2010; 11-12-2018 by Ord. No.
348-2018]
§ 105-8. Golf course daily rates.
A. Monday through Friday: [Amended 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
258-2011; 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 285-2013; 2-9-2015 by Ord.
No. 297-2015; 11-12-2018 by Ord. No. 348-2018]
Rates Public Resident
Early Bird (6:00 a.m. to 7:29
a.m.)
$40 to $65 $30 to $50
Midday (7:30 a.m. to 2:59 p.m.) $60 to $90 $40 to $60
Twilight (adjusted based upon
sunset)
$40 to $65 $30 to $55
Super Twilight $35 to $50 $30 to $50
Senior (62 years and older) $45 to $70 $30 to $50
Junior rate (Monday through
Friday, no earlier than 2:00 p.m.)
$25 to $40 $20 to $29
Junior age is 10 years to 16
years
Must be accompanied by
adult; 1 adult per each child
Must be approved by
professional golf staff
Junior rate subject to
availability
B. Saturday, Sunday and holidays: [Amended 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
258-2011; 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 285-2013; 2-9-2015 by Ord.
No. 297-2015; 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 297-2015; 11-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 348-2018]
Rates Public Resident
Early Bird (6:00 a.m.
to 7:29 a.m.)
Not available Not available
Midday (7:30 a.m. to
2:59 p.m.)
$85 to $110 $55 to $80
Early Twilight $60 to $90 $45 to $65
Twilight $55 to $75 $40 to $55
Super Twilight $40 to $55 $25 to $45
§ 105-8 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 105-8
93:301
§ 105-9. Membership fees. [Amended 12-12-2011 by Ord. No.
258-2011; 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 285-2013; 2-9-2015 by Ord. No.
297-2015; 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 297-2015; 11-12-2018 by Ord. No.
348-2018]
Rates Public Resident
Individual weekday $3,400 $1,700
Family weekday (one
foursome per day)
$4,700 $2,550
Individual full membership $4,800 $2,900
Family full membership (one
foursome per day)
$6,600 $3,900
Corporate $28,000 Not available
Cart fee $25 $25
Guest fees
Monday through Friday $65 $65
Saturday, Sunday and
holidays
$85 $85
Benefits and parameters 13 days' tee time: $4 Two-week tee time:
$4
Lessons: 10%
discount
Lessons: 10%
discount
Rates Public Resident
Senior (62 years and
older)
Not available Not available
Junior Not available Not available
Cart fee Included Included
C. (Reserved)37
D. Re-play fee (Monday to Friday): $40. [Amended 11-25-2013 by Ord.
No. 285-2013]
E. Re-play fee (Saturday, Sunday): $50. [Amended 11-25-2013 by Ord.
No. 285-2013]
F. Re-play (members to walk): $25.38
37.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding weekend and holiday rates, was superseded
12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 258-2011.
38.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G, Men’s spa fee, and Subsection H, Ladies’ locker
room, which immediate followed this subsection, were repealed 11-25-2013 by Ord. No.
285-2013.
§ 105-8 RIVER VALE CODE § 105-9
93:302
Rates Public Resident
3 guests per day 3 guests per day
Walk Walk
Discount must be paid prior
to December 31 of each year
10% discount 10% discount
§ 105-10. Golf camp fees. [Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 248-2011;
amended 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 285-2013]
Fees:
Junior Golf Camp
Fee per Week
(per camper)
Residents $199 to $250
Nonresidents $249 to $300
§ 105-9 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 105-10
93:303
Chapter 107
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 152.
Noise — See Ch. 159.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 170.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 214.
Towing — See Ch. 223.
§ 107-1. Definitions.
FILMING —
§ 107-2. Permit required; form; fees; regulations.
The taking of still, motion or digital pictures, either on film, videotape
or any other form, type, method or medium of photographic or
electronic recording by a person or person(s) other than the owner
of the property being filmed, taped or otherwise recorded, for which
said persons taking said pictures have or will compensate said property
owner, or compensate the designee of said property owner; or
A.
The taking of still, motion or digital pictures, either on film, videotape,
or any other form, type, method or medium of photographic or
electronic recording, intended, in whole or in part, for commercial use
of viewing on television, in theaters, or for advertising purposes other
than the advertising of the property for sale or lease; or
B.
The assembling and setting up on private and/or public property,
including, but not limited to, the property which is being filmed,
videotaped or otherwise recorded, of all equipment needed for the
filming, videotaping or other forms of recording referenced in
Subsection A or Subsection B of this definition above, as well as the
removal of the same upon completion.
C.
A. No person shall film or permit filming within the Township of River Vale
without first obtaining a permit, which permit shall set forth the
location of such filming and the date or dates when filming shall take
place.
B. Permits shall be obtained in the office of the Construction Official, and
the application for the permit shall be in a form approved by the
Construction Official, accompanied by a fee and filed at least five
working days prior to the date of filming, along with a cash bond to
cover any expenses the Township might incur as the result of the
filming, the balance, if any, to be returned by the Township of River
Vale. If the television filming is to take place on Township property or
§ 105-10 RIVER VALE CODE § 107-2
93:304
§ 107-3. Requirements for permit.
will affect the use of the Township property, then the application for the
permit shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the date of filming.
C. Fees for permit for filming and the amount of a cash bond to cover
expenses shall be as indicated in this chapter.
D. A permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor or indoor filming for
two days within a period of not more than 10 days beginning on the date
of issuance of the permit. If the filming does not take place on the dates
specified in the permit due to inclement weather or other good cause,
the Construction Official may issue a new permit at no additional fee.
E. No more than one permit for each resident may be issued in any one
calendar year.
A. No permit shall be issued for filming within the Township of River Vale
unless the applicant for such permit:
(1) Provides insurance coverage for bodily injury for any one person in
the amount of $100,000 and for any aggregate occurrence in the
amount of $500,000.
(2) Specifies in writing that the Township of River Vale will be
indemnified and saved harmless from any and all liability or
damages.
(3) Where filming takes place on private property, obtains permission
of the owner in writing.
(4) Agrees to comply with all lawful directives issued by the Township
of River Vale Police Department, Fire Department and all other
departments where deemed necessary and has prepaid all costs
associated with such directives, including, but not limited to, the
cost of the presence of such police personnel which may be
required. Any vehicles used in connection with or relating to the
filming shall not be parked in any driveway nor shall the aggregate
length of all such vehicles exceed the length of the lot frontage of
the property on which the filming is occurring. All such vehicles
must be parked in front of the property on which the filming is to
take place.
B. The holder of a permit shall be responsible for the removal, upon
completion of filming, of all debris and equipment, or upon the
expiration of the permit, whichever comes first.
C. Filming shall be permitted only Monday through Friday, and shall
commence not earlier than 8:00 a.m. and shall be completed not later
than 7:00 p.m. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the
contrary, no filming shall take place on any holiday, which for the
purposes of this chapter shall mean any federal, state or local holiday or
§ 107-2 CONTRACTORS, REGISTRATION OF § 107-3
93:305
§ 107-4. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the filming of news stories
concerning the Township of River Vale and any of the Township activities.
§ 107-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty by the Municipal Court of violating any provision of
this chapter shall, for each day that filming takes place without the permit
required under this chapter, be fined not less than $1,000 nor more than
$2,000.
§ 107-6. Fees.
Chapter 108
FIREARMS
any date during the school year on which the public schools of the
Township of River Vale are closed.
D. No permit applied for shall issue unless first authorized by the
Construction Official or his or her designee, the Chief of Police or his or
her designee, and the Township Administrator or his or her designee.
The Construction Official must refuse to issue a permit when the report
by the Township of River Vale Police Department is to the effect that
said filming would endanger the public health, safety or welfare. Any
person aggrieved by the decision may appeal to the Mayor and Council
by filing said appeal within 10 days after the adverse decision. Said
appeal shall be heard and decided by the Mayor and Council within 30
days after being filed.
E. The Mayor and Council may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements or limitations of this chapter.
F. The applicant shall notify the Construction Official at least 24 hours
before filming in order to give the Official sufficient opportunity to
notify the affected departments so that they may have an authorized
representative inspect the site.
G. The owner of the property on which the filming is to occur shall, not
later than 24 hours before such filming is to commence, give written
notice to all residents within 200 feet of the property on which the
filming is to occur of the date(s) and time(s) on which the filming is to
occur.
A. Permit fee: $5,000. Said permit fee shall be nonrefundable.
B. Cash bond (amount to be refunded will be less any expenses incurred
by the Township due to filming): $2,500.
§ 107-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 108-1
108:306
§ 108-1. Discharge of firearms restricted.
The discharge of any firearms, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, air gun,
spring gun, gas gun or any other device which impels a projectile through
the use of force is prohibited in the Township of River Vale.
§ 108-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 108-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14.
Chapter 112
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 17.
Fire Department bylaws — See Ch. 18.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 90.
A. Any duly appointed law officer in the course of his or her official duty.
B. The use of firearms when necessary for the preservation of human life.
C. The use of firearms when hunting in conformity with the applicable
laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey.
D. Use of a firearm on a licensed pistol, rifle or firearm range and under
the supervision of the Police Department.
§ 108-1 FIREARMS § 108-3
108:307

ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 7-25-1985 by Ord. No. 0-9-1985 (Ch. 32, Art. I, of the 1967
Code)]
§ 112-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383;
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be
locally enforced in the Township of River Vale.
§ 112-2. Enforcing agency designated.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the
River Vale Volunteer Fire Department.
§ 112-3. Duties of enforcing agency.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Township of River
Vale, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Uniform Fire Code.39
§ 112-4. Life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 112-2 of this article shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 112-5. Organization of enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency established by § 112-2 of this article shall be a
part of the River Vale Volunteer Fire Department and shall be under the
direct supervision and control of the Fire Marshal and Fire Chief, reporting
to the Mayor.
§ 112-6. Fire Marshal and other employees.
A. The local enforcing agency shall be under the direct supervision of the
Fire Marshal who shall be appointed by the Mayor upon the
recommendation of the Fire Chief, with confirmation of the Township
Council.
39.Editor's Note: Section 9 of Ord. No. 0-9-85 provided that the Uniform Fire Code shall
supersede former Ch. 32 (now this Ch. 112) of the Code of the Township of River Vale in
all areas where there is some conflict, but all other sections of Ch. 112 shall remain in full
force and effect where there is no conflict with the Uniform Fire Safety Code. Where Ch.
112 provides more stringent requirements than the Uniform Fire Safety Code, the
requirements of Ch. 112 shall be binding.
§ 112-1 FIREARMS § 112-6
108:309
§ 112-7. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208, respectively), any person aggrieved by any
order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right to appeal to the
Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Bergen.
§ 112-8. Fees [Amended 6-28-1990 by Ord. No. 0-11-90; 12-22-2003
by Ord. No. 0-22-03]
B. The Fire Marshal shall serve for a term of one year.
C. Such inspectors and other employees as may be necessary in the local
enforcing agency shall be appointed by the Mayor upon the
recommendation of the Fire Marshal and Fire Chief, with confirmation
of the Township Council.
D. Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be
subject to removal by the Mayor for inefficiency or misconduct. Each
inspector or employee to be so removed shall be afforded an
opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or a designated
hearing officer.
A. The annual registration fee for life-hazard uses shall be as follows, or as
amended in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(a).
B. Application fee. The application fee for a permit shall follow the New
Jersey Uniform Fire Code 5:70-2.9(c), or as amended by the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code. [Amended 2-12-2018 by Ord. No. 330-2018]
Permit Fee
Type 1 $54
Type 2 $214
Type 3 $427
Type 4 $641
C. Inspections of commercial establishments not falling under the statemandated
fees shall be made at least once annually; fees are as follows:
[Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No. 200-2008]
Type Square Footage Registration Fee
A Less than or equal to
2,000
$95
B 2,001 to 5,000 $145
C 5,001 to 10,000 $220
D Equal to or more than
10,001
$275
§ 112-6 RIVER VALE CODE § 112-8
108:310
Type Square Footage Registration Fee
E Apartment/Multifamily $45 per apartment; $850
maximum; $135 minimum
D. Late registration payment penalty shall be assessed on any registration
form which is returned to the Fire Official after 60 days from date of
official mailing, as follows: [Amended 7-14-2008 by Ord. No.
200-2008]
Type A B C D E
Penalty: $95 $145 $220 $275 $45 per unit; $850
maximum; $135 minimum
§ 112-8 FIREARMS § 112-8
108:311

ARTICLE II
Smoke Detectors and Carbon Monoxide Detectors
[Adopted 5-28-1992 by Ord. No. 0-8-92 (Ch. 32, Art. IV of the 1967
Code); amended in its entirety 12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 0-22-03]
§ 112-9. Purpose.
The intent of this article is to require smoke-sensitive alarm devices and
carbon monoxide detectors in certain structures used for residential
purposes in accordance with P.L. 1991, c. 92, as codified at N.J.S.A.
52:27D-192 et seq. and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 112-10. Enforcement.
In accordance with the provisions of P.L. 1991, c. 92, the Fire Prevention
Bureau shall be the enforcing agency for this article.
§ 112-11. Installation required.
§ 112-12. Certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide
detector compliance.
As set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3, before any structure used or intended
to be used for residential purposes by not more than two households is
sold, leased or otherwise subject to a change of occupancy for residential
purposes, the owner shall obtain a certificate of smoke and carbon
monoxide detector compliance (hereinafter "CSDCMAC") from the Fire
Prevention Bureau.
§ 112-13. Application required; inspection.
A. As set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:70:4.19, in all structures used or intended to be
used for residential purposes by not more than two households which
are subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3, smoke detectors
and carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed as follows:
(1) On each level of the premises.
(2) Outside each separate sleeping area.
B. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors, when required by
Subsection A above, shall be located on or near the ceiling in
accordance with National Fire Protection Association Standard 74-1984
and shall be maintained in working order.
C. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors may be AC-powered
or battery-powered and shall be tested and listed by a product
certification agency recognized by the State Bureau of Fire Safety.
A. As set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3, the owner or the authorized agent of
the owner shall apply for a CSDC on a form provided by the Fire
§ 112-9 FIREARMS § 112-13
108:313
§ 112-14. Applicability; finding of hazards.
§ 112-15. Fees. [Amended 3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 101-2005]
§ 112-16. Violations and penalties.
Prevention Bureau, which application shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee as provided hereinbelow.
B. The Fire Prevention Bureau shall inspect the premises for which a
certificate has been requested and, upon a finding that the structure
complies with the requirements of this article, shall issue a CSDC
within 10 business days of the receipt of a completed application and
fee.
A. As set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:70:4.3, the requirements of this article and
N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19 shall apply to all structures used or intended to be
used for residential purposes by not more than two households
regardless of their state of compliance with the Uniform Construction
Code or any other code.
B. As set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.3, nothing contained therein shall be
deemed to prevent the Fire Prevention Bureau from making a finding of
imminent hazard pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.16 or the Construction
Official from making a finding of an unsafe building pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.23 and requiring correction of such hazard or unsafe condition
in accordance with those regulations.
A. Request for a CSDCMAC received more than 10 business days prior to
the change of occupant: $45. [Amended 2-12-2018 by Ord. No.
330-2018]
B. Request for a CSDCMAC received four business to 10 business days
prior to the change of occupant: $90. [Amended 2-12-2018 by Ord.
No. 330-2018]
C. Request for a CSDCMAC received fewer than four business days prior
to the change of occupant: $161. [Amended 2-12-2018 by Ord. No.
330-2018]
D. If a further inspection is necessary, the application fee for said further
inspection shall be $15.
A. An owner who sells, leases, rents or otherwise permits to be occupied
for residential purposes any premises subject to the provisions of P.L.
1991, c. 92, when the premises do not comply with said statute or the
regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be subject to Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, which may be collected and
enforced by the Fire Prevention Bureau by summary proceedings
pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 112-13 RIVER VALE CODE § 112-16
108:314
§ 112-17. Incorporation of other provisions.
The provisions of P.L. 1991, c. 92, and the regulations promulgated
thereunder, as said statute and regulations may be amended from time to
time, are incorporated herein as though set forth at length. In the event of
an inconsistency or conflict between the provisions of this article and the
provisions of said statute or regulations, the provisions of said statute or
regulations shall apply.
B. In case of continuing violations, each day that the violation persists
shall be deemed a separate violation.
C. The violator shall become liable to the Township of River Vale for the
cost of suppressing any fire directly or indirectly resulting from the
violation pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-210.
§ 112-16 FIREARMS § 112-17
108:315
Chapter 123
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 174.
§ 123-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALES — All sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic sale,"
"rummage sale," "barn sale," "flea market sale" or any similar casual sale of
tangible personal property which is advertised by any means whereby the
public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
GOODS — Any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of
being the object of a sale regulated hereunder and which is owned by the
licensee or consigned to him.
OCCUPANT — Owner or lessee of the premises.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
§ 123-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the Township
of River Vale without first filing with the Township Clerk the information
hereinafter specified and obtaining from such Clerk a license so to do, to be
known as "garage sales license." Such filing shall be made at least one week
prior to the requested sale date. No fee shall be charged for such license.
§ 123-3. Conditions of license.
§ 123-4. Information required.
The information to be filed with the Township Clerk pursuant to this chapter
shall be as follows:
A. Such license shall be issued to any one person only twice within a
twelve-month period, and no such license shall be issued for more than
two consecutive calendar days.
B. Each license must be prominently displayed on the premises and visible
from the street upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the
entire period of the licensed sale.
A. Name of person, firm, group, corporation, association or organization
conducting said sale.
§ 112-17 RIVER VALE CODE § 123-4
123:316
§ 123-5. Responsibility of licensee and property owner.
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on
the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such persons shall
permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles
to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such
premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable orders of any member
of the Police or Fire Department of the Township of River Vale in order to
maintain the public health, safety and welfare. All licensed premises shall
at all times be subject to such reasonable rules as may be made from time
to time by the Township Committee of the Township of River Vale and shall
be subject to inspection at all times by the Building Inspector, Chief of
Police and Fire Chief or any of their agents or any other duly authorized
representative of the Township of River Vale.
§ 123-6. Hours of conduct.
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. only.
§ 123-7. Signs.
No signs for advertising or directing customers are to be posted on any
place other than the premises of the applicant. The sign is not to exceed two
by two feet in size and cannot be placed on the premises earlier than one
week prior to the sale and must be removed within 24 hours after the sale
has terminated.
§ 123-8. Restrictions on certain items.
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale mattresses, bed springs,
cots, lounges and sofas in any garage sale authorized under this chapter
without first complying with the appropriate section of N.J.S.A. 26:10-1
through 26:10-18 with respect to the labeling, sterilizing and disinfecting of
said mattresses, bedspring, cots, lounges and sofas.
B. Name or owner or lessee of the property on which said sale is to be
conducted.
C. Location at which sale is to be conducted.
D. Number of days of sale.
E. Date, nature of any past sale.
F. Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
§ 123-4 GARAGE SALES § 123-9
123:317
§ 123-9. Persons and sales excepted.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 123-10. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Construction Code Official. It shall
be the duty of the Construction Code Official to investigate any violations
of this chapter coming to his attention, whether by complaint or arising
from his own personal knowledge; and if a violation is found to exist, he
shall prosecute a complaint before the local Municipal Court pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Police Department
of the Township of River Vale to bring to the attention of the Construction
Code Official for further investigation any violations of this chapter of which
the Police Department becomes aware during the course of its normal
duties.
§ 123-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, association or corporation conducting any such sale or similar
activity without being properly licensed therefor or who shall violate any of
the other terms shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, for each violation. Each day that
such sale shall continue without being duly licensed shall be considered a
separate violation.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement, and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of Chapter 142, Land Use, of the
Code of the Township of River Vale, or under the protection of the
nonconforming use section thereof or any other sale conducted by a
manufacturer, dealer or vendor, which sale would be conducted from
properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited in the
ordinances.
§ 123-9 RIVER VALE CODE § 123-11
123:318
Chapter 128
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
§ 128-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPENDABLE ITEM — Any item used to extinguish any fire or stop or
contain any leak or spill involving any hazardous material which can neither
be reused nor replenished without cost after the particular fire, leak or spill.
Such items include but they are not limited to fire-fighting foam, chemical
extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand, recovery drums and such
specialized protective equipment as acid suits, acid gloves, goggles,
protective clothing and similar items.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as
such under the NFPA Guide of Hazardous Materials and the Department of
Transportation Guide Book.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to a passenger car, motorcycle, truck, tractor
trailer, construction equipment and farm machinery.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box cylinder or tank used to hold or contain
or carry or store any hazardous material.
§ 128-2. Purpose.
§ 128-3. Responsibility for reimbursement.
Reimbursement to the Township of River Vale for expendable items used
shall be made by:
A. This chapter provides for the reimbursement for or the replacement of
the specialized and nonreusable equipment required by state and
federal regulations to be made available by the Township of River Vale
in case of fire, leakage or spillage involving a hazardous material.
B. This chapter entitles the Township of River Vale to reimbursement for
expendable items used by the Township of River Vale or any of its
agencies in extinguishing any fire, stopping or containing any leak or
controlling any spill of hazardous materials.
A. The owner or operator of the vehicle responsible for the fire, leak or
spill of hazardous material.
§ 123-11 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CLEANUP § 128-3
128:319
§ 128-4. Services for which reimbursement is required.
The person or entity responsible for a fire, leak or spill involving a
hazardous material shall reimburse the Township of River Vale the cost of
services rendered by a recovery company, towing company or other person
or firm engaged by the Township of River Vale to handle such incident.
§ 128-5. Time limit for reimbursement by responsible party.
The person or entity responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous
materials shall reimburse the Township of River Vale the costs aforesaid,
together with the full price of expendable items used to extinguish such fire
or to stop or contain such leak or to control such spill, within 45 days after
receipt of a bill therefor.
§ 128-6. Violations and penalties.
The person or entity responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous
material who fails to reimburse the Township of River Vale within the time
required shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, § 1-14.
Chapter 138
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk vehicles — See Ch. 43. Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 47.
§ 138-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR-VEHICLE JUNK BUSINESS OR MOTOR-VEHICLE JUNKYARD —
In addition to any general or special meaning assigned to it, shall include
B. The owner or person responsible for the vessel containing the
hazardous material involved in such fire, leak or spill on public or
private property, whether stationary or in transit and whether
accidental or through negligence.
C. The owner or person responsible for any property from which any leak
or spill of hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or through
negligence.
D. The person responsible for the fire, leak or spill of hazardous material
on public or private property, whether accidental or through
negligence.
§ 128-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 138-1
138:320
and describe any business and/or any place of storage which displays or any
premises whereon there are displayed two or more unregistered used motor
vehicles or used parts of motor vehicles or material which has been a part
of a motor vehicle.[Amended 3-23-1989 by Ord. No. 0-7-89]
PERSON — As used herein, shall include individuals, copartnerships, firms,
associations or corporations. Masculine pronouns shall include either sex
and neuter gender, and words used in the singular shall include the plural.
§ 138-2. License required.
Without having a license for such purpose from the Township Council of
the Township of River Vale, no person shall maintain, operate or conduct or
continue to maintain, operate or conduct, after the passage of this chapter:
§ 138-3. Unlawful operation.
No person, licensed as provided in § 138-2 herein, shall continue to operate,
maintain or conduct any such junk business or junkyard, or to operate,
maintain or conduct any such yard, shop, store, storage lot or other place
of business as specifically referred to in said section, after revocation or
expiration of his license, as hereinafter provided.
§ 138-4. License application procedure. [Amended 8-26-2004 by
Ord. No. 0-9-04]
Any person desiring a license under this chapter shall make written
application to the Township Council for a license to so operate, upon forms
provided by the Township, which application shall be accompanied by a
license fee of $500, which shall be returned to the applicant if the license
is rejected or refused, and retained by the Township if granted. Licenses
shall expire on June 30 of each year, and application for renewals must be
submitted and the annual license fee of $500 paid before May 15 in each
year.
§ 138-5. Credentials required for licensing.
Each applicant for a license shall furnish such information as may be
required by the Township Council and his application shall be accompanied
by:
A. Any motor-vehicle junk business or motor-vehicle junkyard.
B. Any business or place of storage for secondhand or used motor vehicles.
C. Any yard, shop, store, storage lot or other place of business from which
he shall sell or offer or expose for sale, used parts of motor vehicles or
material which has been a part of a motor vehicle.
A. A letter from the Commissioner of Motor Vehicles of the State of New
Jersey, certifying that application has been made to him for a certificate
of recommendation under this chapter, and in his opinion the license so
§ 138-1 JUNKYARDS § 138-5
138:321
§ 138-6. Public hearing.
§ 138-7. License issuance and duration.
Upon the hearing of such application, the Township Council may, in its
discretion, issue or refuse to issue such license. Any license so issued, shall
continue in effect until July 1 next following the date of its issue, unless
revoked as herein provided.
§ 138-8. Revocation of license.
In addition to the penalty provided herein for the violation of § 138-3,
the Township Council may revoke any license granted hereunder for the
violation by the holder thereof, of this or any other ordinance of the
Township, or any state or federal statute, or for conducting or maintaining
such business, or the premises from which the same is conducted, in a
manner not conducive to the health, safety and general welfare of the
public.
sought for the operation of such business should be granted in the
public interest, which letter shall state the Commissioner's reasons for
such recommendation.
B. A letter signed by the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire
Department of the Township of River Vale, certifying that they have
examined the premises for which such license is sought and find that
the granting of the license so requested would be to the best interest of
the Township of River Vale, and that they deem the granting of such
license advisable, having regard to the depreciation of surrounding
property, and the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Said
letter shall further certify that the business so operated and conducted
will constitute no fire hazard and will not encourage or promote the
violation of any law of this state, particularly the statute relating to the
sale of motor vehicles.
A. Upon receipt of the application for such permit, the Township Council
shall hold a public hearing, which hearing shall be not less than two
weeks nor more than four weeks from the date of such application.
Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to the
applicant and published once in a newspaper circulating in the
Township, not less than seven days before the date of such hearing.
B. Each applicant shall pay the cost of such publication and notice.
C. At the time and place fixed for the hearing, the Township Council shall
proceed to consider such application and shall hear any person desiring
to speak for or against the granting of such license, and may continue
or adjourn such hearing to such other time and place as the Township
Council, in its judgment, may see fit.
§ 138-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 138-9
138:322
§ 138-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of § 138-2 or 138-3 hereof shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14,
in the discretion of the Judge before whom such conviction is had.
Chapter 142
LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Affordable housing — See Ch. 43.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 90.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
Satellite antennas — See Ch. 193.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 212.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 218.
Junk vehicles — See Ch. 241.
§ 138-9 JUNKYARDS § 138-9
138:323

Part 1
[Adopted 2-3-1977 ByLOarndd. UNsoe. 0G-e1n-7e7ra(lClyh. 44A Of 1967 Code)]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 142-1. Short title.
This Part 1 shall be known and cited and referred to as the "River Vale Land
Use Ordinance."
§ 142-2. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this Part 1 to implement the intent and
purpose of the Municipal Land Use Law (P.L. 1975, c. 291, also known as
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), as set forth in Article I thereof.
§ 142-3. Definitions.
A. General terms. For the purposes of this Part 1, unless the context
clearly requires a different meaning, the following general terms shall
be construed as follows:
(1) The term "shall" has a mandatory connotation and the term "may"
has a discretionary and permissive connotation.
(2) A term in the singular number includes the plural, and vice versa.
(3) A term in the present, past or future tense includes either of the
other two tenses.
(4) The verb "use" includes the phrase "or designed, intended or
arranged to be used."
(5) The noun "use" shall include the actual or intended occupancy or
other employment of land or of a structure.
(6) The term "person" shall include an individual, firm, joint venture,
association, partnership, syndicate, limited partnership,
corporation, trust and any other form of business organization.
B. Specific terms. The specific terms hereinafter set forth shall have the
following meanings:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or building customarily
subordinate and incidental to the primary use or building on the same
lot.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The person with whom applications for
development are filed pursuant to this Part 1. The administrative officer
for the Joint Planning Board shall be the Clerk to the Joint Planning
Board.
§ 142-1 JUNKYARDS § 142-3
138:325
ADULT DAY CARE — A program offering health and/or social services
designed to enhance the daily lives of the program's participants. The
facilities provide organized group activities designed to strengthen
the participant's involvement in the community.[Added 2-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 0-1-02]
ADULT RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A planned development for
individuals over the age of 55 that does not provide health care to the
residents.[Added 2-28-2002 by Ord. No. 0-1-02]
AGE-RESTRICTED MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT — A multifamily
residential development intended and specifically designed to provide
well-constructed and adequate housing for persons 62 years of age
or older. Each dwelling unit shall consist of complete living
accommodations, including cooking facilities, sleeping
accommodations and individual bathroom facilities. The age-restricted
multifamily development contains dwelling units that are designated
for permanent occupancy by households composed of at least one
permanent resident, who is a head of the household and has attained
an age of 62 years. Occupancy and use are confined accordingly and
consistent with all federal and state standards, laws, rules and
regulations.[Added 5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 249-2011]
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or a structure, a change
or rearrangement of structural parts or existing facilities or any
enlargement or relocation, whether by extension of a front, rear or side
or by increasing in height or in depth or by moving from one location or
position to another.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance or direction
for the issuance of a permit for construction within the bed of a mapped
street or for construction of a structure not having access or not related
to a street.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health to provide apartment-style housing and
congregate dining to four or more individuals unrelated to the
proprietor. Each unit shall, at a minimum, provide one furnished room,
a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the entrance
to each unit.[Added 2-28-2002 by Ord. No. 0-1-02]
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly underground
that has more than 1/2 its interior height, measured from floor to
bottom of floor joists, above the average finished grade of the ground
adjoining the building.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by arches,
columns, piers or walls, including air-supported structures. This term
shall not include recreation vehicles.[Amended 12-22-1997 by Ord.
No. 0-23-97]
§ 142-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-3
138:326
BUILDING AREA — The maximum horizontal projected area of the
building and its accessories. Roofed-over porches or similar extensions
of a building shall be considered parts of the building. Any eave or
similar projection in excess of four inches shall be considered as part of
the building for the computation of side yards and land coverage.
BUILDING COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by
buildings.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The total vertical dimension from the corner
point of the curbline to the highest point of the building, excluding
chimneys, antennas, mechanical equipment and parapet walls not
exceeding four feet in height. For corner properties, the lower elevation
curb center point shall govern. For sites whose existing
(preconstruction) grade at the building footprint is lower than the
governing curbline elevation, the former shall replace the latter in
the calculation. Building height shall be measured from the average
elevation of the existing grade measured at ten-foot intervals around
the outer perimeter of the proposed building footprint, beginning at the
low point.[Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The person or persons duly appointed to
discharge the duties and functions of the office of the Building
Inspector for the Township of River Vale.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal
plane at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the
exterior surface of the building on any side. In the case of a cantilevered
or projected section of a building, the vertical plane will coincide with
the most projected surface.
CATERING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment that provides food
prepared and served in a formal setting for special occasions, such
as weddings, family reunions, corporate award ceremonies, charitable
benefits and other special events and celebrations.[Added 11-27-2017
by Ord. No. 328-2017]
CELLAR — The portion of a building that is partly or completely
underground that has more than 1/2 its interior height, measured from
floor to finished ceiling, below the average finished grade of the ground
adjoining the building.
CERTIFICATE AS TO APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION OF LAND — A
certificate issued by the proper of the Township certifying:
That there is in the Township a duly established Joint Planning
Board.
(1)
That there is in the Township an ordinance controlling the
subdivision of land.
(2)
Whether a subdivision has been approved by the Joint Planning
Board for the land designated in the application for such certificate
(3)
§ 142-3 JUNKYARDS § 142-3
138:327
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.[Added
10-28-1993 by Ord. No. 0-18-93]
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES —
A community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1
et seq., providing food, shelter and personal guidance under such
supervision as required, to not more than 15 persons with head injuries,
who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to live in
the community, and shall include, but not be limited to, group homes,
halfway houses, supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels.
Such a residence shall not be considered a health care facility within
the meaning of N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq. "Person with head injury" means
a person who has sustained an injury, illness or traumatic change to the
skull, the brain contents or its coverings which results in a temporary
or permanent physiological decrease of mental, cognitive, behavioral,
social or physical functioning which causes partial or total disability.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
— A community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
30:11B-1 et seq., providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under
such supervision as required, to not more than 15 developmentally
disabled or mentally ill persons, who require assistance, temporarily
or permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include,
but not be limited to, group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care
facilities, supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels. Such
a residence shall not be considered a health care facility within the
meaning of N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq. In the case of a community
residence housing mentally ill persons, such residence shall have been
approved for a purchase of service contract or an affiliation agreement
pursuant to such procedures as shall be established by regulation of the
Division of Mental Health and Hospitals of the department of Human
Services. "Developmentally disabled person" means a person who is
developmentally disabled as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2, and "mentally
ill person" means a person who is afflicted with a mental disease as
defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-23, but shall not include a person who has been
committed after having been found not guilty of a criminal offense by
reason of insanity or having been found unfit to be tried on a criminal
charge.[Added 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 0-22-97]
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE —
A shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified
pursuant to standards and procedures established by regulation of
the Department of Human Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et
seq., providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal
guidance and other services, to not more than 15 persons who have
been victims of domestic violence, including any children of such
victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to
and, if so, the date of such approval and any extensions and terms
thereof.
§ 142-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-3
138:328
protect their physical or psychological welfare.[Added 11-25-1997 by
Ord. No. 0-22-97]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in Part 9, Zoning, and upon the issuance of an authorization
therefor by the Joint Planning Board.
CONGREGATE CARE APARTMENT HOUSING — Multiunit housing
developments for semi-independent individuals that contains
community social and dining facilities. Each unit shall, at a minimum,
provide a living room/bedroom, private bathroom and kitchenette. The
residents shall be provided at least one hot meal per day, limited
housekeeping services and transportation.[Added 2-28-2002 by Ord.
No. 0-1-02]
CONTINUING CARE — The provision of lodging, nursing, medical or
health-related services at the same or another location to an individual
pursuant to an agreement for the life of the individual or for a period
greater that one year, including mutually terminable contracts, and
in consideration of an entrance fee with or without periodic
charges.[Added 2-28-2002 by Ord. No. 0-1-02]
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A facility
providing lodging, nursing, medical and/or other health-related
services to people of retirement age. The facility shall be required to
maintain a certificate of authority pursuant to the Continuing Care
Retirement Community Regulation and Financial Disclosure Act,
N.J.S.A. 52:27-330 et seq.[Added 2-28-2002 by Ord. No. 0-1-02]
CORNER LOT — A lot that borders two streets or a lot located on
a curved street if the curve constituting the front lot line shall be
convex having a change of direction of more than 45°. A corner lot
bordering two streets shall have two front yards for measurement
purposes.[Added 7-24-2003 by Ord. No. 0-7-03R]
CURB LEVEL — The existing grade of the street in front of the midpoint
of the lot. Where a lot level is higher than the curb level, the average
elevation of the former along the building line may be taken as a base
for measuring the height of a building. Where a lot fronts on two or
more streets of different levels, the curb level of the higher street
may be taken as the base for measuring the height of a building, to a
distance of 100 feet back from the street with the higher curb level.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DECK — An exterior system supported on a least two opposing sides
by an adjoining structure and/or posts, piers or other independent
supports.[Added 7-24-2003 by Ord. No. 0-7-03R]
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
§ 142-3 JUNKYARDS § 142-3
138:329
the holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure
or of any mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the
use of any building or other structure or land, or extension of use of
land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this Part 1.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person,
partnership, association, company or corporation for the improvement
of property as permitted by COAH regulations.[Added 10-28-1993 by
Ord. No. 0-18-93]
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development and the means necessary for water supply preservation or
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGEWAY — The lands required for the installation of stormwater
sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow
of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building designed or occupied as three
or more dwelling units for three or more families living independently
of each other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building designed for and
occupied as a single dwelling unit for one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building designed or occupied
as two dwelling units for two families living independently of each
other.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms constituting the common
cooking, eating, sleeping, sanitary and living facilities for one family.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined
by the Municipal Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure
that all property in the municipality is assessed at the same assessment
ratio or ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of building permit
may be obtained by the Tax Assessor utilizing estimates for
construction cost. Final equalized assessed value will be determined at
project completion by the Municipal Tax Assessor.[Added 10-28-1993
by Ord. No. 0-18-93]
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance, by public utilities or by municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electric, electronic, steam,
water or sewage transmission or distribution systems, including
buildings, poles, wires, antennas, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
§ 142-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-3
138:330
conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service
by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or
for the public health or safety or general welfare.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living privately together as a
single housekeeping unit and using certain rooms and cooking facilities
in common. However, in the event of guests, it shall not include more
than two paying guests.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Joint Planning Board
taken on a preliminarily approved major subdivision or site plan after
all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been
completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been
installed or guaranties properly posted for their completion, or
approval conditioned upon the posting of such guaranties.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision
which is presented to the Joint Planning Board for final approval in
accordance with these regulations and meeting the requirements of
this Part 1 and which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper county
recording officer.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or space accessory to a residence,
designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles and in which no
occupation, business or service is conducted for profit.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or part thereof, other than a private
garage, used for the storage, care or repair of motor vehicles for profit,
including any sale of motor vehicles, fuels or accessories or the keeping
of such vehicles for hire.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, landscaped
areas, driveways, walks and roads.
GROSS FLOOR AREA TOTAL — The sum of the gross horizontal areas
of every floor of a building, measured from the inside face of exterior
walls or from the center line of party or common walls, including:
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office, studio or occupational
room of a physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer, artist, architect, engineer,
(1) Basement space.
Attic space, whether or not a floor has been laid, over which there
is structural headroom of 7 1/2 feet or more.
(2)
Floor space used for mechanical equipment, with structural
headroom of 7 1/2 feet or more.
(3)
(4) Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor.
Roofed porches, breezeways, interior balconies and mezzanines
and penthouses.
(5)
§ 142-3 JUNKYARDS § 142-3
138:331
musician, accountant or real estate and/or insurance broker or agent
residing on the premises when:
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — Any area of the lot improved with
principal and accessory buildings, structures and uses, cement,
concrete, asphalt, macadam or other artificial structure or substance,
and includes rock, wood and other natural substances and any material
which reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land and
which reduces percolation to a rate slower than 120 minutes per inch.
This phrase also includes any overhanging portion of the roof or similar
building component; however, does not include swimming pools, lights
or trees.[Added 7-24-2003 by Ord. No. 0-7-03R]
INDEPENDENT LIVING — A living unit chosen by the resident for
his/her exclusive use in which the resident can function
independently.[Added 2-28-2002 by Ord. No. 0-1-02]
INTERESTED PARTY —
JOINT PLANNING BOARD — The Joint Planning Board of the Township
of River Vale.
JUDGMENT OF REPOSE — A judgment issued by the Superior Court
approving a municipality's plan to satisfy its fair share
obligation.[Added 10-28-1993 by Ord. No. 0-18-93]
LOADING SPACE — Any off-street space available for the loading or
unloading of goods and having direct usable access to the street or
alley.
Such use is conducted entirely within a dwelling which is the bona
fide residence of the principal practitioner.
(1)
Not more than three employees or assistants are engaged on the
premises by the principal practitioner.
(2)
Such use does not occupy more than 35% of the gross floor area of
the dwelling.
(3)
There is no sale or display of goods or advertising other than an
identification sign not to exceed 10 inches in height or 18 inches in
length.
(4)
In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding: any citizen of the State
of New Jersey.
(1)
In an administrative proceeding before a municipal agency: any
person, whether residing within or without the municipality, whose
right to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by any
action taken under this Part 1 or whose right to use, acquire or
enjoy property under this Part 1 or under any law of this state or
of the United States has been denied, violated or infringed upon by
an action or a failure to act hereunder.
(2)
§ 142-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-3
138:332
LONG-TERM CARE/NURSING HOME — A facility providing for a
resident who can no longer function independently and requires
constant supervision and/or medical assistance for
compensation.[Added 2-28-2002 by Ord. No. 0-1-02]
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or
portions by description, as on a subdivision or record of survey map or
by metes and bounds, for purpose of sale, lease or separate use.
LOT AREA — The area of a lot expressed in square feet or acres. Any
portion of a lot included in a street shall not be included in calculating
lot area. However, any portion of a lot or lots dedicated to the Township
for other public use shall not be deducted from the calculation of the lot
area.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
LOT FRONTAGE — The portion nearest the street for the purpose of
determining yard requirement. On corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent
to the street shall be considered frontage.[Amended 7-24-2003 by
Ord. No. 0-7-03R]
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line of a street on which a lot fronts or abuts
the street line. In the case of a through lot, the longest lot line abutting
a street will be considered the front lot line.[Amended 8-24-2009 by
Ord. No. 217-2009]
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line that is not considered a front lot line or
a side lot line.[Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
LOT LINE, SIDE — The lot boundary line that connects a front lot line
with a rear lot line. A lot may only have two side lot lines.[Amended
8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
LOT TYPES —
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines, measured at
right angles to the axis of the lot across the rear of the required front
yard.[Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 0-16-89]
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted
by the Township for the maintenance of improvements required by this
Part 1, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit under
CORNER LOT — A lot located at the junction of two or more
intersecting streets, or a lot located on one curved street if the
curve constituting the front lot line shall be a convex curve having
a change of direction of more than 45°.
(1)
INTERIOR LOT — A lot other than a corner lot, with only one front
lot line.
(2)
THROUGH LOT — A lot other than a corner lot with more than one
front lot line.
(3)
§ 142-3 JUNKYARDS § 142-3
138:333
the circumstances specified in Section 16, P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.5) and cash.[Amended 4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 0-1-93]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the Township which shall
have been duly adopted by the Joint Planning Board.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than
three lots having a depth of not more than 200 feet, fronting on an
existing improved street, not involving any new street or road or the
extension of public facilities and not adversely affecting the
development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and
not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan; Official
Map, Part 9, Zoning, or this Part 8. Conflicts with the provisions or
portions of the Master Plan, Official Map, or Zoning Ordinance may
be determined through submission of a sketch plat of the proposed
development or lot layout to the reviewing land use board for
review.[Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION —
A building and premises designed or used primarily for the sale
at retail of gasoline, oil, grease, tires, batteries or accessories,
together with the furnishing of some or all of the following services
and no others:
The sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries and
distributors and distributor parts.
(a)
(b) Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving.
Replacement or mufflers and tail pipes, water hoses, fan belts,
brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers,
windshield wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel
bearings, mirrors and the like.
(c)
(d) Radiator cleaning and flushing.
Washing, polishing (but not as a primary service as in the case
of an auto laundry or car wash) and sale of automotive washing
and polishing materials.
(e)
(f) Greasing and lubrication.
(g) Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps and lines.
(h) Minor servicing and repair of carburetors.
(i) Emergency wiring repairs.
(j) Adjusting and repairing brakes.
(1)
§ 142-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-3
138:334
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR USE — Any structure, activity or
use that does not conform to regulations of this Part 1 for the district in
which it is located but that was lawfully in existence before the effective
date of this Part 1 or that exists by virtue of a duly granted variance.
NURSING, REST OR CONVALESCENT HOME — A home for aged,
chronically ill or incurable persons, where persons are housed or
lodged and furnished with board and nursing care for compensation.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Such a map shall be deemed
conclusive with respect to the location, width and extent of streets and
other areas shown thereon as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property, of which the lot is a part, which is the subject of
a development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE — An area provided for the loading or
unloading of trucks, being not less than 12 feet wide and 25 feet long,
exclusive of maneuvering space or access drives thereto.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of
a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and approved by the Township to be set aside, dedicated,
Minor motor adjustments not involving the removal of the head
or crankcase or racing the motor.
(k)
The sale of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco and similar
convenience goods for service filling station customers, as
accessory and incidental to principal operation.
(l)
Provision of road maps and other informational material to
customers and provision of rest room facilities to be installed
and maintained in accordance with Board of Health
regulations.
(m)
Uses permissible at a service filling station do not include major
mechanical and body work; straightening of body parts; painting;
welding; storage of automobiles not in operating condition; renting
of automobiles, trucks or trailers; or other work involving noise,
glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater
than normally found in service filling stations. A service filling
station is not a repair garage nor a body shop.
(2)
§ 142-3 JUNKYARDS § 142-3
138:335
designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for
the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining
or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas may be
improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to
the natural openness of the land. It may include common recreation
areas, fields, woodland areas, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, tennis,
squash and similar courts, skiing and skating facilities, nature trails,
lakes and swimming pools, and other similar open space, including
walkways and sidewalks.[Added 5-23-2011 by Ord. No. 249-2011]
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership
or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought
to be developed to commence and maintain proceedings to develop the
same under this Part 1.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of a
motor vehicle, provided that such space shall have a minimum width
of nine feet and a minimum depth of 19 feet, exclusive of maneuvering
areas, passageways, driveways and loading spaces appurtenant
thereto.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — Any applicant for development,
the owners of the subject property and all owners of property and
government agencies entitled to notice under this Part 1.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted
by the Township, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of
credit under the circumstances specified in Section 16, P.L. 1991, c. 256
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5) and cash.[Amended 4-22-1993 by Ord. No.
0-1-93]
PERMIT, BUILDING — A certificate issued by the Building Inspector for
the construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or repair of a
building upon approval of the submitted application and plans.
PERMIT, CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A certificate
issued by the Building Inspector upon completion of the construction
of a new building or addition or upon a change in the occupancy
of a building, other than a dwelling unit as defined in this Part 1,
which certifies that all requirements of this Part 1, or such adjustments
therefrom which have been granted by the Joint Planning Board, have
been met and that the purpose for which a building or land is to be used
is in conformance with the uses permitted and all other requirements
under this Part 1 for the zone in which it is located or is to be located.
PERMIT, SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A certificate issued by the Building
Inspector for the conduct of a special use which states that the
requirement governing special uses in this Part 1 and all other
applicable requirements have been complied with as certified by the
Joint Planning Board.
PLAN — The written and graphic provisions for development of a
development, including a plat of a subdivision; all covenants relating
§ 142-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-3
138:336
to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures; intensity
of use or density of development; public and private streets, ways
and parking facilities; common open space; and public facilities. The
phrase "provisions of the plan," when used in this section, shall mean
the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition, the
developer’s agreement, the minutes and resolutions of the Joint
Planning Board, the application and the plan itself.[Added 5-23-2011
by Ord. No. 249-2011]
PLAT — The map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Rights conferred pursuant to law and this
Part 1 prior to final approval after specific elements of a development
plan have been agreed upon by the Joint Planning Board and applicant.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision, which is submitted to the Secretary of the
Joint Planning Board for its consideration and tentative approval and
meeting the requirements of this Part 1.
PRIMARY USE — A principal use permitted in the district.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building that is used or designed to be used
for the primary use of the lot on which said building is situated.
PUBLIC UTILITY — As herein used, this term shall have the meaning
set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
QUADPLEX — Four attached dwellings in one building in which each
unit has at least three outside exposures, shares common walls with
an adjoining unit and is either above or below another unit.[Added
4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 332-2018]
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of the Joint
Planning Board or the Township Council.
RECREATION VEHICLE — A self-propelled or towed vehicle equipped
to serve as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or
travel purposes and is used solely as a family or personal
conveyance.[Added 12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 0-23-97]
RESIDENTIAL/GOLF COURSE DEVELOPMENT — A development that
includes both attached residential housing and an eighteen-hole
regulation golf course. The residential/golf course development must
contain both the attached housing and the eighteen-hole regulation golf
course. Standards for residential/golf course development as contained
in § 142-224A(1) must be met.[Added 4-9-2018 by Ord. No.
332-2018]
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which
food and beverages are sold for consumption within the principal
structure and in which all service and consumption take place within
an enclosed building. A snack bar or refreshment stand accessory to
a public, semipublic or private swimming pool, playground, playfield,
park or like recreational facility is not included within the meaning
§ 142-3 JUNKYARDS § 142-3
138:337
of the term "restaurant" if such bar or stand is operated by or with
the approval of the agency operating the recreational facility and is
primarily for the convenience of patrons of the facility.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where patrons are served
food, soft drinks, ice cream and similar confections primarily for
consumption on the premises but other than in the principal structure.
RETAINING WALL — A structure designed for the separation of varying
ground levels.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL OR BUSINESS — A training institution
operated on a profit or nonprofit basis, offering instruction in
stenographic, secretarial, accounting, data processing and related
skills associated with the conduct of a commercial business or
administrative office.
SCHOOL, TRADE OR VOCATIONAL — A training institution operated
on a profit or nonprofit basis, offering instruction and/or experience
training to students, journeymen, apprentices or comparable categories
of persons in the operation of industrial, construction or electronics
machinery or equipment, construction, trades or similar skills.
SETBACK, FRONT — The distance in feet from the street line to the
nearest portion of the principal building.
SETBACK, REAR — The distance in feet from the rear lot line to the
nearest portion of the principal building.
SETBACK, SIDE — The distance in feet from the side lot line to the
nearest portion of the principal building.
SIGN — Any device, whether or not permanent, mobile or portable,
structure or object that provides visual communication to others, but
not including:
SIGN, AREA OF — The area included within the frame or edge of the
sign and comprising all of the display surfaces of the sign. Where the
Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only
property numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of
premises or other identification of premises not having commercial
connotations.
(1)
Flags, signs and insignia of any government, public, semipublic,
civic, political, charitable or religious groups, except when
displayed in connection with any commercial promotion.
(2)
Legal notices and identification, informational or directional signs
erected or required by governmental bodies.
(3)
Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights.
(4)
Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property,
but bearing no advertising matter.
(5)
§ 142-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-3
138:338
sign has no such frame or edge, the area shall be defined by an enclosed
four-sided (straight sides) geometric shape which most closely outlines
said sign.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown:
STORY — That part of a building between a floor and the floor above
or, in its absence, the ceiling or roof above. A story extending less than
three feet above the building line shall not be counted in determining
the number of stories. A story, the floor of which is below the building
line and which extends to more than three feet above the building line
shall be counted as that fraction of a story that the section above the
building line bears to the height of the entire story. Any story under
a pitched roof at the top of a building, the floor of which is not more
than two feet below the plate, shall be counted as a half-story when not
more than 60% of the floor area is used for rooms; otherwise, it shall be
counted as that fraction of a story which its floor area in rooms bears to
the entire floor area of that floor.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway; or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way on
a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording
officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to
such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the land between
the street lines whether improved or unimproved and may comprise
pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas
within the street lines. For the purpose of this Part 1, "streets" shall be
classified as follows:
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage,
floodplains, marshes and waterways.
(1)
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices.
(2)
Any other information required by this Part 1 that may be
reasonably required in order to make an informed determination
pursuant to this Part 1.
(3)
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major system of arterial streets, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets
for circulation within such a development.
(2)
§ 142-3 JUNKYARDS § 142-3
138:339
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a street; the front
lot line.
STRUCTURE — An assembly or combination of materials forming a
construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation, including, among
others, and without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing,
buildings, stadiums, meeting or circus tents, reviewing stands,
platforms, stagings, observation towers, radio and television towers
and antennae, water tanks, trestles, piers, wharves, open sheds, coal
bins, shelters, fences, nonportable flagpoles, swimming pools and signs,
whether installed on, above or below the surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this Part 1 to effect a subdivision of land hereunder
for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or
development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within
the meaning of this Part 1 if no new streets are created: divisions
of land found by the Joint Planning Board or subdivision committee
thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes
where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size; divisions of
property by testamentary or intestate provisions; divisions of property
upon court order; and conveyances so as to combine existing lots by
deed or other instrument. The term "subdivision" shall also include the
term "resubdivision."
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by COAH
approving a municipality's housing element and fair share plan in
accordance with the provisions of the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq., and the regulations promulgated thereunder. A
grant of substantive certification shall be valid for a period of six years
in accordance with the terms and conditions contained therein.[Added
10-28-1993 by Ord. No. 0-18-93]
SWIMMING POOL — A body of water artificially constructed in whole
or in part, having a depth at any point of more than 18 inches, whether
above, below or level with the ground or area surrounding it and
designed, established, constructed, maintained or used as an accessory
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to
the abutting properties.
(3)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Streets which are parallel with
and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide
access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
(4)
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise
abutting on a street.
(5)
§ 142-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-3
138:340
use to a residence for the private swimming, bathing or wading
purposes of a person, the members of his household or their guests.
TOWNHOUSE — An attached one-family dwelling in a row of at least
two units, each with its own front and rear access to the outside and
each separated from any other unit by no more than two common
walls.[Added 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 332-2018]
USE — The principal purpose for which land or a structure is designed,
arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
YARD, FRONT — That unoccupied portion of a lot, tract or parcel of
land which fronts upon a public street between the street line and the
buildings.[Amended 7-24-2003 by Ord. No. 0-7-03R]
YARD, REAR — An open space on the same lot as the principal building,
extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear lot line
and the rear building line.
YARD, SIDE — An open space between the side line of the lot and the
side building line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
§ 142-3 JUNKYARDS § 142-3
138:341

ARTICLE II
Joint Planning Board
[Added 3-13-2017 by Ord. No. 320-201740]
§ 142-4. Establishment; composition.
§ 142-5. Terms.
A. There is hereby established a new board which shall be known as the
Joint Planning Board consisting of nine regular members and two
alternate members. The regular membership shall consist of the
following four classes:
(1) Class I: the Mayor.
(2) Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member
of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor.
(3) Class III: a member of the governing body, to be appointed by it.
(4) Clash IV: six other citizens of the municipality, to be appointed by
the Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal
office, except that one may be a member of the Board of Education.
B. The alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be
designated as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Alternate
members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not
vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of
any class.
A. The term of the Class I member shall correspond with his/her official
tenure.
B. The terms of the Class II and Class III members shall be for one year or
shall terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office,
whichever occurs first.
C. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever he/she is no longer a member of
such other body or at the completion of his/her Class IV term,
whichever occurs first.
D. Members of the Joint Planning Board holding office on the effective date
of this Part 1 shall continue in office until completion of their terms as
provided by prior law.
E. The terms of the first Class IV members appointed to the Joint Planning
Board as reconstituted pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.) shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent,
40.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Planning Board, as amended,
and provided for the amendment of all references to the Township Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment to "Joint Planning Board."
§ 142-4 JUNKYARDS § 142-5
138:343
§ 142-6. Vacancies.
Vacancies in any class occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall
be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 142-7. Organization.
The Joint Planning Board shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
from the members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a
member of the Joint Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by
it.
§ 142-8. Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Joint Planning Board Attorney. The
Board may annually appoint and fix the compensation or agree upon the
rate of compensation of the Board Attorney, who shall be an attorney other
than the Township Attorney.
§ 142-9. Experts and staff.
The Joint Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of
experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board
shall not, however, exceed, exclusive of gifts, grants or applicants' payment
under § 142-33, the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use.
§ 142-10. Powers and duties generally.
The Joint Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its
procedures. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first
four years after their appointment and so that no more than two Class
IV members are reappointed in any one calendar year, except as
necessary to fill vacancies. The terms of all Class IV members appointed
thereafter shall be for periods of four years.
F. The terms of each alternate member shall be two years, except that the
initial terms of Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2 shall be one and two
years, respectively.
G. All terms shall commence on January 1 of the year in which the
appointment is made.
A. To act, pursuant to the powers granted to Planning Boards by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-25.
B. To make and adopt, and from time to time amend, a Master Plan for the
physical development of the municipality, which Master Plan shall
include the specific policy statement referred to in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28d.
§ 142-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-10
138:344
§ 142-11. Bylaws, rules and regulations.
The Joint Planning Board is hereby authorized to adopt such bylaws, rules
and regulations not inconsistent with this Part 1 as may be necessary to
carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this Part 1.
§ 142-12. Administrative officer.
For purposes of administration of this Part 1, the following officer is
designated as administrative officer to the Joint Planning Board: the Clerk
of the Joint Planning Board. Such officer shall have the powers and duties
C. To administer the provisions of Part 8, Subdivision of Land, and Part 6,
Site Plan Review.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
F. To prepare annually a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and to recommend the same to the governing body.
G. To consider and report to the governing body, within 35 days after
referral, on any proposed development regulation submitted to it and to
pass upon other matters specifically referred to it by the governing
body.
H. To act, pursuant to the powers granted to Boards of Adjustment by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, except that Class I and Class III members shall not
participate in the consideration of applications for development which
involve relief pursuant to Subdivision d of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
I. To grant conditional uses in accordance with the provisions of this Part
1.
J. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officers.
K. To administer the provisions of Part 7, Soil Removal.
L. To administer the provisions of ordinances and laws relating to planned
unit developments.
M. To exercise such powers and duties as the Joint Planning Board may be
given under Part 9, Zoning.
N. To administer the provisions of such other ordinances and laws as may
require review, report or other action.
§ 142-10 JUNKYARDS § 142-12
138:345
provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and by the ordinances of the Township
of River Vale adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 142-13. (Reserved)
§ 142-12 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-13
138:346
ARTICLE III
(RESERVED)41
§ 142-14. through § 142-23. (Reserved)
41.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Board of Adjustment, as amended, was repealed 3-13-2017
by Ord. No. 320-2017.
§ 142-14 JUNKYARDS § 142-14
138:347

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 142-24. Enforcement by Building Inspector.
The provisions of this Part 1 shall be administered and enforced by the
Building Inspector of the Township or his designated assistant. In no case
shall a permit be granted for the construction, alteration, occupancy or use
of any building or other structure if the proposed construction, alteration,
occupancy or use thereof would be in violation of any provision in this Part
1. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector or his designated assistant
to cause any building or other structure, plans or premises to be inspected
or examined and to order in writing the remedying of any conditions found
to exist in violation of any provisions of this Part 1. He shall have the right
to enter any building or premises during reasonable daytime hours in the
course of his duties. It shall also be the duty of the members of the Police,
Fire and Public Works Department and the Board of Health to report to the
Building Inspector any violations they may observe.
§ 142-24 JUNKYARDS § 142-24
138:349

ARTICLE V
Permits and Certificates
§ 142-25. Issuance; effect on permits issued pursuant to other
ordinances.
All permits and certificates required under this Part 1 shall be issued by
the Building Inspector unless the provisions of this Part 1 expressly direct
their issuance by another person or agency. No permit or certificate issued
pursuant to this Part 1 shall be deemed to be in lieu of or to supersede
any permit or certificate required under Chapter 90, Construction Codes,
Uniform, or under the applicable provision of any other board, body or
agency of the federal, state, county or Township government.
§ 142-26. Issuance of permits conditioned upon site plan approval.
No building or zoning permit shall be issued for the construction of any
new building, the alteration, addition to or change in use of an existing
building, a conditional use or use or building permitted by a variance
or a nonconforming use unless, when so required, a site plan shall have
first been approved by the Joint Planning Board in accordance with the
terms of this Part 1, provided that site plan review shall not be required
for the construction, alteration or relocation of a single-family residence,
including single-family accessory uses, whether permitted by law or by
variance, in any district, except in cases of a change in use from singlefamily
residential. A home professional use, if permitted by this Part 1, shall
not be deemed a change in use or require site plan review, unless a variance
is also required in connection therewith.
§ 142-27. Certificate of occupancy. [Amended 1-1-1996 by Ord. No.
0-27-95]
A. Certificate required before occupancy. No person shall occupy, rent,
lease, sublet, transfer title to or suffer the occupancy of, the letting of or
allow any person to live in or upon, inhabit as a tenant or tenants or
occupants or to occupy as a new owner or cotenants or co-owner any
dwelling house or houses or dwelling units, within the confines of the
Township of River Vale, unless and until that person shall have first
obtained from the Construction Official or his agent of the Township of
River Vale a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of demolition and a
permit authorizing any of the foregoing when any of the foregoing shall
take place subsequent to February 1, 1996. When a certificate of
demolition is obtained, the building shall remain unoccupied.
B. New occupancy or reoccupancy. The provisions of Subsection A shall
apply with equal force and effect to any and all new and additional
lettings, tenancies, transfers of title of premises or any part thereof and
occupancies of any dwelling house or houses or dwelling units, within
the Township, upon vacating of same, whether the reoccupancy is by
virtue of transfer of title of the dwelling house or houses or dwelling
§ 142-25 JUNKYARDS § 142-27
138:351
unit or dwelling units or by virtue of rental of any of the foregoing
or by virtue of any other action not specifically herein enumerated.
The foregoing requirements for Subsections A and B shall be effective
whether the occupancy, rental, lease or transfer of title is temporary,
seasonal or permanent or whether or not for a consideration.
C. Definitions; applicability.
(1) As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING HOUSE AND UNIT — Includes but is not limited to
any one-family dwelling, all apartments or portions of apartments
in any apartment house or apartment structure and any rooms in
a motel, hotel or other place of public accommodation. The term
shall also include a unit in a condominium or cooperative.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, holding
company, foreign corporation, limited liability company or any
other entity, whether or not incorporated in this or any other state
or country, including any real estate broker or real estate agent or
any representative, servant or employee of the foregoing.
(2) This section shall apply to each and every dwelling house as
aforesaid and to each and every dwelling unit as aforesaid within
the Township and shall include all single and multiple dwellings
and premises on which a building is located and is used for human
occupancy.
D. Rooming houses exempt. Licensed rooming houses that are annually
examined and licensed by the Township shall be exempt from the rental
portions of this section only, provided that they keep an accurate
register giving true names and addresses of all persons occupying any
rooms for any period of time.
E. Effect on other municipal ordinances. Nothing contained in this section
shall exempt any of the dwellings or buildings or parts of buildings
covered by this section from full and complete compliance with any
other provisions of any other ordinance or ordinances of the Township
of River Vale, as the same may be applicable.
F. Application for certificate.
(1) Prior to the rental, transfer of title or occupancy of any dwelling
house or houses or any dwelling unit or units provided for in this
section, application for a certificate of occupancy permitting
occupancy shall be made, in writing, to the Construction Official or
his agent of the Township by that person, persons, firm or
corporation, agent, servant or representative, as set forth in
Subsection A, and consent shall be given therewith unto the
Construction Official or his agent to enter upon and examine the
dwelling house or houses and dwelling unit or units and the
§ 142-27 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-27
138:352
building or buildings wherein the same may be situate, for which
the application is applied for.
(2) All applications for such certificates, as aforesaid, shall be made in
writing and shall state the name and address of the owner of the
dwelling house or houses, the dwelling unit or units and the
building or structure wherein the same may be situate; and the
name and address of the owner-occupant or tenant-occupant or any
other occupant of the same; and also the name and address, if a
sale or transfer of title, of the seller, transferor, buyer and the new
proposed owner-occupant or any-other-purposes occupant; and
shall further state the name and address of the renting or sales
agent, if any, and shall describe the premises to be occupied,
including the street address thereof, and a designation of the
portion or portions of the premises or structures for which the
specific application is being made and the specific room or rooms in
the premises to be occupied for sleeping purposes and the number
of persons to occupy each sleeping room.
G. Inspections.
(1) The Construction Official or his agent shall conduct an inspection
of the premises in question, to ensure compliance with applicable
municipal ordinances and rules and regulations affecting the use
and occupation of all such dwelling houses and dwelling units and
structures. The inspection shall also require compliance with, but
not limited to, the following regulations:
(a) Flue connections are properly sealed.
(b) Sump pumps are not connected to the sewer.
(c) All electrical outlets, switches and panel boxes are properly
covered.
(d) Relief valves from boilers and water heaters are properly
piped.
(e) All plumbing fixtures are in working order.
(f) Pools are properly fenced.
(g) There are rails on all interior stairs of more than two risers.
(h) Exterior rails must be properly secured.
(i) Property must not be in violation of Chapter 181, Property
Maintenance.
(j) The property is being used for the use it is zoned.
(2) No certificate of occupancy permitting occupancy shall be issued
unless there is full and complete compliance with all of the
§ 142-27 JUNKYARDS § 142-27
138:353
foregoing, unless otherwise specified, in writing, by the
Construction Official or his agent.
H. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person, persons, partnership, firm, corporation, holding
company, foreign corporation, limited liability company or any
other entity, whether or not incorporated in this or any other state
or country, including any real estate broker or real estate agent or
any representative, servant or employee of any of the foregoing,
who in any manner knowingly fails to fully comply with the terms
and covenants of the within section and who is part of any
transaction resulting in the violations of any of the terms and
provisions of the within section shall be deemed to have violated
the terms and provisions of the within section and is subject to the
penalties provided in this revised section for violation of the same,
unless and until a certificate of occupancy permitting occupancy as
aforesaid shall have been issued.
(2) All violations of this section by any person or persons, partnership,
firm or corporation or any agents or servants or representatives, as
provided herein, whether the person is the owner of the premises,
the agent of any party as aforesaid or the tenant or the occupant or
occupants, shall be deemed separate and distinct violations for
each and every day that said violations may continue, and all
parties violating this section shall be deemed jointly and severally
liable for any and all such violations. For each and every violation
committed, in violation of this section, violators shall be subject to
the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article I, § 1-14.
I. Issuance by Construction Official; fees. A certificate of occupancy
permitting occupancy to be issued under the terms of this section shall
be issued solely by the Construction Official or his agent without the
necessity of approval therefor by the governing body of the Township of
River Vale. The fee for issuance of such certificate, as provided for
herein, shall be the sum of $100. [Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No.
0-9-04]
J. Compliance with ordinances required. All buildings or structures or
dwelling houses or dwelling units for which application shall have been
filed by virtue of this section shall fully comply with all other municipal
ordinances or requisite municipal requirements for the structures or
units. The Construction Official or his agent shall be required to specify
the corrections to be made to the premises for the certificate to be
issued.
K. Notification when inspection may be made. All owners or renting
agents of real estate or person or persons applying for a certificate, as
provided herein, shall advise the Construction Official or his agent of a
reasonable time or times that the inspection may be made and have
someone present to assist and provide entry for the inspection
§ 142-27 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-27
138:354
§ 142-28. Issuance of certificates conditioned upon site plan
approval.
Except as herein expressly provided, no certificate of use and occupancy
shall be issued for any new building, for any addition or alteration to an
existing building or for any change in the kind or character of the use unless
the building and its appurtenances conform in all respects to an approved
site plan or an approved amendment to an approved site plan. A substantial
change in the kind or character of occupancy of an existing building shall
require site plan approval, except if the change is to one-family residential.
§ 142-29. Additional approvals and compliance required.
Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 142-26 and 142-28 of this article, no
building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued:
§ 142-30. Records.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to keep records of all
applications for permits and certificates of use and occupancy which he
countersigns, together with a notation of all special conditions involved. He
shall file and safely keep copies of all plans and applications submitted.
They shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be available
for the use of the Township Council and of other officials of the Township.
The Building Inspector shall prepare monthly reports for the Township
Council, summarizing all permits issued and certificates countersigned, all
complaints of violations and the action taken thereon. A copy of each such
report shall be filed with the Tax Assessor at the same time it is filed with
Township Council.
purposes. The Construction Official or his agent shall comply with the
request and application within 10 working days after entry is provided
and, when proper, shall issue the certificate upon approval.
L. Compliance with procedures required. No tenant, owner or occupant
shall sublease, sublet, transfer title (except as heretofore provided),
permit the use or the occupancy of the dwelling house, dwelling unit or
structure provided for herein without following the procedures set forth
and required by the within section, nor shall any real estate broker or
agent or representative of any of the foregoing permit any violation of
this section.
A. Unless the provisions of the County Planning Law have been complied
with, if applicable.
B. Without the approval of the Board of Health of the Township of River
Vale, when required by law or ordinance.
C. Without the approval of such other governmental bodies as may be
required under state, federal and municipal laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
§ 142-27 JUNKYARDS § 142-30
138:355

ARTICLE VI
Meetings
§ 142-31. General requirements.
§ 142-32. Minutes.
Minutes of every meeting shall be kept and shall include the names of the
persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the persons appearing
by attorney or by agent, the action taken by the Board, the findings, if any,
made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office
of the Township Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may
be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes in accordance with the fee
schedule of this Part 1.
A. Meetings of the Joint Planning Board shall be scheduled not less
frequently than once a month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be
held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for
development to process.
B. Special meetings of the Joint Planning Board may be called by the
Board's Chairman and shall be called at the request of any two Board
members. Such meetings shall be held on notice to the members and
the public in accordance with law.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting unless a quorum shall be
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of a quorum, except as
otherwise required by any provision of this Part 1 or of law.
E. All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open Public
Meetings Law (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6).
§ 142-31 JUNKYARDS § 142-32
138:357

ARTICLE VII
Fees and Deposits; Applications
[Amended 8-17-1978 by Ord. No. 0-10-78; 10-19-1978 by Ord. No.
0-14-78; 2-23-1984 by Ord. No. 0-2-84; 5-24-1984 by Ord. No.
0-10-84; 2-27-1986 by Ord. No. 0-3-86; 3-24-1988 by Ord. No.
0-5-88; 4-26-1990 by Ord. No. 0-6-90; 9-26-1991 by Ord. No.
0-19-91; 10-28-1993 by Ord. No. 0-18-9342]
§ 142-33. Fees.
A. An applicant for a building permit for the construction of a new singlefamily
dwelling shall pay with the application the following trust
account fees, upon issuance of a building permit: [Added 7-14-1994
by Ord. No. 0-9-94]
(1) Engineering review of a site plan: $250.
(2) Engineering review prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy:
$250.
B. The following is a fee schedule for the payment of fees and costs for
land development within the Township of River Vale, and the following
fee schedule shall replace all similar applicable fees in various existing
ordinances of the Township of River Vale heretofore in effect. The fees
and deposits hereinafter provided for shall be applicable to the Joint
Planning Board in acting on the applications hereinafter described, as
follows:
(1) Minor subdivision involving a division or assemblage of lots:
(a) Filing fee: $120.
(b) Deposit for costs: $400.
(2) Minor subdivision involving boundary line alteration or relocation:
(a) Filing fee: $100.
(b) Deposit for costs: $250.
(3) Major subdivision:
(a) Sketch plat:
[1] Filing fee: $200.
[2] Deposit for costs: $2,500.
(b) Preliminary approval:
[1] Filing fee: $100, plus $10 per resulting lot.
42.Editor’s Note: This ordinance was repealed 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 147-2006.
§ 142-33 JUNKYARDS § 142-33
138:359
[2] Deposit for costs: $500, plus $100 per resulting lot.
(c) Final approval:
[1] Filing fee: none.
[2] Deposit for costs: $1,250.
[3] Upon submittal of bond estimate, such additional deposit
for costs as incurred, not to exceed 7% of the estimated
cost of improvements or of the cost of anticipated
expenses as estimated by the Township Engineer,
whichever is greater.
(4) Major site plan and conditional use applications:
(a) Preliminary approval:
[1] Filing fee: $350.
[2] Deposit for costs: $2,500, together with such amount as
shall be determined by the Joint Planning Board to be
necessary to defray the costs of any engineering, legal,
planning, traffic, drainage, hydraulic or other special
studies or expenses as may be incurred by the Township in
the course of the application.
(b) Final approval:
[1] Filing fee: $125.
[2] Deposit for costs: $1,500.
[3] Upon submittal of bond estimate, such additional deposit
for costs as incurred, not to exceed 7% of the estimated
cost of improvements or of the cost of anticipated
expenses as estimated by the Township Engineer,
whichever is greater.
(5) Minor site plan, amended site plan and applications for changes in
use or occupancy:
(a) Filing fee: $125.
(b) Deposit for costs: $250, together with such amount as may be
determined by the Joint Planning Board to defray the cost of
professional services or special studies required by the
Township.
(6) Concept plan or other informal review:
(a) Filing fee: none.
(b) Deposit for costs: none (such other amount to be deposited as
the Joint Planning Board may determine necessary to defray
§ 142-33 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-33
138:360
the anticipated cost of professional services or special studies
required by the application).
(7) Part 9, Zoning, amendment:
(a) Filing fee: $250.
(b) Deposit for costs: $1,500, together with such other amount as
the Joint Planning Board may determine necessary to defray
necessary professional expenses or special studies incurred by
the Township, including the remapping of districts, zone
boundary line changes or other similar expenses.
(8) Use variance:
(a) Filing fee: $350.
(b) Deposit for costs: $1,500.
(9) Variance, other than use, sign, access, nonconforming use or lot
area:
(a) Filing fee: $80.
(b) Deposit for costs: $120.
(10) Variance, lot area:
(a) Filing fee: $100.
(b) Deposit for costs: $150.
(11) Variance, sign:
(a) Filing fee: $80.
(b) Deposit for costs: $120.
(12) Variance, access:
(a) Filing fee: $100.
(b) Deposit for costs: $400.
(13) Variances ancillary to Joint Planning Board jurisdiction:
(a) Filing fee: no additional fee.
(14) Any other application to the Joint Planning Board:
(a) Filing fee: $125.
(b) Deposit for costs: $300.
(15) Photocopying of minutes/maps: $0.25 per page.
§ 142-33 JUNKYARDS § 142-33
138:361
(16) Mailing copies of decisions, in addition to photocopying charges:
$1.
(17) Furnishing list of owners entitled to notice: $10.
(18) (Reserved)43
(19) Zoning permit, issued by Zoning Officer: $25. [Added 3-23-1995
by Ord. No. 0-7-95]
C. Deposit for costs. All deposits shall be on account of such engineering,
inspection, legal, advertising and other costs as may be incurred by the
Board in connection with any application up to the point of final action
thereon by the Board. Prior to final action on any application, the
Township Administrator shall compute all engineering, inspection,
legal, advertising, recording and other costs actually incurred by the
Board in connection with the application up to the point of final action.
If the aggregate amount of such costs shall exceed the deposit for costs,
the applicant shall, on demand, immediately post the amount of such
excess. If the aggregate amount of such costs shall be less than the
deposit for costs, the excess shall be refunded to the applicant, except
for balances under $5, which shall not be returnable.
D. Complete applications. No land use application shall be deemed
complete until the fees and deposits for costs required by this Part 1
shall have been paid to the Township. No final action on any application
shall be taken by the Board having jurisdiction until the required
deposits for costs have been brought up to date, as determined by the
Township Administrator. No return of excess costs, fees, interest on
bonds or any other payment shall be made to an applicant until the
Township Administrator has certified that the required cost deposits
have been made in full, pursuant to this Part 1.
E. Additional special studies. If, upon or after acceptance of an
application, the Joint Planning Board finds that professional, expert or
special services or studies are required in order to evaluate, process or
decide a pending application, including engineering, planning, traffic,
hydraulic, legal, environmental or drainage studies or services, and that
the deposit for costs initially provided will be inadequate to meet such
costs, each is empowered to require the applicant to pay for such costs
and to deposit with the municipality such additional sums as the Board
estimates will be necessary to pay the costs of such services or studies.
F. Responsibility of owner. In the event that the amount of costs for
processing any application for development shall exceed the deposits
for said costs, and if the applicant withdraws his application or fails to
pay the amount of such excesses, the payment for such excesses shall
immediately become the responsibility of the owner(s) of the subject
43.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(18), pertaining to soil moving applications, was
deleted 2-18-2006 by Ord. No. 142-2006.
§ 142-33 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-33
138:362
property, and the amount of such excesses shall constitute a first lien
thereon.
G. Fee for Tax Map revision. Within 30 days of final approval of any minor
or major subdivision, the applicant shall pay to the Township of River
Vale Trust Account (escrow deposits) a fee of $50 per proposed lot for
the purpose of updating and amending the Township Tax Map to reflect
any necessary changes occasioned by said subdivision. Within 30 days
of final approval of any site plan for condominiums, patio homes,
townhouses and/or multifamily units, the applicant shall pay to the
Township of River Vale Trust Account (escrow deposits) a fee of $10 per
proposed unit for the purpose of updating and amending the Township
Tax Map to reflect any necessary changes occasioned by said site plan.
H. Appeals. [Added 8-22-1996 by Ord. No. 0-7-96(R)]
(1) Appeals of decisions of the administrative officer to the Joint
Planning Board.
(a) Filing fee shall be $125.
(b) Deposit for costs shall be $400.
(2) Deposit for costs; refund to successful appellant.
(a) Where a decision of an administrative officer is, on appeal,
reversed by the Joint Planning Board, the deposit for costs
shall be returned to the appellant.
(b) This section does not affect any additional deposits that are
required by the ordinances of the Township of River Vale or
laws of the State of New Jersey.
I. Exemption from fees for developments to aid disabled persons. [Added
10-22-1998 by Ord. No. 0-13-98]
(1) Definition. "Disabled person" means a person who has the total and
permanent inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by
reason of any medically determinable physical or mental
impairment, including blindness, and shall include, but not be
limited to, any resident of this state who is disabled pursuant to the
Federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 416) or the federal Railroad
Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. § 231 et seq.), or is rated as
having a 60% disability or higher pursuant to any federal law
administered by the United States Veterans' Act. For purposes of
this subsection, "blindness" means central visual acuity of 20/200
or less in the better eye with the use of correcting lens. An eye
which is accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision such that
the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater
than 20° shall be considered as having a central visual acuity of 20/
200 or less.
§ 142-33 JUNKYARDS § 142-33
138:363
§ 142-34. (Reserved)44
§ 142-35. Responsibility of owner. [Added 8-17-1978 by Ord. No.
0-10-78; amended 2-23-1984 by Ord. No. 0-2-84]
In the event that the amount of costs for processing any application for
development shall exceed the deposits for said costs and if the applicant
withdraws his application or fails to pay the amount of such excesses, the
payment for such excesses shall immediately become the responsibility of
the owner(s) of the subject property, and the amount of such excesses shall
constitute a first lien thereon.
§ 142-36. Builder's agreement.
(2) A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled person, is
exempt from the payment of any fee charged under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8 in connection with any application for development which
promotes accessibility to his own living unit.
J. Fees for the purchase of Land Use books. [Added 3-14-2005 by Ord.
No. 101-2005]
(1) To purchase Land Use book in person: $55.
(2) To purchase Land Use book by mail $60.
A. In any case involving the extension of municipal facilities, the
installation of public improvements or the performance of special
conditions and agreements between the applicant and the municipality,
including special conditions for the preservation of trees, protection of
existing natural resources or natural features, protection against other
environmental damage, promotion of good civic design and
arrangements or other provisions to carry out the purposes set forth in
Article I of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2, prior to the
granting of final approval, the issuance of a building or construction
permit or the commencement of construction or prior to the installation
of any improvements or commencement of operations, whichever is
first to occur, a builder's agreement shall be entered into between the
owner, subdivider, developer and/or applicant and the Joint Planning
Board and Township Council. Said agreement shall specifically detail all
items of public improvements to be performed, the amounts of bonds to
be furnished, other requirements of the Joint Planning Board and all
other items as agreed and stipulated between the parties. Said
agreement shall be prepared by the Joint Planning Board and approved
by the Township Council. Said builder's agreement shall be binding
upon the applicant, its successors and assigns, shall be executed in
recordable form and shall be recorded at the applicant's expense in the
44.Editor’s Note: Former § 142-34, Development fees, added 10-28-1993 by Ord. No. 0-18-93,
was repealed 3-27-2006 by Ord. No. 147-2006. See now Ch. 43, Affordable Housing, Art. II,
Development Fees, for provisions pertaining to developers’ fees for affordable housing.
§ 142-33 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-36
138:364
office of the Bergen County Clerk. [Amended 2-27-1986 by Ord. No.
0-3-86]
B. Prior to granting subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76, the Joint Planning Board shall require entry
into a builder's agreement to the same extent as if application had been
made to the Joint Planning Board.
C. At the time above set forth, the Joint Planning Board shall require the
posting of a performance guaranty, as approved by the Board Attorney,
in an amount up to 120% of the estimated cost of the public
improvements and work as required by the Joint Planning Board. The
estimated cost for this purpose shall be determined by the Board upon
the written recommendation of the Township Engineer. The Board shall
require that a sum not in excess of 10% of such estimated cost shall be
posted with the Township as a cash performance bond. The Board shall
require that a sum equal to 7% of such estimated cost or $1,250,
whichever is greater, be deposited with the Township before
commencement of operations to cover the expenses incurred and to be
incurred by the Township for engineering services and legal expenses
in connection with the subdivision and application and in connection
with the inspection and certification of improvements within the
development. The builder's agreement shall provide that if the
Township's approved expenses for such purposes shall exceed the
amount deposited, the subdivider or developer shall pay such excess
amount to the Township and shall further provide that any portion of
the deposit for costs not required to be expended for such purposes
shall be refunded to the subdivider or developer, as the case may be. No
such deposit shall be charged with an amount unless the same shall
represent a reimbursement to the Township for payments by it for
services rendered, upon proper vouchers, duly sworn to, as provided by
law. In every case, any charge to the deposit provided for herein shall
be reviewed and approved by the municipality as to the necessity for
the performance of the service and the reasonableness of the amount
charged therefor, to the same extent as if there were no provision for
reimbursement to the Township. The Township Engineer shall perform
the following inspections in connection with the certifications of
improvements within the development:
(1) Prior to the start of any excavation work, the developer shall notify
the Township Engineer. At that time the Township Engineer shall
inspect the construction location and grade stakes, original ground
conditions and weather conditions and shall decide whether work
is to proceed or be delayed.
(2) During rough grade work, the Township Engineer shall conduct
periodic inspections of work progress and investigate any
subsurface conditions that are encountered. If, during the course of
construction, unforeseen conditions, such as springs, aquifer
layers, high groundwater tables and miscellaneous unknowns are
encountered, it shall be determined by the Township Engineer
§ 142-36 JUNKYARDS § 142-36
138:365
whether or not the developer shall install additional catch basins,
storm drains, french drains or any other drainage appurtenances.
(3) The Township Engineer shall inspect all drainage trenches and
storm drain pipes prior to any backfilling of the trenches. The storm
drain pipes, pipe joints and pipe bedding shall be inspected by the
Engineer before the trenches can be backfilled. All trenches shall
be backfilled and tamped in accordance with standard
specifications approved by the Township Engineer.
(4) The Township Engineer shall inspect the excavation, subbase and
pouring of curbs and sidewalks. Said construction shall conform to
plans and specifications, the approved maps and Township
specifications and regulations.
(5) The tickets for delivery of materials or supplies on the site may be
inspected to determine the quantities used.
(6) The Township Engineer shall inspect and check the materials and
amount of said materials used for the subbase material. Said
materials shall conform to the requirements as set forth on the
plans and specifications and to Township specifications and
requirements. When approval is given by the Township Engineer,
the work may proceed.
(7) The Township Engineer shall inspect final pavement construction
work during the course of said construction. The pavement shall be
constructed in accordance with the requirements as set forth on
the plans and specifications, the approved maps and Township
specifications and regulations.
(8) The Township Engineer shall inspect the site of grading of
individual lots so as to avoid dangerous conditions or the creation
of low spots on lawns, driveways and other areas.
(9) The installation of concrete monuments shall be inspected by the
Township Engineer.
(10) Utilities shall be inspected by the Township Engineer in
conjunction with the various utility companies concerned.
(11) The Township Engineer shall inspect the installation of shade trees
in conjunction with a member of the Shade Tree Committee.
D. Any and all moneys posted by the developer or subdivider as a deposit
for costs of the Township's professional engineering and legal expenses
shall be deemed a credit to reduce by such amount the required posting
of 7% of the cost of construction of subdivision improvements. The
balance of any remaining moneys on deposit with the Township of River
Vale shall be refunded to the applying parties at any time following
expiration of 60 days from the receipt by the Township Clerk of the
certification of the Board Secretary that all costs and expenses of the
§ 142-36 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-36
138:366
§ 142-37. Applications.
Township arising out of or due to the subdivision applicant have been
paid or sufficient provision therefor has otherwise been made.
E. A deposit of $50 to the Township of River Vale shall be made for each
concrete monument as shown on the plat and not actually in place,
which moneys shall be refunded to the owner on demand after the
monuments have been set by the owner's engineer to the satisfaction of
the Township Engineer. If the monuments are not set within 30 days
after written notice to the owners by the Township Engineer, the
Township shall retain said moneys as liquidated damages, and the
governing body shall then direct the Township Engineer to place the
monuments. The Township, at its option, may, in lieu of the above
deposit, accept a bond approved by the Board Attorney. [Amended
8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
F. Prior to release of the performance bond, the applicant shall file with
the Township Engineer as-built drawings, in ink, on tracing cloth to
such scale as required by the Township Engineer, accurately showing
the location, profile, size and appurtenances of all storm drains, catch
basins, septic tanks and septic systems, sanitary sewers and water
mains and all utilities, including service connections, constructed
within the subdivision. Such as-built drawings shall be and become the
property and public record of the Township of River Vale. Upon
submission of the as-built tracings to the Township Engineer, upon the
improvements being completed, installed and accepted by the
Township, upon compliance with the law and upon the performance of
all other terms of the builder's agreement, the performance bond shall
be released, provided that a maintenance bond in an amount not to
exceed 15% of the cost of the public improvements and work, or of the
original installation, is posted, which cost shall be determined by the
Township Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4). The maintenance
bond shall be reviewed for form and approved by the Board Attorney
and shall run for a period not to exceed two years from final acceptance
of the improvement. [Amended 4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 0-1-93]
A. The Joint Planning Board shall, by resolution, prescribe forms for
applications.
B. All applications to the Joint Planning Board shall be filed with the
appropriate administrative officer of the Board with whom the applicant
intends to file, who shall stamp the date of filing thereon.
C. An application shall be complete, and shall be referred to as a complete
application, when:
(1) The prescribed application form fully completed and duly executed
has been filed with the Board.
§ 142-36 JUNKYARDS § 142-37
138:367
§ 142-37.1. Fees and escrows in addition to application fee. [Added
6-27-2005 by Ord. No. 118-2005]
Each applicant for a developmental application, concept review,
subdivision, site plan or variance application shall deposit with the
Township, to be held in escrow, as hereinafter provided, a sum determined
by the administrative officer, after consultation with the Board's
professional consultants, to be sufficient to defray the Township's
reasonable and necessary costs for professional and administrative services
in reviewing the application. The amount of such escrow shall be
determined within 30 days after the submission of an otherwise complete
application, or an application shall not be declared complete until such
escrow fund has been deposited. The escrow fund shall be in cash unless
the amount thereof is greater then $10,000 in which event it may be by
letter of credit in a form satisfactory to the Board Attorney. The escrow
fund shall be deposited into a separate trust account by the Township
and, if the amount thereof is greater than $5,000, it shall be deposited
in an interest-bearing account with interest accruing for the benefit of
the applicant. Disbursements may be made from the escrow fund only
after approval by the Township Council of duly submitted vouchers for
the reasonable and necessary charges for professional services rendered
in connection with the application. In addition to the application fees set
(2) All documents in the requisite number and in the form prescribed
by this Part 1 shall have been filed with the Board.
(3) A certificate from the Tax Collector shall have been filed with the
proper Board administrative officer stating whether any taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent.
(4) All fees and deposits prescribed by this Part 1 have been paid.
(5) In the event that this Part 1 or any applicable law, ordinance, rule
or regulation shall require that the documents, plat or plans be
referred to other persons or bodies, an affidavit shall have been
filed with the proper administrative officer stating the date, time,
place and circumstances of such filing, the status of such other
application, reference or filing, the parties, attorneys or other
persons prosecuting the same and the anticipated date of
preliminary and final action thereon.
(6) The written consents of all owners of the property have been filed
with the proper administrative officer.
(7) The Board, or its designee, shall have certified, within 45 days after
filing thereof with the proper administrative officer, that the
application is a complete application.
(8) All applications for development to the Joint Planning Board shall
be signed by the owner(s) of the property and shall contain the
provisions of § 142-35.
§ 142-37 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-37.1
138:368
forth herein, the Board may charge the applicant an amount equal to
the fee(s) which the Board pays to a professional engineer, planner or
attorney to review the development application. If the Board determines
that it is necessary to retain the services of a professional engineer, planner
or attorney to review the development application, the applicant shall be
required to pay the initial deposit and such other additional deposits as
may be required to offset these special review costs incurred by the Board.
The applicant shall be responsible for the pro rata share of costs and fees
for the reporting and transcription of any meeting wherein the application
is discussed, reported, considered or a hearing or decision is rendered. In
the event any development application requires a special meeting date, the
Board shall charge the applicant a special meeting fee of $1,000, plus an
amount equal to the fee(s) which the Board pays to its engineer, planner,
attorney, secretary and other professional advisors who attend the special
meeting. The cost of these services shall be charged against the initial
deposit and such other additional deposits posted by the applicant. The
term "professional personnel" shall be defined to include the Township
Attorney. The intent of this section is to require that an applicant reimburse
the Township for the cost the Township incurs in the Township Attorney
reviewing documents submitted by the applicant, including, but not limited
to, developer's agreements, deeds and/or easements.
§ 142-37.2. Developer's agreements. [Added 6-27-2005 by Ord. No.
118-2005]
The Township may require upon approval of a development that the
applicant enter into a developer's agreement with the Township to ensure
that the project is completed in accordance with the resolution of approval
adopted by the Board. The form of developer's agreement, as well as any
deeds or easements to be conveyed to the Township, shall be in a form
acceptable to the Board and Township Attorney. Prior to these documents
being prepared, the person responsible for preparing the documents for
the applicant must contact the Board and Township Attorney's office in
order to make sure that the approved form of developer's agreement,
deed or easement is used. Furthermore, simultaneously with the Board and
Township Attorney reviewing the deeds or easements, the applicant must,
at a minimum, provide a title report providing clear title to the Township,
or an updated search, or an opinion letter from the applicant's attorney that
there are no liens and that the deed or easement conveys clear title.
§ 142-37.1 JUNKYARDS § 142-37.2
138:369

ARTICLE VIII
Hearings
§ 142-38. General requirements.
§ 142-39. Notice requirements for hearings.
A. Oaths. The officer presiding at a hearing of the Joint Planning Board, or
such person as he may designate, shall have power to administer oaths
and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents
presented by the parties, and the provisions of the County and
Municipal Investigations Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq. ) shall apply to
such hearings.
B. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
C. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
D. Records. The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request of any interested party, upon prior payment by such
party of the estimated fee therefor. Said fee shall be subject to
adjustment upon ascertainment of the actual amount thereof.
E. When any hearing before the Joint Planning Board shall carry over two
or more meetings, a member of the Board who was absent for one or
more of the meetings shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which
the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his said absence;
provided, however, that such member has available to him a transcript
or recording of the meetings from which he was absent and certifies, in
writing, to the Board that he has read such transcript or listened to
such recording.
F. When required. A public hearing shall be held on each application for
development. Notice of a public hearing shall be given when required
by law or by § 142-39 of this article.
A. Manner; service; publication; contents. Whenever a hearing is required
on an application for development pursuant to this Part 1 or otherwise
by law, the applicant shall give notice thereof as provided by Section 7
and Section 7.1 of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-11 and
40:55D-12).
§ 142-38 JUNKYARDS § 142-39
138:371
§ 142-40. List of property owners furnished.
Within seven days after receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt of
payment of a fee of $10, the Tax Collector shall furnish to an applicant and
to the administrative officer a list from the current tax duplicate of names
and addresses of owners to whom an applicant is required to give notice,
and it shall be the duty of the administrative officer to certify the list to the
applicant and, at least one week prior to the hearing, to the Board Attorney
for his file and information.
B. Additional contents for notice. All notices shall additionally specify the
sections of this Part 1 from which the applicant seeks relief.
C. When notice is not required. Neither public notice of a hearing by
publication nor notice to owners of real property within 200 feet is
required in the following cases:
(1) Minor subdivisions.
(2) Final approval of site plans and major subdivisions pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50; but notice and publication are required for
preliminary site plan review and preliminary major subdivision
approval.
(3) Such categories of site plan review as may be specifically excepted
from the notice requirements by ordinances adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 [Section 7.1(a) of the Municipal Land Use Law].
(4) Application for modification, waiver or alteration of the terms or
conditions of any variance, subdivision, site plan or other similar
approval, unless directed by the board having jurisdiction. Notice
shall be ordered if the modification, waiver or alteration is
substantial or relates to a material term or condition.
§ 142-39 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-40
138:372
ARTICLE IX
Time Limitations; Decisions
§ 142-41. Time limits for approvals and expiration of approvals.
A. (Reserved)45
B. Applications to the Joint Planning Board.
(1) The Joint Planning Board shall render its decision not later than 45
days from the filing of a complete application in the following
matters:
(a) Minor subdivisions.
(b) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision of 10 or fewer lots
and not involving a conditional use.
(c) Final approval of a major subdivision and not involving a
conditional use.
(d) Preliminary approval of a site plan for 10 acres of land or less
and not involving a conditional use.
(e) Final approval of a site plan for 10 acres of land or less and not
involving a conditional use.
(2) The Joint Planning Board shall render its decision not later than 95
days from the filing of a complete application in the following
matters:
(a) Any subdivision or site plan that involves conditional use
approval.
(b) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision involving more
than 10 lots or of a site plan involving more than 10 acres.
(c) Any subdivision or site plan that involves exercise by the Joint
Planning Board of its power to grant variances or
authorizations pursuant to this Part 1 or pursuant to law.
C. Extension of time. The time within which the Joint Planning Board is
required to act may be extended with the consent of the applicant.
D. Failure of the Board to act within time. Failure of the Joint Planning
Board to render its decision within the applicable time period set forth
in this section shall constitute an approval of the application; and, at the
request of the applicant, a certificate shall be issued by the Secretary of
the Board certifying that the Board has failed to act.
E. Expiration of approvals.
45.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Applications to the Board of Adjustment, was deleted
pursuant to Ord. No. 320-2017, adopted 3-13-2017, which ordinance provided for the
dissolution of the Board of Adjustment.
§ 142-41 JUNKYARDS § 142-41
138:373
(1) Minor subdivision. [Amended 4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 0-1-93]
(a) Except as provided hereinbelow, approval of a minor
subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date on which the
resolution of municipal approval is adopted unless within such
period a plat in conformity with such approval and the
provisions of the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.) or
a deed clearly describing the approved subdivision is filed with
the county recording officer, the Township Engineer and the
Township Tax Assessor.
(b) The Joint Planning Board may extend the one-hundred-ninetyday
period for filing a minor subdivision plat or deed pursuant
to this subsection if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Joint Planning Board that the developer was
barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because
of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental or quasi-governmental entities and that the
developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal
to the period of delay caused by the wait for the required
approvals, as determined by the Joint Planning Board. The
developer may apply for the extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date.
(c) The Joint Planning Board shall grant an extension of minor
subdivision approval for a period determined by the Joint
Planning Board but not exceeding one year from what would
otherwise be the expiration date if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Joint Planning Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in
obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental
entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the required approvals. A developer shall
apply for the extension before what would otherwise be the
expiration date of minor subdivision approval or the 91st day
after the developer receives the last legally required approval
from other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
(2) Major subdivision. [Amended 4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 0-1-93]
(a) Except as provided hereinbelow, final approval of a major
subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date of signing of the
plat unless within such period the plat shall have been duly
filed by the developer with the county recording officer. The
Joint Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the
period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190
days from the date of the signing of the plat.
§ 142-41 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-41
138:374
§ 142-42. Decisions.
§ 142-43. Publication of decisions.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published as required by law.
Such publication shall be arranged by the Secretary of the Joint Planning
(b) The Joint Planning Board may extend the ninety-five-day or
one-hundred-ninety-day period if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Joint Planning Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
filing because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals
from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued
the required approvals. The length of the extension shall be
equal to the period of delay caused by the wait for the required
approvals, as determined by the Joint Planning Board. The
developer may apply for the extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date.
(3) Variance. Any variance granted by the Joint Planning Board
permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or structures
or permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire unless
such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said
variance or unless such permitted use has actually been
commenced within one year from the date of the determination of
the Joint Planning Board; except, however, that the running of the
period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of
filing an appeal from the decision of the Joint Planning Board to the
governing body or to a court of competent jurisdiction until the
termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
A. All decisions of the Joint Planning Board on an application for
development shall be by written resolution which shall set forth
findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board, within 10 days of
the date of decision, to the applicant or, if represented, then to his
attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be
mailed to all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee
prescribed by this Part 1. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the
office of the Township Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality.
C. Any approval or other relief granted by the Board shall be conditioned
upon either the prompt payment of due or delinquent taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment
thereof in a manner that will adequately protect the municipality.
§ 142-41 JUNKYARDS § 142-43
138:375
Board without separate charge to the applicant. Within 10 days of the
date of such decision, said notice shall be sent to a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality for publication.
§ 142-43 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-43
138:376
ARTICLE X
Appeals
[Amended 4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 0-1-93; 1-24-2002 by Ord. No.
0-19-01]
§ 142-44. Appeals.
All decisions to the Joint Planning Board shall be subject to the appellate
procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17h.
§ 142-45. through § 142-52. (Reserved)
§ 142-44 JUNKYARDS § 142-45
138:377

ARTICLE XI
Continuation of Provisions
[Amended 1-19-1978 by Ord. No. 0-1-78; 6-1-1978 by Ord. No.
0-8-78]
§ 142-53. Continuation of certain ordinances; zoning readoption.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-90b and the provisions of
P.L. 1976, c. 115, the following ordinances of the Township of River Vale
hereby are continued in full force and effect and readopted, except the
extent inconsistent with any provision of the Municipal Land Use Law,
P.L. 1975, c. 291, or this Part 1, and such ordinances shall be read in
pari materia with this Part 1:
(1) Part 8 of this chapter, the Land Subdivision Ordinance, originally
adopted March 4, 1954, as amended and supplemented to the
effective date hereof.
(2) Part 6 of this chapter, the Site Plan Ordinance, originally adopted
February 2, 1967, as amended and supplemented to the effective
date hereof.46
(3) Part 7 of this chapter, the Soil Moving Ordinance, originally
adopted June 2, 1966, as amended and supplemented to the
effective date hereof.
B. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-90b and the provisions of
P.L. 1976, c. 115, the River Vale Zoning Ordinance (Part 9 of this
chapter), adopted November 29, 1944, as amended and supplemented
to the effective date hereof, is readopted and continued in full force and
effect, except to the extent inconsistent with any provision of the
Municipal Land Use Law (P.L. 1975, c. 291) or this Part 1, and such
ordinances shall be read in pari materia with this Part 1.
46.Editor's Note: The 1967 ordinance was superseded 9-18-1980 by Ord. No. 0-23-80. See the
history for Part 6, Site Plan Review, of this chapter.
§ 142-53 JUNKYARDS § 142-53
138:379

ARTICLE XII
Off-Tract Improvements
§ 142-54. Procedure for determination and allocation of costs.
In the event that the Joint Planning Board shall determine that off-tract
improvements are required in connection with any subdivision or site plan,
then prior to granting final approval:
A. The Joint Planning Board shall report to the Township Council:
(1) The location, character and extent of the required off-tract
improvements.
(2) The Township Engineer's estimate of the total cost of such off-tract
improvements.
(3) The proposed allocation of the said total cost determined in
accordance with the standards set forth herein.
B. The Township Council shall determine and report to the Joint Planning
Board whether the off-tract improvement will be constructed:
(1) By the Township as a general improvement or as a local
improvement, or as a combination thereof; or
(2) By the subdivider or site plan applicant with a formula specified by
the Township Council providing for partial reimbursement if the
improvement specially benefits property other than that within the
subdivision or site plan.
C. The Joint Planning Board shall require, as a condition for approval of
the final plat or site plan, that:
(1) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Township as a
general improvement, the subdivider or site plan applicant shall
deposit with the Township Administrator an amount equal to the
difference, if any, between the estimated cost of the improvement
and the estimated total amount by which all properties, including
the subdivision or site plan to be serviced by the improvement, will
be specially benefited by the improvement.
(2) If the improvement is to be constructed by the Township as a local
improvement, the subdivider or site plan applicant shall deposit
with the Township Administrator, in addition to the amount
specified in Subsection C(1), the estimated amount by which the
subdivision or site plan will be specially benefited by the
improvement.
(3) If the improvement is to be constructed by the subdivider or site
plan applicant, the subdivider or site plan applicant shall file with
the Township Administrator a performance guaranty for 120% of
the full estimated cost of the improvement.
§ 142-54 JUNKYARDS § 142-55
138:381
§ 142-55. Standards for allocating costs.
A. In determining the allocation of costs for off-tract improvements among
the subdivider or site plan applicant, other property owners and the
Township, the Joint Planning Board shall be guided by the following
factors:
(1) The total estimated cost of off-tract improvements.
(2) The increase in market values of the properties affected and any
other benefits conferred.
(3) The needs created by the application.
(4) Population and land use projections for the land within the general
area of the subdivision or site plan and other areas to be served by
the off-tract improvements.
(5) The estimated time for construction of the off-tract improvements.
(6) The condition and period of usefulness of the improvements which
may be based upon the criteria of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22.
B. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Joint Planning
Board may take into account the following specific factors:
(1) With respect to street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, shade tree,
streetlight, street sign and traffic light improvements, the Board
may consider:
(a) Traffic counts.
(b) Existing and projected traffic patterns.
(c) Quality of roads and sidewalks in the area.
(d) Such other factors as it may deem relevant to the needs
created by the subdivision or site plan.
(2) With respect to drainage facilities, the Board may consider:
(a) The relationship between the area of the subdivision or site
plan and the area of the total drainage basin of which the
subdivision or site plan is a part.
(b) The proposed use of land within the subdivision or site plan
and the amount of land area to be covered by impervious
surfaces on the land within the subdivision or site plan.
(c) The use, condition or status of the remaining land area in the
drainage basin.
(3) With respect to water, gas and electric supply and distribution
facilities, the Board may consider the use requirements of the use
§ 142-55 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-55
138:382
§ 142-56. Deposits.
Any money received by the Township Administrator for off-tract
improvements to be constructed or installed by the Township pursuant to
the provisions of this article shall be deposited in a suitable depository
therefor and shall be used only for the improvements for which they are
deposited or improvements satisfying the same purpose. If construction of
improvements for which the Township is responsible has not commenced
within five years from the date of deposit, the amount deposited, together
with any income thereon, shall be returned to the subdivider or site plan
applicant or his successor in interest.
§ 142-57. Actual costs to determine refund or additional charge.
Upon completion of any improvement constructed by the municipality as
a general or local improvement, the total cost of such improvement shall
be determined by the Township Administrator. The difference between the
actual cost as so determined and the estimated cost shall be computed.
The subdivider or site plan applicant or his successor in interest shall make
remittance to the Township if the actual cost exceeds the estimated cost
or shall receive a refund from the funds deposited with the Township if
the estimated cost exceeds the actual cost, in an amount which bears the
same relationship to the differences between the actual and estimated costs
as the amount deposited by the subdivider or site plans applicant for his
proportionate share of the estimated cost bears to the total estimated cost.
Any sum payable by the subdivider or site plan applicant or his successor in
interest may be levied and collected by the Township in the same manner as
is provided by law for the levy and collection of real estate taxes.
§ 142-58. Successors in interest.
In the absence of an express provision in a deed or deeds of conveyance,
it shall be presumed that the fee owners of all lots in the subdivision or
site plan at the date any deposit or portion thereof is returned or additional
charge is made are the lawful successors in interest to the subdivider or
site plan applicant and that each such fee owner shall be charged with
or entitled to receive a pro rata share, based on lot area, of any funds
to be returned or additional charge to be made pursuant to this Article.
proposed for the subdivision or site plan and the use requirements
of all other properties to be benefited by the improvements.
(4) With respect to sewerage facilities, the Board may consider:
(a) The anticipated volume of effluent from the use proposed for
the subdivision or site plan and the anticipated volume of
effluent from all other properties to be benefited by the
improvements.
(b) The types of effluent anticipated and particular problems
requiring special equipment or added costs.
§ 142-55 JUNKYARDS § 142-58
138:383
Upon payment of any such sums to said fee owners, the Township shall be
released of liability to any other person.
§ 142-58 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-58
138:384
ARTICLE XIII
Construction of Provisions
§ 142-59. Minimum requirements.
All standards and restrictions set forth in this Part 1 shall be interpreted
and applied as minimum requirements. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prohibit or prevent the use of higher or more restrictive
standards or requirements that may appear in any other lawfully applicable
statutes, ordinances, regulations, rules, deed restrictions or covenants.
§ 142-60. Applicability of construction provisions.
Whenever the clear context of this Part 1 does not require a contrary
interpretation, this Part 1 shall be read in pari materia with Chapter 90,
Construction Codes, Uniform, as adopted, amended and supplemented.
Specifically, the Construction Official, as referred to therein, shall have all
the powers and duties of the Building Inspector under this Part 1.
§ 142-61. Applicability of statutory land use provisions.
Whenever the definitions, terms or provisions of the Municipal Land Use
Law, P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), are inconsistent with the
definitions, terms or provisions of the Part 9, Zoning; Part 8, Subdivision
of Land; Part 6, Site Plan Review, and Part 7, Soil Removal, readopted
hereby, the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291, shall govern, including, without
limitation, the time periods therein provided, the penalty provided by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55 for transfer or sale of land without subdivision approval
and any governing statutory procedural requirements.
§ 142-62. Repealer.
This Part 1 is intended to constitute the comprehensive Zoning, Subdivision,
Site Plan, Joint Planning Board and Land Use Regulation Ordinances of the
Township of River Vale, and all prior ordinances or parts of ordinances that
are not incorporated into or adopted by reference or readopted by this Part
1 and that are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part 1 are hereby
repealed.
§ 142-63. Pending applications.
Notwithstanding the repealer of prior ordinances as set forth in § 142-62,
all applications for development properly and timely made pursuant to said
prior ordinances prior to the effective date of this Part 1 may be continued,
but shall be processed in accordance with the substantive and procedural
requirements of this Part 1.
§ 142-64. Administrative officer for appeals to Township Council.
For appeals to the Township Council, as provided in this Part 1, the
administrative officer shall be deemed to be the Township Clerk.
§ 142-59 JUNKYARDS § 142-64
138:385

Part 2
[Adopted 6-2F4l-o2o0d1 H9 aBzyarOdr dA.r Neaos. 355-201947]
ARTICLE XIV
General Provisions
§ 142-65. Title.
This Part 2 shall be known as the "River Vale Flood Hazard Area Regulation
Ordinance."
§ 142-66. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Council of the Township of River
Vale of Bergen County, New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 142-67. Findings of fact.
§ 142-68. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this Part 2 to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of River Vale are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
47.This Ordinance Also Superseded Former Part 2, Flood Hazard Areas, Adopted 10-15-1981
By Ord. No. 0-17-81 (Ch. 34A Of 1967 Code), As Amended.
§ 142-65 JUNKYARDS § 142-68
138:387
§ 142-69. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this Part 2 includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 142-70. Word usage and definitions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
A. Word usage. For the purpose of this Part 2, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning, the term "shall" indicates a mandatory
requirement and the term "may" indicates a permissive action. Words
used in the present tense include the future tense, singular usage
includes the plural usage, and the plural usage includes the singular
usage.
B. Interpretation. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used
in this Part 2 shall be interpreted so as to give them meanings that they
have in common usage and to give this Part 2 its most reasonable
application.
§ 142-68 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-70
138:388
C. Definitions. As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this Part 2 or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH zone on
a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a onepercent-
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO,
A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, the elevation
represents the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has
a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the
area of special flood hazard.
§ 142-70 JUNKYARDS § 142-70
138:389
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building built, in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard
by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to
the flow of the water; and adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude
of the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building"
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 142-70 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-70
138:390
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than 0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing
walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44
CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational
vehicle.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 142-70 JUNKYARDS § 142-70
138:391
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual
start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of pilings, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 142-70 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-70
138:392
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or
a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred. "Substantial damage"
also means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two or
more separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure during a ten-year period,
the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
"Substantial improvement" also means cumulative substantial
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed or
repetitive loss. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this Part 2 that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this Part 2.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this Part 2. A new or substantially improved
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
(2)
§ 142-70 JUNKYARDS § 142-70
138:393

ARTICLE XV
Application, Interpretation and Penalties
§ 142-71. Applicability.
This Part 2 shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Township of River Vale, County of Bergen and State of
New Jersey.
§ 142-72. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard; study
on file.
§ 142-73. Compliance; violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Part 2
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this Part 2
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Part 2 or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be subject
to the penalties in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, for each
violation and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the
case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of River Vale
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 142-74. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This Part 2 is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Part 2 and
other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of River Vale,
Community No. 340069, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report, "Flood Insurance Study,
Bergen County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated August 28,
2019.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and panels 34003C0092H,
34003C0094H, 34003C0111H, 34003C0113H, 34003C0182H,
34003C0201H, whose effective date is August 28, 2019.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this Part 2. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 406
Rivervale Road, River Vale, New Jersey.
§ 142-71 JUNKYARDS § 142-75
138:395
§ 142-75. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this Part 2, all provisions shall be:
§ 142-76. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this Part 2 is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This Part 2 does not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazard
or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This Part 2 shall not create liability on the part of the Township
of River Vale, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Part
2 or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 142-75 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-76
138:396
ARTICLE XVI
Enforcement; Standards; Severability and Enactment
§ 142-77. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 142-72. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Official and
may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities;
and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is
required:
§ 142-78. Appointment of administrator.
The Chief Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this Part 2 by granting or not granting development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 142-79. Duties and responsibilities of Chief Construction Official.
The duties of the Chief Construction Official shall include but not be limited
to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in section § 142-81H; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Reviewing all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this Part 2 have been fulfilled.
B. Reviewing all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from federal, state or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
C. Reviewing all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway; if located in the floodway, to
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 142-81J(1) are fulfilled.
D. Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation and floodway
data has not been provided in accordance with § 142-72, Basis for
establishing areas of special flood hazard; study on file, the
§ 142-77 JUNKYARDS § 142-79
138:397
Construction Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source in order to administer § 142-81G, Residential construction,
and § 142-81H, Nonresidential construction.
E. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in section
§ 142-77C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this Part 2.
F. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control and the Land
Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
G. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and non-flood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and non-flood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 142-81G (specific standards, residential construction), § 142-81H
(specific standards, nonresidential construction), and § 142-81I
(specific standards, manufactured homes).
H. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between
a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
§ 142-79 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-79
138:398
§ 142-80. Appeals and variance procedure.
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in § 142-80.
A. Appeal board.
(1) The River Vale Joint Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from the requirements of this Part 2.
(2) The River Vale Joint Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this Part 2.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the River Vale Joint Planning
Board, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior
Court, Law Division, as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the River Vale Joint Planning
Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this Part 2, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
§ 142-79 JUNKYARDS § 142-80
138:399
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this Part 2, the Joint Planning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this Part 2.
(6) The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in Subsection A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection A(4),
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
§ 142-80 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-80
138:400
§ 142-81. Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazard, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements, the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
§ 142-80 JUNKYARDS § 142-81
138:401
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding,
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
F. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data have been provided as set forth in § 142-72, Basis for
establishing areas of special flood hazard; study on file, or in § 142-79D,
Use of other base flood data, the following standards are required.
G. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities (including
all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other
service equipment) and sanitary facilities elevated at or above the
more restrictive, base flood elevation plus one foot, or as required
by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1.
(2) Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's DFIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
§ 142-81 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-81
138:402
basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified); and require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
H. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE zone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, as well as all electrical,
heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service equipment
either:
(1) Elevated at or above the more restrictive, base flood elevation plus
one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1; and require
within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's FIRM to elevate
above the depth number specified in feet plus one foot, above the
highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no depth number is
specified); and require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures; or
(2) Be floodproofed so that below the more restrictive, base flood
elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table
6-1, the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water; have structural components
capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy; and be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction
are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall
be provided to the official as set forth in § 142-79E(2)(b).
I. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
Subsection A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage.
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the more restrictive, base flood
§ 142-81 JUNKYARDS § 142-81
138:403
§ 142-81.1. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
Part 2 shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the Ordinance, which shall remain
in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this Part 2 are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 142-81.2. Enactment.
This Part 2 shall take effect following adoption and approval in a time and
manner prescribed by law and shall remain in force until modified, amended
or rescinded by the Township of River Vale, Bergen County, New Jersey.
elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 2-1.
(e) Have the manufactured home chassis supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade
and securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
J. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
§ 142-72 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following
provisions apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(2) If Subsection J(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with § 142-81.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation
data has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
0.2 of a foot at any point.
§ 142-81 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-81.2
138:404
Part 3
[Adopted 6-24-2M0a1s9teBry POlardn. No. 355-2019]
ARTICLE XVII
Adoption and Revision
§ 142-82. Adoption.
The current official assessment map of the Township of River Vale be and
the same is hereby adopted and established as the Master Plan as created
under authority of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 142-83. Revision.
Said plan, by ordinance, whenever and as often as it appears in the public
interest, may be changed or altered in the manner provided by law.
§ 142-82 JUNKYARDS § 142-83
138:405

Part 4
[Adopted 2-16P-1la9n7n8eBdy ROersdid. eNnot.i a0l- 2D-e7v8el(oCphm. e5n4t Os f 1967 Code)]
ARTICLE XVIII
General Provisions
§ 142-84. Title; exercise of powers.
§ 142-85. Zoning amendments.
§ 142-86. Purposes.
The purposes of this district are those set forth in Part 9, Zoning, of this
chapter and are designed to protect and enhance the general welfare by
aiding, encouraging and regulating the most appropriate use of land in the
municipality. Such purposes also are intended to:
A. This Part 4 shall be known and cited as the "Planned Residential
Development Ordinance of the Township of River Vale."
B. The powers granted herein shall be exercised by the Township of River
Vale through the Municipal Joint Planning Board, and the Joint Planning
Board shall administer the provisions of this Part 4 in accordance with
P.L. 1975, c. 291, Sections 33 and 52(c) [the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45 and 40:55D-65(c)].
A. Number of districts. Article L, § 142-221, of this chapter is hereby
amended and supplemented to include a new district or zone which
shall be designated the "Planned Residential Development Zone (PRD)".
B. Zoning Map amendment. The Zoning Map of the Township of River
Vale, dated March 9, 1972, and prepared by T.E. Moore, AIP, is hereby
amended to include the Planned Residential Development Zone, the
boundaries of which are indicated thereon.48
A. Increase the amount and broaden the variety of housing in the
Township, thereby providing housing for smaller family units, senior
citizens and other people with a wide variety of economic needs and
social desires.
B. Guide development in types, amounts, intensities and areas considered
appropriate in relation to the present and future overall development of
River Vale in accordance with the Township's Master Plan and in
particular with the land-use-plan element of the Master Plan.
C. Foster and support the functional, aesthetic and economic revitalization
and renewal of the Four Corners area.
48.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Township Clerk. A Table of
Zoning Map amendments is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 142-84 JUNKYARDS § 142-86
138:407
§ 142-87. Definitions.
The definitions set forth in Part 1, Land Use Generally, of this chapter
shall apply to the terms herein provided unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, and the following additional definitions shall apply with respect
to the additional terms set forth in this Part 4:
COMMON RECREATION AREAS — One or more parcels of land and/or
water within a planned residential development site, designed and intended
primarily for the use and enjoyment of the residents therein. Such areas
may contain such complementary structures and improvements for active
or passive recreational pursuits as are necessary and appropriate for the
benefit and enjoyment of the residents of the planned residential
development.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of interior walls
in a building. Floor area shall not include areas devoted to mechanical
equipment serving the buildings, stairways and elevators, areas devoted
D. Provide for a safe and convenient pattern of traffic circulation,
including roads, sidewalks and bicycle paths.
E. Minimize the impact or natural resources.
F. Promote functionally and aesthetically good design and promote a
desirable visual environment.
G. Encourage and promote flexibility and economy in layout and design of
residential and related land uses.
H. Promote an enjoyable and desirable visual environment as an aid to
healthful, peaceful and pleasant living.
I. Coordinate development procedures by the comprehensive statement
of subdivision, site plan and zoning regulations.
J. Encourage innovations in residential development so that the growing
demands of the population may be met by greater variety in type,
design and layout of buildings and by the conservation and more
efficient use of natural resources and open space ancillary to said
buildings.
K. Encourage a procedure which can relate the type, design and layout of
residential development to the particular site and the particular
demand at the time of the development in a manner consistent with the
preservation of the property values within established residential areas.
L. Ensure that the increased flexibility of substantive regulations over
land development is subject to such administrative standards and
procedures as will encourage the disposition of proposals for land
development without undue delay.
§ 142-86 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-87
138:408
exclusively to off-street parking and loading space for motor vehicles and to
any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than seven feet.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of all the land
proposed to be included in a planned development. The holder of an option
or contract to purchase or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land shall be deemed to be a landowner for the purpose of
this Part 4.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and approved by the Joint Planning Board to be set aside, dedicated,
designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use
and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring
such open space, provided that such areas may be improved with only those
buildings, structures, streets and off-street parking and other improvements
that are designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land. It
may include common recreation areas, woodland areas, parks, playgrounds,
golf courses, tennis, squash and similar courts, skiing and skating facilities,
nature trails, lakes and swimming pools, camping facilities and other similar
open space, including walkways and sidewalks.
PLAN — The written and graphic provisions for development of a planned
residential development, including a plat of a subdivision; all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures; intensity
of use or density of development; public and private streets, ways and
parking facilities; common open space; and public facilities. The phrase
"provisions of the plan," when used in this Part 4, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition, the developer's agreement,
the minutes and resolutions of the Joint Planning Board, the application and
the plan itself.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified
minimum contiguous acreage of five acres or more, to be developed
according to a plan or plans containing one or more residential clusters,
which may include appropriate recreational, accessory or public or quasipublic
uses all primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
Contiguous areas within the Planned Residential Development District
proposed to be separately managed, owned or operated may be
independently processed and approved as planned residential
developments, provided that an agreement exists between developers for
joint development of specified common features and common public
improvements in areas aggregating five acres or more, that the
arrangements made for common features and mutually required public
improvements are approved in advance by the Joint Planning Board, and
further provided that the developer's agreements and performance
guaranties identify clearly the extent of the separate and common
undertakings and the respective liabilities thereunder. Subdivision into lots
or separate ownership of less than five acres, however, shall not be deemed
prohibited, provided that the planned residential development otherwise
meets the criteria of this definition. Subdivision and separate ownership
of single-family detached dwellings on lots that comply with the lot width,
lot size and road frontage requirements applicable in A Residence Districts
§ 142-87 JUNKYARDS § 142-87
138:409
shall also not be deemed prohibited, although less than five acres in size,
provided that the criteria of this definition are otherwise complied with.
SENIOR CITIZEN DWELLING OR UNIT — A building or structure designed
for permanent occupancy by no more than three persons, at least one of
whom is a head of the household and has attained the age of 52 years, and
in which actual occupancy and use are confined accordingly, consistent with
all federal and state standards, laws, rules and regulations. No restrictions
shall be placed by the landowner on the ages of the other members of
a senior citizen family unit, and no provision hereof shall be deemed to
prevent future occupancy or ownership entirely by persons less than 52
years of age by virtue of sale, inheritance, devise, gift or other transfer or
disposition, directly or indirectly, by or from a senior citizen, provided that
full-time occupancy of a senior citizen unit under all circumstances shall be
limited to three persons or fewer.
SITE AREA, GROSS — A site, inclusive of lands dedicated or proposed for
interior streets or other public purposes and inclusive of that portion of
external streets to be dedicated for any public purpose (municipal, county
or state) under the terms and conditions of site plan review.
SITE AREA, NET — A site, exclusive of lands dedicated or proposed for
streets or other public purposes and so designated by the Joint Planning
Board.
TOWNHOUSE — A building or structure designed for or occupied by no
more than one family or household and attached to other similar buildings
or structures by not more than two party walls (which shall be of masonry
construction) extending from the foundation to the underside of the roof
and providing two direct means of access from the outside. Furthermore,
each such dwelling unit shall be provided with cooking, sleeping and
sanitary facilities for the use of each family or household of the townhouse.
For the purpose of this Part 4, a townhouse may include a building or
structure in fee simple, condominium, cooperative or leasehold ownership
or any combination thereof. The Joint Planning Board, on site plan review,
shall be empowered to limit the number of townhouse units per structure
based on the fire, building and planning reports filed in respect to the site
plan application.
§ 142-87 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-87
138:410
ARTICLE XIX
Uses
§ 142-88. General requirements.
Within the Planned Residential Development Zone, no building, land,
structure, area or use shall be used in whole or in part for other than one or
more of the enumerated, specified uses, and no building or structure shall
be arranged, intended, designed, erected, remodeled, altered or used, nor
any improvement undertaken, for any purpose other than as enumerated in
this Part 4 or as provided by law.
§ 142-89. Permitted uses.
The following principal uses and customary accessory uses shall be
permitted within a Planned Residential Development Zone if in accordance
with a site plan approved by the Joint Planning Board:
§ 142-90. Prohibited uses.
Notwithstanding the foregoing reference to customary accessory uses, no
business, professional, commercial or other nonresidential use shall be
carried on in any townhouse, multifamily or senior citizen housing unit or
in or upon any other part of such multifamily site. No stores, shops or
other business, professional or commercial use, whether or not such use
is accessory, auxiliary, incidental or at some other lesser level of intensity,
shall be constructed, maintained, opened or carried on or upon any
multifamily or townhouse site or at or in any individual townhouse or
multifamily unit or in or upon any parking or garage area.
A. Single-family detached dwelling as permitted in A Residence Districts.
B. At any such single-family detached dwelling use as mentioned in
Subsection A, agricultural, gardening and horticultural uses, home
office and studio uses and public uses, all as heretofore permitted in the
A Residence District, provided that none is conducted as a commercial
enterprise.
C. Townhouses, as hereinafter provided.
D. Senior citizen housing, as hereinafter provided.
E. Multifamily dwellings, as hereinafter provided.
F. Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, including golf courses and
clubs, tennis, squash and similar courts and clubs, swimming pools and
clubs, skating facilities and other similar recreation and open space
uses when limited and related to the use of the planned residential
development. Indoor tennis courts shall not be permitted, and all
structures proposed for recreational use shall be required to be
approved in advance by the Joint Planning Board.
§ 142-88 JUNKYARDS § 142-90
138:411

ARTICLE XX
Development Standards
§ 142-91. General requirements.
§ 142-92. Minimum size.
No site shall be considered as a planned residential development for
townhouse, senior citizen or multifamily development unless it shall contain
five or more acres of adjoining and contiguous land and shall contain
sufficient access to an approved and improved public street, certified to
be suitable or approved by the Joint Planning Board, unless such site
qualifies as a planned residential development under the definition provided
in § 142-87 of this Part 4. For the purpose of this Part 4, internal streets,
roads to be dedicated and rights-of-way shall not be deemed to divide
acreage of a planned development and shall be considered as part of
the gross site area. Subdivision into lots or separate ownership of less
than five acres, however, shall not be deemed prohibited provided that
the planned residential development otherwise meets the criteria of this
section. Subdivision and separate ownership of single-family detached
dwellings on lot that comply with the lot width, lot size and road frontage
requirements applicable in A Residence Districts shall also not be deemed
A. Plot and lot sizes and dimensions, structural heights and locations may
be freely disposed and arranged in conformity with the overall density
and other standards herein provided and with the conditions of
comprehensive plans therefor, the general features and design of which
shall be approved by the Joint Planning Board.
B. The Joint Planning Board, in its findings, shall be guided by the
standards set forth herein as well as those provided in Part 8
(Subdivision of Land) and Part 9 (Zoning) of this chapter and by written
reports by the Township Engineer and Township planning consultants.
In addition, the Joint Planning Board, in its findings, shall have the right
to require modifications in the plans as submitted to the extent
provided by law and defined herein.
C. The Joint Planning Board shall also be guided by the recommendations
of the Fire Prevention Bureau, Police Department, County Planning
Board, the River Vale Board of Health and the Township Shade Tree
Commission, as well as other appropriate municipal, county and state
agencies having an interest in said development, including the
Construction Official of the Township of River Vale.
D. In connection with this Part 4, the Joint Planning Board may promulgate
rules and regulations to supplement the standards and conditions set
forth in this Part 4 not inconsistent with this Part 4 or applicable law.
E. The minimum development standards of a planned residential
development shall be in accordance with the following requirements.
§ 142-91 JUNKYARDS § 142-92
138:413
prohibited, although less than five acres in size, provided that the criteria
of this section are otherwise complied with.
§ 142-93. Aggregate areas of less than five acres.
All tracts, parcels or lots within a Planned Residential Development Zone
which do not qualify as a planned residential development, and until
preliminary site plan approval as a planned residential development, shall
be governed by the rules and regulations of the applicable zoning in effect
without reference to this Part 4.
§ 142-94. Minimum setbacks from boundary lines.
A. No building within a planned residential development that is designed
or used for other than one-family residential use or a permitted
accessory building to a one-family-building residential use shall be
located less than 50 feet from any boundary line of the Planned
Residential Development Zone District, provided that the Joint Planning
Board, on site plan review, is empowered to determine that a lesser
setback is adequate by reason of special circumstances affecting the
visual impact and the use made or to be made on adjoining premises
and in cases where the result of the proposed setback is consistent with
the overall character of the planned development, but no provision
hereof shall be deemed to empower the Joint Planning Board to approve
a minimum setback less than 40 feet from any boundary line.
B. A minimum setback requirement of not less than 50 feet from all
external lot lines and from all external streets and thoroughfares shall
be provided for all parking lots, parking areas and off-street parking
spaces; except, however, that the Joint Planning Board may permit, on
site plan review, accessory off-street parking for a planned residential
development with a distance of not less than 25 feet from external lot
lines and external streets for not more than 8% of the required offstreet
parking for the planning unit development and for not more than
22 cars, whichever is lesser, provided that the Joint Planning Board
deems the planted buffer area separating such off-street area or areas
adequate to screen such areas from the external lot line. Parking spaces
and drives for one-family residential lots, however, shall be required to
comply with the A Residence District zone requirements.
C. For purposes of Subsection A, the term "external lot lines" shall be
deemed to mean the external lot lines of the entire planned residential
development proposed to be constructed on such lot or lots, including
any road areas that are within the planned residential development,
whether such proposed road areas are to be dedicated or not. For
purposes of Subsection A, the term "external lot lines" shall not be
deemed to mean the external lot lines of any separate lot created within
the planned residential development by virtue of the site plan or
subdivision approval of the Joint Planning Board.
§ 142-92 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-95
138:414
§ 142-95. Internal setback requirements.
§ 142-96. Residential densities and distribution of dwelling types.
A. Any proposed building or structure within the confines of a planned
residential development shall have a minimum setback requirement of
30 feet from any public or private street, road or thoroughfare right-ofway
line or a distance equal to the height of any building or structure
from said right-of-way line, whichever is greater.
B. At all street intersections, no obstruction to vision (other than an
existing building, post, column, hedge, wall or tree) exceeding 30
inches in height above the established grade of the street at the
property line shall be erected or maintained within the area bounded by
the line drawn between points along each such street line 30 feet
distant from their intersection or 20 feet distant from the
commencement of the radius, whichever is greater.
A. Residential density requirements. Residential development densities of
a planned residential development for townhouse or multifamily
construction shall not exceed an average gross density of 8.75 dwelling
units per acre of gross site area. Residential development proposed for
single-family detached housing shall require 18,000 square feet of land
as a minimum lot size and shall otherwise conform to the provisions of
the A Residence District, except that the minimum front yard setback
for such one-family units may be reduced to not less than 35 feet by the
Joint Planning Board on site plan review where the rear of the lots so
reduced abut a residence zone district.
B. Distribution of residential units.
(1) Within a planned residential development, the distribution of
residential dwelling units shall be as provided herein:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings on lots of 18,000 square feet:
up to 10% of total units.
(b) Townhouse or multifamily dwellings: up to 100% of total units.
(2) Where a landowner can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Joint
Planning Board that the provisions of Subsection B(1) cannot be
complied with due to unusual physical constraints of the property,
such as exceptional topographic or geologic condition or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition, including the
prevailing housing market, the Joint Planning Board shall have the
right to modify the distribution requirements, but no provision
hereof shall be construed to authorize modification increasing the
density permitted above.
§ 142-95 JUNKYARDS § 142-97
138:415
§ 142-97. Distances between buildings.
The minimum distance between any two buildings shall be not less than 1/
3 the average height of the buildings involved at their closest proximities,
except that the Joint Planning Board, on site plan review, may require a
greater minimum distance, but not more than the average height of the
buildings involved at their closest proximities or 12 feet, whichever is
greater, where such greater distance is determined by the Joint Planning
Board to be necessary to provide adequate access for the building or
buildings.
§ 142-98. Maximum height of buildings.
The maximum height of buildings shall not exceed two habitable stories,
and the height thereof shall not in any event exceed 35 feet, including
roof mechanical equipment, measured at any point of the adjacent finished
grade at the building line.
§ 142-99. Common recreation areas.
A. The minimum required area for common recreation and open space use
shall be as follows: a minimum of three square feet of common
recreation and open space use shall be provided for each one square
foot of actual building area, exclusive of parking areas.
B. Said common recreation and open space areas shall not include any
recreational facility where outside or private membership is required
excluding the residents who reside therein, but this provision shall not
be construed to require that residents of single-family dwelling units
within or without the Planned Residential District be included or have
the use of the recreational facilities. All residents other than the owners
and occupants of single-family dwelling units shall have the right to use
and enjoy the common recreation areas and facilities without separate
charge, unless application is made to the Joint Planning Board for relief
from the provisions of this section. The Joint Planning Board is
authorized by resolution to grant exceptions from the requirements of
this section where special circumstances of particular occupancies are
demonstrated not requiring use by individual occupants of the
recreational facilities provided. No provision hereof shall be deemed to
preclude reasonable rules and regulations for the management and use
of such recreational facilities and for the enforcement thereof, and no
provisions hereof shall be deemed to preclude the waiver, without
application to the municipality, evidenced by an express written
contract or lease, of the right to use and enjoy the common recreation
areas and facilities; provided, however, that individual waivers not be
obtained from more than 8% of the total dwelling units within the
Planned Residential Districts without the municipal application
referred to above.
C. Recreational leases or similar charging arrangements shall be
prohibited unless disclosed in advance to and approved by the Joint
§ 142-97 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-99
138:416
§ 142-100. Open space.
§ 142-101. Maximum coverage.
The maximum area of the gross site which may be covered by buildings,
private parking areas, private driveways, road surfaces and other
impermeable surfaces, with the exception of walkways and recreational
facilities, shall not exceed 50% of the gross site area.
§ 142-102. Dwelling unit floor area requirements.
Minimum dwelling unit floor area requirements shall be as follows:
Planning Board, acting by resolution. The recreational facilities and
open space areas shall be appropriately and conveniently located for
the residents of the planned development and shall be developed with
active and/or passive recreational facilities or permitted to remain in a
natural state, including landscaped or planted areas.
D. The common recreational areas shall be within the gross site of the
planned residential development, but they are not required to be on
every lot within the planned residential development approved by the
Joint Planning Board so long as the criteria set forth above are
otherwise met with regard to the entire site.
A. The minimum area required for open space shall be not less than 85%,
provided that for purposes of this section, internal and external street
areas and parking areas and driveways may be included as open
spaces, notwithstanding that the same may be improved with
pavement, curbing or other similar installations. The minimum area
required for on-site open space, excluding streets, parking areas and
parking lots and drives as an open space area, and available for
landscaping and for planted areas and otherwise unimproved, shall be
not less than 50% of the entire net site area.
B. A minimum of three square feet of landscaped and planted open space
area shall be provided for each one square foot of total gross building
area within the planned residential development.
C. Said open space may include common recreation area for residential
uses, sidewalks, planted areas, grass and lawn areas and required
buffer areas for computation purposes, but all open space shall be
shown on a landscape, grading, drainage and lighting plan detailing the
proposed improvements, meeting the standards and requirements
provided herein and in Part 1, Land Use Generally, of this chapter, and
reviewed and approved by the Joint Planning Board prior to
commencement of construction.
A. One-family dwelling: as required in the A Residence District.
B. Senior citizen dwelling: 600 square feet.
§ 142-99 JUNKYARDS § 142-102
138:417
C. Townhouse or multifamily dwelling, each dwelling unit:
(1) Efficiency unit: 600 square feet.
(2) One-bedroom unit: 800 square feet.
(3) Two-or-more-bedroom unit: 1,000 square feet plus 250 square feet
for each bedroom in addition to two bedrooms.
§ 142-102 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-102
138:418
ARTICLE XXI
Circulation and Off-Street Parking
§ 142-103. Off-street parking required.
In any planned development, there shall be provided, at the time any
building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity, offstreet
parking spaces, constructed and paved, for automobiles and other
motor vehicles in accordance with the requirements set forth herein and
in conformity with the off-street parking standards set forth in Article LIX,
§ 142-268 et seq., of this chapter.
§ 142-104. Size of parking space.
Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than 180 square
feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall measure nine feet in
width by 20 feet in length and shall be of usable shape and condition,
provided that the Joint Planning Board shall have the authority to permit
parking spaces of lesser size if the equivalent area is devoted to planting
islands or similar landscaping improvements.
§ 142-105. Number of spaces required.
The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be not fewer than
two spaces per dwelling unit, except that one space shall be required for
senior citizen units, provided that there is sufficient open space shown
on the site for one additional parking space for such senior citizen unit
in the event that it no longer continues to be used as such. Units at any
time containing more than two bedrooms shall be provided with additional
parking at a ratio of one space for each additional bedroom over two.
§ 142-106. Modification of space requirements.
Exceptions to the number of required off-street parking spaces may be
made by the Joint Planning Board on site plan review to the extent of
an increase or decrease of 25% in the event that an affirmative
recommendation for a modification is made by the Township Engineer.
§ 142-107. Enclosed structures required.
A minimum of not less than 15% of the required off-street parking spaces
shall be provided in enclosed structures or garages.
§ 142-108. Parking of commercial vehicles.
Outdoor overnight storage or parking of commercial vehicles shall be
prohibited, and the landowner or developer shall specifically inform
occupants of this restriction in writing.
§ 142-103 JUNKYARDS § 142-109
138:419
§ 142-109. Use of parking space restricted.
Parking spaces are to be limited to use for the parking of operable motor
vehicles and may not be used for storage or other purposes, such as
the repairing of motor vehicles. The outdoor parking or storage of boats,
campers or trailers is prohibited except in enclosed garages.
§ 142-110. General requirements for parking spaces and areas.
§ 142-111. Sight distance.
A. All parking spaces shall be located within 300 feet of the building or use
served.
B. Parking areas shall contain adequate design features for handicapped
persons, lighting, marking, planting, buffer areas and location and
design of entrances and exits in accordance with all applicable
municipal, county and state standards.
C. A parking plan shall be submitted showing the number of off-street
parking spaces included, the location and width of all parking and
loading spaces, driveways, walkways, landscaping and circulation
patterns. The Joint Planning Board may require modifications to the
parking plan and parking regulations to account for special factors,
anticipated use by visitors, the location of the parking areas and the
projected impact upon traffic flow in the vicinity.
D. Surface drainage from all paved surfaces shall be directed to catch
basins and piped to public storm sewers or other approved
drainageways.
E. Parking areas shall be maintained and available for use at all times.
F. At all times, except in the case of detached single-family dwelling units,
no parking space shall be located in a front yard or in any area
determined by the Fire Prevention Bureau to be required to be reserved
as a fire lane.
G. All driveways and driveway exits and entrances to streets shall be
designed with special reference to pedestrian and traffic safety.
H. No outdoor parking or outdoor parking space shall be located within
five feet of any building wall containing windows unless the sill height
of such windows is not less than 15 feet above the level of the average
grade at the building line.
I. No outdoor parking or outdoor parking space shall be located in any
area not approved by the Joint Planning Board on site plan review.
A. All driveways with traffic exiting across a walkway or sidewalk along an
exterior or interior street or roadway shall have a clear sight triangle
measuring eight by eight feet to allow driver visibility of pedestrians on
§ 142-109 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-111
138:420
§ 142-112. Landscaping requirements.
§ 142-113. Parking area design standards.
the walkway or sidewalk. Planting within such triangular areas shall be
limited to ground cover and permanently low-growing shrubs.
B. All driveways with traffic exiting to a street without crossing a walkway
or sidewalk shall have a clear sight triangle beginning at the face of the
curb and measuring 20 feet by 20 feet with similar ground cover and
low-growing shrubs.
C. The required clear sight triangle area shall be measured from the
commencement of the radius in cases where such measurement would
result in a more extensive area to be kept clear, as herein provided.
A. Parking areas shall be screened from the street and adjacent properties
with landscaping materials of five feet in height in side yards and rear
yards and three feet in height in front yards. All planting areas shall be
protected from vehicle encroachment by continuous concrete curbing
or other curbing or barrier approved by the Joint Planning Board.
B. For parking areas or lots containing 10 or more cars, the paved parking
surface shall contain one planting island or planting bed for each 10
spaces. Such planting island shall have a minimum permeable surface
of 50 square feet and shall be protected by continuous concrete curbing
or other barrier approved by the Joint Planning Board. Surface areas
shall be planted or covered with organic materials such as wood chips
and may not be paved or covered with stone, brick, concrete, slate or
other like materials. Trees having specifications approved by the Shade
Thee Commission shall be planted within such islands at a ratio of one
tree per island and one tree per 30 feet along the perimeter of the
parking areas and driveways. In lieu of planting islands, planting beds
projecting from the perimeter may be approved by the Joint Planning
Board, unless otherwise located and approved by the Joint Planning
Board on site plan review.
A. Access. There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all
parking spaces. Access drives or driveways shall be no less than 12 feet
wide for either ingress or egress and 24 feet wide for both ingress and
egress, except that for residential structures for fewer than three
families, access drives or driveways shall be no less than 12 feet wide
for both ingress and egress. No driveway or access driveway shall be
closer than 50 feet to the street lot lines of any two intersecting streets.
B. Size of aisles and driveways. The width of all aisles or driveways
providing direct access to individual parking stalls shall be in
accordance with the requirements as established in Table 1 below. Only
one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles serving parking spaces
placed at an angle other than zero degrees or 90°.
§ 142-111 JUNKYARDS § 142-113
138:421
§ 142-114. Street standards.
Table 1
Minimum Permitted
Aisle Width Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
0 (parallel parking) 12
30 12
45 13
60 18
90 (perpendicular parking) 25
A. The right-of-way and pavement widths of all internal streets, roads and
vehicular traveled ways shall be determined from sound planning and
engineering standards in conformity to the estimated needs of the full
development proposed and the traffic to be generated thereby and shall
be adequate in size, location and design to accommodate the maximum
traffic, parking and loading needs and the access of fire-fighting,
service, safety and emergency vehicles and shall be certified adequate
by a competent expert licensed as a professional engineer or planner
under the laws of the State of New Jersey and in the service of the Joint
Planning Board.
B. All streets and roads, either dedicated public streets or those privately
owned and maintained, or any combination thereof, shall be subject to
all Township ordinances with regard to the construction of same as well
as to the laws of the State of New Jersey.
C. When deemed necessary by the Joint Planning Board, the landowner
shall provide a continuous street circulation system with adjoining land
areas.
D. To the extent practicable, the proposed street system shall conform to
the proposals and conditions shown on the Master Plan, except as may
be modified by the Joint Planning Board and designed to facilitate a safe
and convenient road network in the planned residential development as
a part of the Township.
§ 142-113 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-114
138:422
ARTICLE XXII
Improvements and Services
§ 142-115. Utility improvements.
§ 142-116. Garbage and trash services.
This Part 4 shall not be construed as requiring the municipality to provide
garbage, refuse or trash removal service to the occupants of a planned
development. On the contrary, garbage, refuse and trash removal and
disposal services shall be arranged for by or on behalf of the occupants
of a planned residential development privately, on the same basis as such
services are contracted for by the owners of single-family residences within
the Township of River Vale. The developer's agreement shall contain
provisions respecting garbage, refuse and trash removal services designed
to ensure that the same will be provided to the occupants on a basis
substantially similar to that provided for other residents of the Township of
River Vale.
§ 142-117. Snow and ice removal.
Common parking areas, spaces and driveways within a Planned Residential
District shall be kept free of snow and ice, and a common arrangement shall
be made for or on behalf of the occupants thereof requiring snowplowing
and snow and ice removal from common parking areas, spaces and
driveways not later than 24 hours after the accumulation thereof. The
developer's agreement shall provide accordingly and shall contain
provisions pursuant to which the Township may elect to remedy a failure
A. Every planned development shall be serviced with a comprehensive
water and sewage distribution and disposal system.
B. All utility improvements, including storm drainage systems, sanitary
sewage collection and disposal and water supply systems, shall be in
accordance with standards and procedures established by municipal,
county and state regulations. Said improvements shall be subject to
review and approval by the Township Engineer and Township Board of
Health, as well as appropriate county and state agencies. Water supply
facilities and fire hydrants shall be subject to review and approval by
the Board of Fire Rating Organization of New Jersey and the Township
Fire Prevention Bureau.
C. Electric, gas and telephone services, if available, shall be provided by
the developer in concert with the appropriate public utilities providing
such service. Said services shall be provided as a part of an
underground system. Energy conservation systems shall be employed
whenever practicable.
D. All utility systems and improvements shall be reviewed and approved by
the Joint Planning Board for adequacy and appropriateness of extension
of existing utility systems.
§ 142-115 JUNKYARDS § 142-117
138:423
to comply with the foregoing standard, with additional provision for
reimbursement to the Township of any costs incurred thereby, to be added
to and to be a part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon and
enforced and collected with interest by the same officers and in the same
manner as other real estate taxes.
§ 142-118. Street improvements.
Monuments, street names and other traffic control devices and signs, shade
trees, streetlights, sidewalks, curbs, fire hydrants and all aspects of street
construction, as well as other improvements, shall be subject to municipal
regulations and review and approval by the Township Engineer in the light
of current standards and specifications.
§ 142-117 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-118
138:424
ARTICLE XXIII
Landscaping Standards
§ 142-119. Purpose.
Emphasis shall be placed upon landscaping as a means of achieving beauty,
safety and convenience in the community. Landscaping shall be designed in
such a manner as to impart its aesthetic character when viewed from an
area accessible to the public or from adjacent properties. It will be required
on all projects. The location, nature and height of walls and fences and the
nature and extent of the landscaping on the sites shall be such that the
use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of
adjacent land and buildings.
§ 142-120. Integration into overall design.
Landscaping design and planning shall be integrated into the overall design
and shall not be considered as an afterthought. Proposed landscape design
schemes shall be evaluated in their relationship to the existing natural
landscape or to the developed or proposed landscape, including those on
adjacent properties. The existing natural landscape character shall be
preserved whenever possible and practical.
§ 142-121. Items other than plantings.
Landscaping includes not only the design and installation of plant material
but also paving, benches, fountains, exterior lighting fixtures, fences and
other items of outdoor furniture serving the pedestrian. The design of these
items shall complement the total design of the space. No advertising will
be allowed on any exposed amenity or facility such as benches and trash
containers.
§ 142-122. Landscaping as screening of objectionable areas.
One of the uses of landscaping will be to screen, to buffer and to accentuate
boundaries and to involve the masking out or concealing of any
objectionable area. The achievement of this is left to the designer, whether
by walls, fences, mounds of earth or vegetation. Screening shall be
employed to mask from the public view or adjacent properties such service
areas as trash and garbage areas, outside equipment of an unaesthetic
character and accessory buildings or areas not enhancing or in keeping with
the aesthetics of the project or neighborhood.
§ 142-123. Conditions for issuance of certificate of occupancy.
All landscaping and plantings designated on the plans shall be of specified
height and shall be installed and growing in a healthy condition before a
certificate of occupancy is issued.
§ 142-119 JUNKYARDS § 142-123
138:425

ARTICLE XXIV
Administrative Procedures
§ 142-124. Administrative authority; statutory findings.
In accordance with Part 1, Land Use Generally, of this chapter the Joint
Planning Board of the Township of River Vale shall administer this Part 4.
Prior to approval of a planned residential development, the Joint Planning
Board shall make each of the findings required to be made and referred
to in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45. Except as may be inconsistent with this Part 4 all
remaining provisions of the Part 8 (Subdivision of Land), Part 6 (Site Plan
Review) and Part 9 (Zoning) shall govern and control in the processing,
review and approval of a planned residential development. The following
procedures shall also apply.
§ 142-125. Final site plan approval required.
Final site plan approval by the Joint Planning Board shall constitute the
specific land use, extent and intensity of development permitted by Part
9, Zoning, of this chapter. No building permit shall be issued prior to
final site plan approval without written authorization of the Joint Planning
Board, execution of the developer's agreement and filing and approval of
performance guaranties.
§ 142-126. Site plan and subdivision approval applicable.
All provisions of Part 1, Land Use Generally, of this chapter, regarding
site plan and subdivision approval shall be deemed applicable to planned
residential developments unless the context clearly renders such
procedures, standards or requirements inapplicable or unless specifically
waived or modified by the Joint Planning Board.
§ 142-127. Additional procedure for flexibility.
In order to encourage and promote flexibility and economy in layout and
design, the following additional procedures shall apply:
A. Within 90 days of the date of the application for site plan approval, the
Joint Planning Board shall inform the applicant, in writing, as to
whether filing requirements for preliminary approval have been met. If
so, the application shall be deemed complete. Within 45 days of such
certification by the Joint Planning Board of the completed application,
the Joint Planning Board shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall
grant preliminary approval with or without conditions or deny the
proposed site plan. Should the Joint Planning Board disapprove the site
plan at the preliminary stage, the applicant may reapply with a revised
or modified proposal. The purpose of said preliminary application,
which may be in tentative form for discussion purposes, shall be to
promote mutual agreement between the applicant and the Joint
Planning Board on the basic scheme of the planned development and to
§ 142-124 JUNKYARDS § 142-127
138:427
§ 142-128. Joint Planning Board findings.
Prior to approval of a planned development, the Joint Planning Board shall
find, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45, that:
set direction for the required additional review and agreements leading
to final site plan approval.
B. The information required hereby and by Part 6, Site Plan Review, of this
chapter, for preliminary approval shall be submitted in tentative form
for discussion purposes. Such information shall include preliminary
architectural floor plans and building facades and elevations. If the
Joint Planning Board finds said application to be not in accordance with
the Planned Development District requirements or if the Joint Planning
Board requires any substantial amendment in the layout of
improvements proposed by the developer that have been the subject of
a hearing, an amended application for development shall be submitted
and proceeded upon as in the case of the original application for
development. Preliminary approval shall authorize the applicant to
submit an application for final approval.
C. Within three years from the date of preliminary approval, with or
without conditions, the applicant may submit a complete application for
final approval in compliance with the conditions and stipulations
established by the Joint Planning Board in granting preliminary
approval. Within 45 days after submission of a complete final
application, the Joint Planning Board, if it determines that a further
exploration of facts would be in the public interest, shall have the power
to hold a public hearing and shall grant final site plan approval with or
without conditions or shall deny the application. In making its
determination, the Joint Planning Board may permit deviations, not
deemed by the Joint Planning Board to be substantial, from the
conditions of preliminary approval necessitated by changed conditions
or circumstances of the developer since the date of preliminary
approval. If it determines that substantial changes in the terms of
approval are required, the Joint Planning Board may grant the same,
but in such case a public hearing shall be required to be held on notice,
as in the case of preliminary approval.
D. In the course of site plan approval, the Joint Planning Board may allow
for or permit greater or lesser concentrations of density or intensity of
land use within a section or sections of development than in others,
provided that the maximum density provided for the district as a whole
is not exceeded.
E. Prior to or as a condition of final approval, the Joint Planning Board
shall set forth any requirements for timing of development among the
various types of uses and subgroups.
A. Any departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to and comply
§ 142-127 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-128
138:428
with Part 9, Zoning, standards established for the Planned Development
District within which the subject property is located.
B. Any common open space designated on the site plan has been
adequately reserved as to amount, location, purpose, ownership and
maintenance for the use and benefit of the owners or residents in the
planned development and that the proposed common open space, if
adequate, and the proposals for maintenance and conservation of said
common open space are reliable.
C. The physical design proposed for public services, vehicular and
pedestrian traffic control and the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment, all created by the interrelationship of these
development aspects and other requirements of site plan review, will
result in an adequate development.
D. There will be no unreasonable, adverse impact upon the neighborhood
in which the planned development is proposed to be established.
E. In cases of developments contemplating construction over a period of
years, the terms and conditions intended to protect the interests of the
public and of the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in its total completion are adequate.
§ 142-128 JUNKYARDS § 142-128
138:429

ARTICLE XXV
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 142-129. Additional planning standards.
A. The site in general.
(1) The proposed location of main and accessory buildings on the site
and their relation to one another, traffic circulation within the site,
height and bulk of buildings, provision of utilities such as water,
sewer, power and telephone, disposition or disposal of solid and
fluid wastes, provision of off-street parking space, provision of
buffer areas and other open spaces on the site and the display of
signs and external lighting shall be such that any development will
adequately handle pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the site
and in relation to the street system adjoining and will harmoniously
and satisfactorily fit in with contiguous land and buildings and
adjacent neighborhoods. Attention shall be paid to the preservation
of historic places and artifacts. In addition, the Joint Planning
Board shall consider the factors of drainage, road alignment and
other engineering aspects of such site plan and may require the
review of such factors by engineering authorities appointed by the
Township.
(2) The location and size of the use, the nature and intensity of the
operations involved in or conducted in connection with it, the size
of the site in relation to it and the location of the site with respect to
streets giving access to it shall be such that it will be in harmony
with the appropriate and orderly development of the district in
which it is located.
B. Buildings.
(1) Buildings or structures which are a part of a present or future
group or complex shall have a unity of character and design. They
shall be designed and constructed of materials which help to
achieve visual harmony with the surroundings. All exterior walls
visible to public or adjacent property shall be designed to create a
harmonious whole. Materials shall express their function clearly
and shall not appear as a material foreign to the rest of the building
or artificial to that intended. It is not to be inferred that buildings
must look alike or be of the same style to be harmonious. Harmony
can be achieved through the proper consideration of scale,
proportions, site planning, landscaping, materials and color.
Buildings which are of symbolic design for reasons of advertising
and buildings which are not compatible with the atmosphere and
character will not be allowed. Symbols attached to buildings will
not be allowed unless they are secondary in appearance to the
building and are an aesthetic asset to the building project and the
neighborhood. The relationship of forms to the use, texture and
color of materials shall be such as to create a harmonious whole.
§ 142-129 JUNKYARDS § 142-129
138:431
§ 142-130. Special requirements.
When the area involved forms an integral part of, is immediately
adjacent to or otherwise clearly affects the future of any
established section of the Township, the design scale and location
on the site shall enhance rather than detract from the character,
value and attractiveness of the surroundings.
(2) Exterior lighting may be used to illuminate a building and its
grounds for safety purposes, but in an aesthetic manner. Lighting is
not to be used as a form of advertising in a manner that is not
compatible to the neighborhood or in a manner that draws
considerably more attention to the building or grounds at night
than in the day. Lighting following the form of the building or part
of the building will not be allowed if the overall effect will be garish
or detrimental to the environment. All fixtures used in exterior
lighting are to be selected for functional and aesthetic value.
(3) All exterior structures, attached or not to buildings, shall be in
harmony with and secondary to the buildings. Aesthetically, they
shall be an asset to the site and to the neighborhood. All vending
machines or any facility dispensing merchandise or a service shall
be confined to a space built into the building or buildings or
enclosed in a separate structure compatible with the main building.
A. Common recreation areas and open space ownership. The landowner or
developer shall provide for and establish an organization for the
ownership and maintenance of any common recreation areas and open
space, and such organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose
of any of same by sale or otherwise (except to an organization
conceived and established to own and maintain the common recreation
areas and planned development open space) without the written
consent and approval of the governing body of the Township of River
Vale. Before dissolving and before disposing of any open space, the
organization shall first be required to offer to dedicate the open space
to the municipality, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-43.
B. Continuous maintenance of common recreation areas and open space.
In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the open space
in reasonable order and condition, the Joint Planning Board may serve
written notice upon such organization or upon the owners of the
development setting forth the manner in which the organization has
failed to maintain the open space in reasonable condition, and said
notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be
cured within 35 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a
hearing thereon which shall be held within 15 days of the notice. At
such hearing, the Joint Planning Board may modify the terms of the
original notice as to deficiencies and may give a reasonable extension of
time, not to exceed 65 days, within which they shall be cured. If the
deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modification thereof
§ 142-129 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-130
138:432
§ 142-131. Public hearing.
An application for preliminary plan approval of a planned unit development
shall require a public hearing. When a hearing date has been set by the Joint
Planning Board, the applicant shall notify by registered or certified mail, at
least 10 days prior to the hearing, all property owners within 200 feet of
the extreme limits of the proposed planned development area. Said notice
shall state the date, time and place of hearing and that a brief description
of the proposed development has been filed with the Township Clerk for
public inspection. The applicant shall furnish proof of notification to the
Joint Planning Board at the time of the hearing. All notice and publication
shall not be cured within said 35 days or any permitted extension
thereof, the municipality, in order to preserve the open space and
maintain the same for a period of one year, may enter upon and
maintain such land. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the
public any rights to use the open space except when the same is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners. Before the expiration
of said year, the Joint Planning Board shall, upon its initiative or upon
the request of the organization theretofore responsible for the
maintenance of the open space, call a public hearing upon 15 days'
written notice to such organization and to the owners of the
development, to be held by the Joint Planning Board, at which hearing
such organization and the owners of the development shall show cause
why such maintenance by the Township shall not, at the election of
the Township, continue for a succeeding year. If the Joint Planning
Board shall determine that such organization is ready and able to
maintain said open space in reasonable condition, the Township shall
cease to maintain said open space at the end of said year. If the Joint
Planning Board shall determine such organization is not ready and able
to maintain said open space in a reasonable condition, the Township
may, in its discretion, continue to maintain said open space during the
next succeeding year, subject to a similar hearing and determination
in each year thereafter. The decision of the Joint Planning Board in
any such case shall constitute a final administrative decision subject
to judicial review. If the Joint Planning Board determines that the
proceedings mentioned hereinabove should be referred to the Township
Council, it is empowered to do so, and the Township Council shall
thereafter have the same powers and be subject to the same
restrictions as provided in this subsection.
C. Cost of maintenance. The cost of such maintenance by the Township
shall be assessed pro rata against the properties within the
development that have a right of enjoyment of the open space, in
accordance with assessed value at the time of imposition of the lien,
and shall become a lien and tax on said properties and be added to and
be a part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon and enforced
and collected with interest by the same officers and in the same manner
as other taxes.
§ 142-130 JUNKYARDS § 142-131
138:433
requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.)
shall apply.
§ 142-132. Performance guaranty.
Before final approval of a planned development, the Township shall require,
in accordance with the standards and provisions of Part 8 (Subdivision
of Land) and Part 6 (Site Plan Review) the furnishing of a performance
guaranty for all of the proposed improvements as provided thereby. A
maintenance guarantee shall also be required prior to the release of such
bonds.
§ 142-133. Fees.
A. Upon submission of an application for a planned development, all
applicants shall be required to submit specified fees in accordance with
the following schedule at the office of the Clerk of the Joint Planning
Board: filing fees, $750. [Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
B. All other fees, costs, expenses and deposits for costs shall be required
as in the case of major subdivision approval under Part 8 (Subdivision of
Land) and Part 1 (Land Use Generally). In addition to the foregoing, no
final approval of a planned residential development application or of a
subdivision or site plan application required by a planned residential
development shall be granted, unless adequate provision is made for
the payment and reimbursement to the Township of any engineering,
inspection, planning and legal costs incurred or to be incurred by the
Joint Planning Board or by the Township Council in connection with the
planned development.
§ 142-131 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-133
138:434
Part 5
[Adopted 6-24-S1h9a9d9eB TyreOersd. No. 0-12-99]
ARTICLE XXVI
Shade Tree Advisory Committee
[Amended 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 148-2006]
§ 142-134. Establishment; membership; terms; appointment.
There is hereby established the Advisory Shade Tree Committee of the
Township of River Vale. The Committee shall consist of seven members,
three of whom shall be the Property Maintenance Officer and the
Superintendent of Public Works and the Land Use Administrator. Their
terms of office shall commence upon the day of their appointment. The
terms of office of the additional five members shall commence upon the
day of their appointment and be for the respective periods of one, two,
three, four and five years, beginning on January 1 next succeeding such
appointment. The terms of each appointee shall be designated in his or her
appointment. All subsequent appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall be
for the full term of five years, to take effect on January 1. The members
shall be residents of the Township, appointed by the Mayor and shall serve
without compensation except as hereinafter provided.
§ 142-135. Organization.
The Committee shall organize within 30 days after the appointment of
its total membership for the remainder of the then calendar year, and
thereafter annually by the election of one of its members as Chairperson
and the appointment of a Secretary, who need not be a member.
§ 142-136. Definitions.
As used in this Part 5, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
other entity.
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes any public street or highway, including the
right-of-way, and any park, playground or other property or place owned by
or under the control of the Township of River Vale.
TREE — Trees of all types having a diameter of two inches or greater
measured at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground (diameter breast height)
and any and all shrubs or hedges over three feet in height.
§ 142-137. Powers and duties.
A. The Advisory Shade Tree Committee shall have exclusive jurisdiction
over all trees and shrubs within the right-of-way lines of public streets
in the Township and is authorized to plant, remove, maintain and
§ 142-134 JUNKYARDS § 142-137
138:435
§ 142-138. Cost of planting.
The cost and expense of planting trees and for caring for trees which may
have been planted or for which care has been provided by the Committee
may be paid for by the Shade Tree Committee out of such money as may be
appropriated from time to time by the Township Council.
protect trees and shrubs within the right-of-way lines of public streets
and highways and zoned Conservation Districts in the Township.
B. To regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same so
far as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
C. Move or require the removal of any tree or part thereof dangerous to
public safety. The Committee shall give reasonable notice of its
intention to remove, or cause the removal of, a tree or part of a tree
dangerous to public safety, unless public safety requires immediate
removal, in which case no notice shall be necessary.
D. To recommend to the Township the creation of amendments to or repeal
of ordinances adopted by the governing body necessary or proper for
carrying out the provisions hereof.
E. To order treatment and/or removal of any tree situated upon private
property which is believed to harbor a disease or insects readily
communicable to neighboring healthy trees in the care of the
municipality and to enter upon private property for that purpose with
the consent of the owner thereof, provided that the suspected condition
is first confirmed by a certificate issued by or on behalf of the
Department of Agriculture.
F. To study and recommend methods of funding, outside of municipal
taxation, by grants and aid, both state and federal.
G. To develop a program of tree planting and overall beautification in
areas along the public right-of-way and upon public property and to
develop a master plan for the care and control of existing shade trees
and ornamental trees and the planting of new trees throughout the
Township. Said survey and master plan shall be submitted to Township
Council for its review and approval annually, but in no event later than
March 31 of the next succeeding year.
H. To give advice relative to shade tree issues to the Township Joint
Planning Board.
I. To provide a procedure for removing or trimming existing trees where
necessary because the tree is either dead, diseased or injured by storm
or similar consequences.
§ 142-137 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-139
138:436
§ 142-139. Permit required for certain activities.
No person, except Township employees acting under instruction for the
Township Council, shall do or cause to be done any of the following acts
within the Township of River Vale street rights-of-way or the zoned
Conservation District without a written permit issued by the Department of
Public Works, on recommendation of the Property Maintenance Officer:
§ 142-140. Trees to be reduced to surface.
Any person who has received written permission to remove any tree or
shrub must reduce it to the surface of the ground.
§ 142-141. Interference with Advisory Shade Tree Committee.
No person shall delay or interfere with any lawful work undertaken by the
Advisory Shade Tree Committee or its authorized agent.
§ 142-142. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part 5 shall be liable
to a fine for the violation of each rule or regulation in the amount not
exceeding $300 for each violation and/or a replacement of tree illegally
A. Cut or trim any limb two inches or more in diameter, break, climb with
spikes, disturb the roots of or otherwise injure or spray with any
chemical or remove any living tree or shrub or injure, misuse or remove
any structure or device placed to support or protect such tree or shrub.
B. Plant any tree or shrub.
C. Fasten any rope, wire, electrical attachment, sign or other device to a
tree or shrub or to any guard about such tree or shrub, except support
ropes or wire.
D. Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree or
shrub which will prevent access of air, water or fertilizer to the roots of
such tree or shrub.
E. Pile any building material or make any mortar or cement within six feet
of a tree or shrub.
F. Allow any herbicidal gaseous, liquid or solid substance to make contact
with the stem or roots of any trees or shrub within the Township rightof-
way.
G. Top any tree, "topping" being defined as the severe cutting back on
limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's
crown to such a degree so as to remove the canopy and/or disfigure the
tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees
under utility wires or other obstructions where normal pruning
practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the
discretion of the Shade Tree Committee.
§ 142-139 JUNKYARDS § 142-142
138:437
removed. Summons for violation of this Part 5 are to be issued by the
Property Maintenance Officer.
§ 142-142 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-142
138:438
Part 6
[Adopted 9-18-1980 By OSirtde. PNlaon. 0 R-2e3vi-e8w0 (Ch. 69 Of 1967 Code)]
ARTICLE XXVII
Title and Purpose
§ 142-143. Title.
This Part 6 shall be known and may be cited as the "Site Plan Review
Ordinance of the Township of River Vale."
§ 142-144. Purpose.
Such regulations are deemed necessary to achieve the following purposes:
A. To provide maximum safety and convenience of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic by ensuring that all driveways and walkways are
adequate but not excessive in number, that they are adequate in width,
grade, alignment and visibility and that they are suitably located,
particularly with respect to their confections with public streets.
B. To provide adequate access, ingress and egress for all proposed
structures for equipment or material and for fire and police protection
and any other municipal services on the site.
C. To provide adequate off-street parking to accommodate vehicles of
persons connected with or visiting the premises and to obviate the
parking of such vehicles in public streets.
D. To assure landscaping of sites in a manner which provides reasonable
screening during all seasons of the year, including all playgrounds and
parking areas, and protecting the view of adjacent residential
properties and abutting streets of residential areas.
E. To provide, in applicable cases, a drainage system and layout which will
afford the best solution to any drainage problems.
F. To prevent any alteration of the natural land contours by the erection of
any structure that would increase possible flood heights or divert
floodwaters to other properties or create any other hazardous condition
relating to flooding.
G. To conserve the value of the property proposed for development and
other properties in the area thereof and to encourage the most
appropriate use of the land.
H. To preserve trees and other natural resources and to protect wildlife to
the greatest extent possible.
I. To assure that there has been compliance with all zoning and other
applicable ordinances of the Township.
§ 142-143 JUNKYARDS § 142-144
138:439

ARTICLE XXVIII
Definitions
§ 142-145. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall
be used in the interpretation and construction of this Part 6:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The administrative clerk for any
application before the Joint Planning Board of the Township of River
Vale.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use,
zoning variance or direction for the issuance of a permit pursuant to
law.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Joint Planning Board of the Township
of River Vale, as provided by Article XXIX.
BOARD — The Joint Planning Board of the Township of River Vale.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having
a roof.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the approving authority
taken on a preliminary approved site plan after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been completed or
fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed or
guaranties properly posted for their completion, or approval
conditioned upon the posting of such guaranties.
GOVERNING BODY — (Reserved)
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any
citizen of the State of New Jersey, and, in the case of a civil proceeding
in any court or in an administrative proceeding before a municipal
agency, any person, whether residing within or without River Vale,
whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by
any action taken under this Part 6 or whose rights to use, acquire or
enjoy property under this Part 6 or under any other law of this state or
the United States have been denied, violated or infringed by an action
or failure to act under this Part 6.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — Any applicant for development,
the owners of the subject property and all owners of property and
government agencies entitled to notice.
PERFECTED APPLICATION — One that is submitted in a proper and
complete form, including all required application forms and maps, all
required fees submitted and filed within the appropriate time
schedules, proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements
§ 142-145 JUNKYARDS § 142-145
138:441
are due or delinquent on the property for which approval is sought,
and other municipal reviews and governmental approvals as provided
herein.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
the Township of River Vale, including cash, provided that the Township
shall not require more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in
cash.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant
to this Part 6 prior to final approval after specific elements of a
development plan have been agreed upon by the approving authority
and the applicant.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped easement established at the
intersection of two streets, or a driveway and a street, in which nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner
as to obstruct vision between a height of two feet and six inches above
the center-line grade of the street or driveway. The Township shall
have the right of entry to remove any obstruction to vision within the
sight easement area not conforming to the standards of this definition,
following due notice to the property owner. Said triangle shall be
determined along such street lot lines or edge of driveway 30 feet
distant from their joint intersection.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways; the location of all existing and proposed
buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and
egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and
signs, lighting and screening devices; and any other information that
may be reasonably required in order to make an informed
determination pursuant to this Part 6.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land.
B. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word
"structure" shall include the word "building"; the word "person"
includes a corporation as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes
the word "plot"; the word "occupied" includes the words "designated or
intended to be occupied"; the word "used" shall include the words
"arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or
intended to be used." The word "shall" is mandatory and not optional,
and the word "may" is permissive.
§ 142-145 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-145
138:442
ARTICLE XXIX
Administration and Enforcement
§ 142-146. Applicability.
§ 142-147. Site plan approval; when required.
A. Except as provided herein, no building or excavation permit shall be
issued for any building, structure or use or any enlargement, expansion
or change of use, unless a site plan is first submitted and approved by
the approving authority.
B. No certificate of occupancy shall be given unless all construction and
conditions conform to the site plan as approved, unless conditionally
approved by the approving authority as provided herein.
A. Site plan review shall not be required for a single-family detached
dwelling or for such accessory uses as a private garage, toolhouse,
gardens or private greenhouses, swimming pools and other similar uses
incidental to a single detached dwelling or for similar improvements as
accessory uses to a principal use. The exceptions listed herein shall not
be applicable to planned developments.
B. Site plan approval shall not be required where:
(1) Minor repair to the interior of a building does not involve structural
change or enlargement of the building, as determined by the
Building Inspector.
(2) Renovations or alterations to the exterior design of a building or
structure do not involve any enlargement of the building or major
structural change, as determined by the Building Inspector.
C. However, the Building Inspector, at his discretion, may refer any
application for a building permit to the approving authority for site plan
approval, Subsection B(1) and (2) notwithstanding, where, in the
Inspector's judgment, the construction, reconstruction, alteration or
change of use will affect circulation, water supply, sewage disposal,
drainage, landscaping, signs, lighting, off-street parking or loading, or
the lack of any or all of these factors, environmental factors and other
considerations as specified in this Part 6.
D. Except as provided in Subsection B(1) and (2) herein, all construction,
reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of a building, structure or use
or a change of use or occupancy on or in a nonconforming structure,
use or lot shall require site plan approval.
E. Although a building may not be involved, site plan approval shall be
required for any new or additional driveway to any commercial,
industrial or nonconforming use or for any parking lot or facility for four
or more motor vehicles or for any new or additional off-street loading
facility.
§ 142-146 JUNKYARDS § 142-147
138:443
§ 142-148. Public hearing.
§ 142-149. Approval of change of use. [Amended 11-29-2010 by
Ord. No. 242-2010]
F. The approving authority may require the applicant, developer and
owner of the premises to enter into a developer's agreement detailing
the conditions of approval, the work to be performed by the applicant,
the guaranties to be provided and such other terms and provisions as
may be agreed upon.
A. When required.
(1) A public hearing shall be required for the following preliminary
applications:
(a) Site plan approval involving a nonconforming use.
(b) For any site plan requiring conditional use approval.
(c) For any site plan requiring subdivision approval.
(d) For any site plan requiring planned development approval.
(e) For any site plan requiring a variance of any type.
(f) For any site plan involving a new commercial or industrial use
or parking lot or involving a home occupation or other
commercial or professional use in a residential district, but not
an insubstantial amendment or modification thereof unless
required by the Board.
(g) For any site plan application in respect to which the Joint
Planning Board makes a determination that, by reason of the
peculiar circumstances involved, a public hearing is necessary
to adequately illuminate the issues or to fully develop the
pertinent facts.
(2) Whenever a hearing is required to be held, the hearing shall be on
notice as provided by the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
B. Availability of maps and documents prior to hearing. Any maps and
documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be on file and
available for public inspection at least 10 days before the date of the
hearing during normal business hours in the office of the administrative
officer. The applicant may produce other documents, records or
testimony at the hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement the
previously filed maps and documents.
A. Any change in use, ownership or occupancy of an existing
nonresidential structure or use shall require approval from the Zoning
Official and Township Engineer prior to the issuance of a certificate of
§ 142-147 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-149
138:444
occupancy by the Construction Official. All existing nonresidential
structures must be a part of a previously approved site plan. If the
structure is not part of an approved site plan, the Township Engineer in
conjunction with the Zoning Official shall review the requested change
of use to determine if it can be granted. Should the Township Engineer
and/or the Zoning Official determine that the change of use cannot
be issued, an application for site plan approval must be made to the
appropriate municipal land use board.
B. All persons wishing to change use, ownership, or occupancy of any
premises shall file with the Zoning Officer an application for a zoning
permit stating the intent and use of the premises, and a commercial
certificate of continued occupancy for the use of commercial properties.
C. These provisions, however, shall not be construed to require site plan
approval or change of use approval for a change of tenancy of office
space in an office building containing three or more separate offices,
provided that the Zoning Official and Township Engineer both find that
there is no substantial change in use or occupancy, and no substantial
increase in the intensity of use is proposed or that no exterior changes
or parking revisions are required or proposed.
§ 142-149 JUNKYARDS § 142-149
138:445

ARTICLE XXX
Procedure for Site Plan Approval
§ 142-150. Submission of application for preliminary approval.
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer in writing,
in duplicate, on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for preliminary site plan approval shall be filed no less than 21
days prior to the Board's meeting.
§ 142-151. Procedural requirements for preliminary approval.
A. Preliminary site plan review.
(1) The applicant shall submit the preliminary site plan application and
plat maps and payment of all required fees to the administrative
officer who shall submit copies of the preliminary plat to the
following:
(a) Engineer.
(b) Building Inspector.
(c) Chief of Police.
(d) Board Attorney.
(e) Planning Consultant.
(f) Fire Prevention Bureau.
(g) Shade Tree Commission.
(2) Said professionals and Boards shall make any recommendations to
the approving authority within 30 days of the application
submission. The approving authority shall take said
recommendations into account but shall have the authority to
proceed in the absence of such recommendations found not be
essential to its determination.
(3) If the preliminary plat is found to be incomplete, the applicant shall
be notified thereof within 45 days of the date of submission or it
shall be deemed to be perfected.
(4) Where adjustments or changes are required in the plat submission,
the applicant shall be required to modify the plat in order to qualify
it as a perfected application as to content and for public hearing
purposes.
B. County Planning Board and other governmental agency approvals.
(1) Any site plan application requiring County Planning Board or other
governmental agency approvals shall be submitted by the applicant
to the Bergen County Planning Board or other governmental
§ 142-150 JUNKYARDS § 142-151
138:447
§ 142-152. Effect of preliminary approval. [Amended 4-22-1993 by
Ord. No. 0-1-93]
Preliminary approval of a site plan shall confer upon the applicant the rights
established by Section 37 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49), as the
same may be amended from time to time, for a period of three years from
the date on which the resolution of preliminary approval is adopted or for
such extended periods as provided therein.
§ 142-153. Submission of application for final approval.
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer in writing,
in duplicate, on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for final approval of a site plan shall be filed no less than 21 days
prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority. Required filing
fees shall be submitted with the application form.
§ 142-154. Procedural requirements for final approval.
agency for review and approval. The approving authority may
condition any approval that it may grant upon the timely receipt of
a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board
or other governmental agency or by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period.
(2) A preliminary site plan requiring County Planning Board or other
governmental approval which may not have been received at the
time of the public hearing may require the public hearing to be
continued until such time as the required reports are received.
C. Other requirements.
(1) The applicant shall be required to submit proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property for which preliminary site plan approval is sought.
(2) All applicable fees shall be paid prior to any action by the approving
authority.
D. Public hearings. Upon submission of a perfected application, the
approving authority shall schedule a public hearing for the applicant.
A. Final site plan review. The applicant shall submit the final site plan
application and plat maps and payment of all required fees to the
administrative officer who shall submit copies of the plat to the
following professionals:
(1) Engineer.
(2) Building Inspector.
(3) Board Attorney.
§ 142-151 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-154
138:448
B. Each shall make any recommendation to the approving authority within
30 days of the application submission. The approving authority shall
take said recommendations into account but shall have the authority to
proceed in the absence of such recommendations if the approving
authority finds such recommendations not to be essential to its
determination.
C. The approving authority shall review the application for final site plan
approval with or without conditions, provided that the following
requirements have been met:
(1) The detailed drawings, specifications and estimates meet all
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) The final plans are substantially the same as the approved
preliminary site plan and conditions governing same.
(3) All improvements have been installed or bonds posted to ensure the
installation of improvements.
(4) The applicant agrees, in writing, to all conditions of final approval,
and the developer's agreement has been executed, if required.
(5) Proof has been submitted that no taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent for which final site plan
approval is sought.
(6) All applicable fees have been paid prior to any final action by the
approving authority.
(7) Requirements of other governmental units have been complied
with.
§ 142-154 JUNKYARDS § 142-154
138:449

ARTICLE XXXI
Site Plan Details
§ 142-155. Information to be indicated on site plan.
A. All applications for site plan approval shall be submitted in 12 copies
and shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer or
architect. Unless waived by the Board on an application for that
purpose, it shall bear the signature and seal of a licensed land surveyor
as to topographic and boundary survey data.
B. All site plans shall comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth
and shall contain the following information and data where applicable:
(1) A title block shall be indicated in the lower right corner of the plan
and shall include the name and address of the record owner,
including the block and lot number of the site, the title of the
development and the name, address, license number and seal of the
person preparing the plan. If the owner is a corporation, the name
and address of the president and secretary shall be submitted with
the application with the data required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 as to
shareholders owning 10% or more of the corporate shares.
(2) A date block of the site plan adjacent to the title block containing
the date of preparation. All subsequent revisions shall be noted and
dated.
(3) A key map showing the location of the tract with reference to
surrounding areas and existing street intersections within 1,500
feet of the boundaries of the subject premises.
(4) A scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch shall be used, and a
graphic representation of the scale and a North arrow shall be
displayed. All distances and dimensions shall be in feet and
decimals of a foot, and all bearings shall be given to the nearest 10
seconds.
(5) The names of all owners of adjacent property within 200 feet of the
subject premises, together with the block and lot numbers of the
said property, as shown on the current municipal tax records.
(6) Zone boundaries shall be shown on the site plan as they affect the
parcel. Adjacent zone districts within 200 feet shall also be
indicated. Such features may be shown on a separate map or as a
key on the detail map itself.
(7) Survey data showing boundaries of the property, required building
or setback lines and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots,
reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use,
including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way.
§ 142-155 JUNKYARDS § 142-155
138:451
(8) Reference to any existing covenants, deed restrictions, easements
or exceptions that are in effect or are intended to cover all or any of
the tract. A copy of such covenants, deed restrictions, easements or
exceptions shall be submitted with the application. If there are no
known covenants, deed restrictions, easements or exceptions
affecting the site, a notation to that effect shall be indicated on the
site plan map.
(9) Location of existing buildings on the site which shall remain and all
other structures such as walls, fences, culverts, bridges, roadways,
etc., with spot elevations of such structures. Structures to be
removed shall be indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain
shall be indicated by solid lines.
(10) All distances as measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the property to the nearest intersection with any
other street.
(11) Location plans and elevations of all proposed buildings and other
structures, including required yard and setback areas, building
height in feet and stories, lot coverage and improved lot coverage
calculations.
(12) Location, height, dimensions and details of all signs, either
freestanding or affixed to a building. Where signs are not to be
provided, a notation to that effect shall be indicated on the site
plan.
(13) Location of all storm drainage structures, soil erosion and sediment
control devices and utility lines, whether publicly or privately
owned, with pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow, and, if any
existing utility lines are underground, the estimated location of
said already underground utility lines shall be shown.
(14) Existing and proposed contours referred to United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey datum, with a contour interval of one foot for
slopes of 5% or less; an interval of two feet for slopes of more than
5% but less than 15%; and an interval of five feet for slopes of 15%
or more. Existing contours are to be indicated by dashed lines, and
proposed contours are to be indicated by solid lines.
(15) Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and other significant
existing features, including previous flood elevations of
watercourses, where available, ponds and marsh areas as may be
determined by survey.
(16) All proposed streets with profiles indicating grading and cross
sections showing width of roadway, location or width of sidewalk
where required and location and size of utility lines according to
community standards and specifications.
§ 142-155 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-155
138:452
(17) The proposed use or uses of land and buildings and proposed
location of buildings, including proposed grades. Floor space of all
buildings and estimated number of employees, housing units or
other capacity measurements, where required, shall also be
indicated. If the precise use of the building is unknown at the time
of application, an amended plan showing the proposed use shall be
required prior to a certificate of occupancy.
(18) All means of vehicular ingress and egress to and from the site onto
public or private streets showing the size and location of driveways
and curb cuts, including the possible organization of traffic
channels, acceleration and deceleration lanes, additional width and
other traffic controls which may be required. Improvements such
as roads, curbs, sidewalks and other design detail shall be
indicated, including dimensions of parking stalls, access aisles,
curb radii, direction of traffic flow and other conditions as may be
required in Part 9 (Zoning), Part 8 (Subdivision of Land), or this
Code.
(19) The location and design of any off-street parking areas or loading
areas showing size and location of bays, aisles and barriers.
(20) The location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants and all
sewer lines or alternative means of water supply or sewage
disposal and treatment in conformance with the applicable
municipal standards and appropriate utility companies, where
applicable.
(21) The proposed location, direction of illumination, power and time of
proposed outdoor lighting in conformance with applicable
standards of the community, including type of standards to be
employed, radius of light and intensity in footcandles.
(22) The proposed screening and landscaping and a planting plan
indicating natural vegetation to remain and areas to be planted and
type of vegetation to be utilized.
(23) The proposed stormwater drainage system is to conform to designs
based on a fifteen-year storm, using a one-hour intensity of two
inches. The approving authority may require such other drainage
facilities, including retention facilities, as will minimize stormwater
runoff. All site plans shall be accompanied by a plan sketch showing
all existing drainage within 500 feet of any boundary and all areas
such as paved areas, grassed areas, wooded areas and any other
surface area contributing to the calculations and methods used in
the determinations.
(24) Such other information or data as may be required by the
approving authority in order to determine that the details of the
site plan are in accordance with the standards of Part 9 (Zoning)
and Part 8 (Subdivision of Land) of this chapter.
§ 142-155 JUNKYARDS § 142-155
138:453
(25) Such other information or data as may be required by the
approving authority for a determination that the details of the site
plan are in accordance with all applicable municipal, county and
state ordinances and regulations.
§ 142-155 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-155
138:454
ARTICLE XXXII
Design Standards
§ 142-156. General requirements.
In reviewing any site plan, the approving authority, all advisory boards and
professional advisers shall be guided by the design standards contained
herein. The following standards shall be utilized by the Joint Planning Board
in reviewing all site plans. These standards are intended to provide a frame
of reference for the applicant in the development of site and building plans,
as well as a method of review for the reviewing authority. These standards
shall not be regarded as inflexible requirements. They are not intended to
discourage creativity, invention and innovation. The specification of one or
more particular architectural styles is not included in these standards:
A. Drives, parking and circulation.
(1) The review of the site plan shall consider pedestrian and vehicular
traffic movement within and adjacent to the site, with particular
emphasis on the provision and layout of parking areas, off-street
loading and unloading, movement of people, goods and vehicles
from access roads within the site and between buildings and
vehicles.
(2) All parking spaces shall be usable, and safely and conveniently
arranged access to the site from adjacent roads shall be designed
so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic flow on these roads
and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and egress to the
site. Treatment and design of proposed screening of parking areas
and drives shall be shown, and the site plan shall provide special
attention to the separation of pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular
traffic.
B. Building design and layout.
(1) The design and layout of buildings and parking areas shall be
reviewed so as to provide an aesthetically pleasing design and
efficient arrangement. Particular attention shall be given to safety
and fire protection; impact on surrounding development,
contiguous and adjacent buildings and lands; and environmental
and ecological considerations.
(2) Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to the terrain
and to existing buildings in the vicinity that have a visual
relationship to the proposed buildings. The achievement of such
relationship may include the enclosure of space in conjunction with
other existing buildings or other proposed buildings and the
creation of focal points with respect to avenues of approach, terrain
features or other buildings. Whenever practicable, buildings shall
be separated from parking areas by not less than 25 feet unless
access for fire-fighting equipment is otherwise provided.
§ 142-156 JUNKYARDS § 142-156
138:455
C. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement
of persons and vehicles and for security purposes. Directional lights
shall be arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent
properties.
D. Buffering. Buffering, where required, shall be located around the
perimeter of the site to minimize headlights of vehicles, noise, light
from structures, the movement of people and vehicles and to shield
activities from adjacent properties. Buffering may consist of fencing,
evergreens, shrubs, bushes, deciduous trees or combinations thereof to
achieve the stated objectives.
E. Landscaping.
(1) Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site plan
designed and integrated into building arrangements, topography,
parking and buffering requirements. Landscaping shall include
trees, bushes, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, plants,
sculpture, art, street furniture and the use of building and paving
materials in an imaginative manner.
(2) The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as
practicable and, where desirable, by minimizing tree and soil
removal. Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general
appearance of neighboring developed areas. Treatment and design
of proposed screening shall be shown and shall be such as may be
maintained throughout the year. Areas of the lot not occupied by
buildings, parking or walkways shall be planted with grass, shrubs
or other decorative landscaping.
F. Surface water drainage. Special attention shall be given to proper site
surface drainage so that removal of surface waters shall not adversely
affect neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system and
so that the runoff stormwaters from the site generally will be
minimized, including by retention facilities if deemed necessary.
Stormwater shall be removed from all roofs, canopies and paved areas
and carried away in swales or in an underground drainage system.
Surface water in all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it
will not obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and will not
create puddles or the menace of ice or other hazardous conditions.
G. Utilities. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 0-17-89]
(1) Electric and telephone lines shall be underground. Any utility
installation remaining above the ground shall be located so as to
have a harmonious relation to neighboring properties and the site.
The proposed method of sanitary sewage disposal from all
buildings shall be indicated.
(2) In all site plans involving the construction of new or enlarged
buildings or structures, no new building or structure and no part of
any building or structure proposed to be enlarged shall be located
§ 142-156 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-156
138:456
within a minimum setback of 25 feet from the center line of a
natural gas or liquefied gas transmission line or within 25 feet
of overhead electric or other high-tension lines. In respect of
overhead or aerial lines, the setback shall be measured from a
line drawn vertically from the outer edge of any overhead electric
or other high-tension line or from any supporting structure or
stanchion supporting an overhead powerline.
H. Signs. The size, location, design, color, texture, lighting and materials
of all permanent signs and outdoor advertising structures or features
shall not detract from the design of proposed buildings and structures
and the surrounding properties, nor create confusion with traffic signs
or any other signs. Off-site directional signs shall conform to the
foregoing. Buildings, structures or building features shall not be such
as constitute the substantial equivalent of a sign or advertisement and
shall not represent a corporate identity.
I. Special features. Exposed storage areas, exposed or hidden machinery
installations on all levels, service areas, truck loading areas, utility
buildings and structures and similar accessory areas and structures
shall be subject to such setbacks, screen plantings or other screening
methods as shall reasonably be required to prevent their being
incongruous with the existing or contemplated environment and the
surrounding properties.
J. Sanitary and solid waste disposal.
(1) Sanitary waste disposal, water supply and solid waste disposal
shall be reviewed and considered. Particular emphasis shall be
given to the adequacy of existing systems and the need for
improvements to adequately carry runoff and sewage and maintain
an adequate supply of water at sufficient pressure.
(2) Solid waste disposal shall be reviewed to ensure frequent
collection, protection against vermin and rodents and aesthetic
considerations. All systems shall meet municipal specifications as
to installation and construction, and any outdoor solid waste
disposal facility shall be adequately screened or otherwise
landscaped so as not to detract from an aesthetic environment.
(3) The location of all existing and proposed solid waste collection
stations shall be delineated on the site plan. A plan detail at a scale
of one inch equals 10 feet shall be incorporated in the submission
for each such station or for a typical station. The containers at each
station shall be delineated on the detail plan and described in
tabular form. A separate container or containers shall be provided
for each recyclable material specified in Chapter 186, Recycling, of
the Code of the Township of River Vale in addition to the containers
for nonrecyclable solid waste. [Added 6-22-1989 by Ord. No.
0-12-89]
§ 142-156 JUNKYARDS § 142-156
138:457
§ 142-157. Additional standards.
K. Environmental considerations.
(1) Environmental elements relating to soil erosion and sedimentation,
preservation of trees, protection of watercourses and water quality,
noise pollution, topographic limiting areas, wetland areas and
other environmental and ecological factors will be reviewed, where
appropriate, to minimize adverse development effects.
(2) Provisions shall be made for the elimination of all loud and
offensive noise to the general public.
L. Common recreation areas and open space. [Added 7-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 0-13-99; amended 7-22-1999 by Ord. No. 0-19-99]
(1) Any residential development having a density of 4.5 units per acre
or greater and/or private streets and/or common resident utility or
collection areas shall provide common recreation areas and open
space. The design and layout of common recreation areas and open
space shall be reviewed so as to provide an aesthetically pleasing
design with an emphasis on health and safety.
(2) In order to achieve balanced aesthetic proportion in addition to
promoting health, welfare and safety, the area required for
recreation and open space shall be, at a minimum, a total of 30% of
any individual parcel, with at least 10% of the gross site area of
said parcel reserved for a reasonable mix of active recreation
activities such as sitting areas, picnic areas, playfields,
playgrounds, basketball courts, tennis courts, swimming pools,
canoeing, fishing and various types of water sports.
A. Off-street parking requirements. The number, location and design of offstreet
parking facilities shall be as set forth in Article LIX, § 142-268 et
seq., of this chapter.
B. Circulation within parking area.
(1) Except for attendant parking, all parking spaces shall be designed
free and clear of any obstruction to individual parking stalls.
(2) Such parking spaces shall be located in such a fashion as to permit
all vehicles to exit same in a safe and orderly manner. Under no
condition shall vehicles be permitted to back out of a parking lot
driveway or otherwise block the free movement of traffic within the
parking area or specific points of safety control, such as fire
hydrants, doorways, elevators or other similar locations. Aisle
widths and circulation patterns shall be designed to permit
emergency and service vehicles such as delivery trucks, solid waste
collection vehicles and the like to have reasonable access to and
space for their intended functions.
§ 142-156 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-157
138:458
§ 142-158. Lighting and signs.
(3) Pedestrian circulation within a parking area shall be, to as great an
extent possible, separated from vehicular traffic. Safety zones,
crossing points and sidewalk areas, where warranted, shall be
provided.
(4) The use of pedestrian carts or other similar accessory vehicles shall
not be permitted to be retained within the driving area of the
parking facility.
C. Guardrails, wheel stops and parking lot striping.
(1) Guardrails shall be provided in appropriate locations when same
are required for safety purposes.
(2) Wheel stops, permanently anchored to the ground, may be required
in appropriate locations. Parked vehicles shall not overhang or
extend over sidewalk areas, unless an additional sidewalk width of
2 1/2 feet is provided to accommodate such overhang.
(3) Parking stalls, driveways and aisles shall be clearly marked and
delineated. The approving authority may require that certain areas
be maintained for fire-fighting purposes or other emergency
purposes. These areas as well as other pavement signage shall be
appropriately designated.
D. Limitations as to use. All off-street parking areas shall be used solely for
the parking of passenger automobiles, and no commercial repair work
or service of any kind shall be conducted on such parking lot.
A. Lighting. In connection with every site plan, the applicant shall submit
plans for all proposed exterior lighting. These plans shall include the
location, type of light, radius of light and intensity in footcandles. The
following design standards shall be followed:
(1) The style of the light and light standard shall be consistent with the
architectural style of the principal building.
(2) The maximum height of freestanding lights shall not exceed 30
feet, mounting height.
(3) All lights shall be shielded to restrict the maximum apex angle of
the cone of illumination to 150°.
(4) Where lights along property lines will be visible to adjacent
property, the lights shall be appropriately shielded.
(5) Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings shall be avoided,
except where properly screened from adjacent properties.
(6) Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected to avoid being
damaged by vehicles.
§ 142-157 JUNKYARDS § 142-158
138:459
§ 142-159. Landscaping and buffer areas.
(7) Lighting shall be located along streets and parking areas, at
intersections and where various types of circulation systems
merge, intersect or split.
(8) Pathways, sidewalks and trails shall be lighted with low or
mushroom-type standards.
(9) Stairways and sloping or rising paths, building entrances and exits
shall require illumination.
(10) The following intensity in footcandles shall be provided
throughout:
(a) Parking lots: an average of 1.5 footcandles throughout.
(b) Street intersections: three footcandles.
(c) Maximum at property lines: one footcandle.
(d) In residential areas: an average of 0.6 footcandle.
(11) Lighting shall not be permitted which requires flashing or
intermittent illumination. Lighting which requires change in color,
intensity or hue shall likewise be prohibited. Said lighting shall in
no way interfere with, detract from or diminish in any way the
effectiveness of any traffic signal or similar safety or warning
device.
B. Signs. Each site plan application shall include a sign plan showing the
specific design, location, size, construction and illumination. If the
applicant is unable to provide said details for signs, the approving
authority shall condition its approval upon receipt of same prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
A. Landscaping. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with each site plan
application. The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs,
bushes, plant material, ground cover and natural features such as
boulders and rock outcroppings. It should show where they are or will
be located and the planting details. The following design principles
shall be employed:
(1) Vines and climbing plants should be considered for large expanses
of walls.
(2) Ground cover should be used extensively to prevent erosion.
(3) Existing large trees should be saved by not varying the grade
around the trees by more than six to 12 inches, by construction of
tree wells and by erecting protective fences. Whenever the
applicant shall excavate or fill in areas in the vicinity of large trees,
he shall notify the Shade Tree Commission, and within 15 days of
§ 142-158 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-159
138:460
§ 142-160. Utility improvements.
Gas, electric and telephone service. Where existing utility lines, such as
electric and telephone poles, exist off-tract and require relocation by the
approving authority, a waiver of the subsurface requirement may be
granted.
§ 142-161. Other standards.
said notification, the Shade Tree Commission shall advise the
applicant if it requires a statement and/or sketches outlining
compliance with this subsection.
(4) In parking lots, at least 5% of the parking areas shall be
landscaped. The landscaping should be located in protected areas,
along walkways, center islands and at the end of bays. In narrow
islands, low-spreading plants such as creeping juniper, English ivy,
myrtle or pachysandra are appropriate.
(5) All landscaping in parking areas shall be carefully located so as not
to obstruct vision. A variety of different types of trees should be
grouped to break up the mass of cars.
B. Buffer areas. Buffers are fences, landscaping and berms and mounds
that shall be used to minimize any adverse impacts or nuisances on the
site or from adjacent areas. Buffer areas shall be required for the
following areas:
(1) Along property lines shielding various uses from one another.
(2) Where interior roads or driveways run parallel with roadways
exterior to the site.
(3) Where parking areas abut other properties.
(4) In the general areas of garbage storage areas, loading and
unloading areas and outdoor storage areas.
(5) As windbreak areas.
(6) To shield areas from deleterious noise or other adverse conditions.
C. Buffer area design. Where evergreens are used as buffer materials, they
shall be planted in two or three staggered planted rows. The rows shall
be four to five feet apart, and the evergreens shall be planted four feet
on center. Where earthen berms are utilized, they shall be maintained
with a minimum height of four feet, and a maximum slope shall be
suitably stabilized to prevent erosion.
A. Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall be designed to be safe and
adequate for the purpose intended. Said walls shall not detract from the
aesthetic beauty of the site when constructed and, to this end, shall be
§ 142-159 JUNKYARDS § 142-161
138:461
fenced or landscaped in accordance with the plans to be approved by
the approving authority.
B. Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage, where permitted, shall be suitably
located and approved by the approving authority which shall consider
the relationship of such areas to adjacent properties and roadways;
provided, however, that in all such cases where storage is permitted
such areas be suitably screened.
C. Design standards for physically handicapped persons. All plans and
specifications relating to the site improvements shall provide facilities
for the physically handicapped as required by law, including in respect
to parking spaces, building entrances, walkways and ramps and
signage.
§ 142-161 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-161
138:462
ARTICLE XXXIII
Waiver of Requirements
§ 142-162. Special conditions.
Upon a finding by the Joint Planning Board that due to special conditions
peculiar to a given site or application, strict compliance with the provisions
of this Part 6 would result in peculiar, exceptional and undue hardship upon
the applicant, or that strict compliance is otherwise impracticable and not
within the general purpose and intent of the standards established by this
Part 6, the Joint Planning Board may waive or vary such requirement or
requirements.
§ 142-162 JUNKYARDS § 142-162
138:463

ARTICLE XXXIV
Penalties
§ 142-163. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provision of
this Part 6 shall be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article I,
§ 1-14; and each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation or offense.
§ 142-163 JUNKYARDS § 142-163
138:465

ARTICLE XXXV
Concept Plan Review
§ 142-164. Rules.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.1, an applicant for
concept plan review shall not be required to submit any fees for such an
informal review.
B. The action taken by the Joint Planning Board on an application for
review of a concept plan shall be informal.
C. All applications for an informal review of a concept plan shall be by
letter filed in the office of the Joint Planning Board not less than 15 days
prior to the meeting at which the applicant seeks review and discussion
of the plan.
D. The Joint Planning Board is additionally empowered to make such rules,
regulations and bylaws as shall govern on concept plan review and in
respect of minor site plan applications as defined in the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-5, provided that no application shall be
deemed a minor site plan application if a public hearing and notice are
required under the terms of this Part 6.
§ 142-164 JUNKYARDS § 142-164
138:467

ARTICLE XXXVI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 142-165. Minimum requirements.
All standards and restrictions set forth in this Part 6 shall be interpreted
and applied as minimum requirements. Nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prohibit or prevent the use of higher or more restrictive
standards or requirements that may appear in any other lawfully applicable
statutes, ordinance, regulations, rules, deed restrictions or covenants.
§ 142-166. Applicability of statutory land use provisions.
Whenever the definitions, terms or provisions of the Municipal Land Use
Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) are inconsistent with the definitions, terms
or provisions of Part 6, Site Plan Review, the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. shall govern, including, without limitation, the time periods therein
provided, the penalty provided therein for transfer or sale of land without
subdivision approval and any governing statutory procedural requirements.
§ 142-165 JUNKYARDS § 142-166
138:469

ARTICLE XXXVII
Tree Preservation and Removal
[Added 5-22-1997 by Ord. No. 0-5-97(R)]
§ 142-167. Title. [Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 106-2005]
This article shall be contained in Chapter 142, Land Use, of the Code of
the Township of River Vale and shall be entitled "Tree Preservation and
Removal."
§ 142-168. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to discourage indiscriminate and excessive
removal, cutting and destruction of trees and to encourage conditions
and practices which prevent increased surface drainage, sedimentation
and soil erosion, decreased soil fertility, post construction mortality and
provide adequate revegetation of the area with appropriate species after
construction. On relevant land as defined herein, it is the intent of this
article for the applicant's professional design consultants to prepare and
submit plans which consider and place a design priority on the preservation
of existing vegetation and in particular, trees. It is the further intent of
this article that roadway alignment, building placement, proposed grading,
utility installations and other site improvements be planned and designed
with the preservation of existing trees as a major consideration. The ability
to maximize or increase development density shall not be a legitimate cause
to justify relief from provisions of this article.
§ 142-169. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED TREE PLAN — A tree removal, preservation and planting plan
which has been approved by the appropriate board of review of the
Township of River Vale.[Amended 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 0-21-97]
COMMUNITY BUILDINGS — Churches, clubs, lodges or any such building
used by any organized group or by the public generally.
DRIPLINE — An imaginary line from the tips of the outermost branches of
a tree projected vertically to the ground.
ENFORCING OFFICER — The Construction Code Official shall be the
enforcing officer for all approved tree plans.
PREFERRED TREES — Trees recommended by the New Jersey Bureau of
Forest Management as best adapted to the climate, soil and topography of
the Township of River Vale. A listing of these trees is on file with the River
Vale Township Clerk.
RELEVANT LAND — Any real property which:
§ 142-167 JUNKYARDS § 142-169
138:471
STREET TREE — Any tree within the right-of-way exclusively.
TREE — Any living woody perennial plant having a trunk diameter of at
least four inches measured at four feet above the natural ground level. If a
plant has multiple stems, then the aggregate of the stem diameters and/or
the aggregate of the circumferences shall be used in determining whether
the plant is a tree.[Amended 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 307-2015]
TREE REMOVAL, PRESERVATION AND PLANTING PLAN — A plan of tree
removal, preservation and/or planting prepared by the New Jersey Bureau
of Forest Management, an approved forester by the New Jersey Bureau of
Forest Management, a licensed landscape architect or, at the discretion of
the appropriate board of review, a similarly qualified person.
§ 142-170. Exemptions.
Under this section, the following trees may be removed without filing a plan:
§ 142-171. Compliance required.
No person shall cut, remove, plant or damage any tree upon any relevant
land within the Township of River Vale unless such removal and cutting is
done in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 142-172. Tree removal, preservation and planting plans required.
Is or could be the subject of a major subdivision application, as is
defined in the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and
Part 9 (Zoning) of this chapter; or
A.
Is the subject of a site plan application in which any new building
coverage exceeds 2,500 square feet; or
B.
C. Is the subject of a minor subdivision application consisting of three lots.
A. Any tree removed in compliance with the Farmland Assessment Law
(N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.).
B. Trees directed to be removed by municipal, county or state authority
pursuant to law.
C. Any tree which is part of a nursery, garden center, Christmas tree
plantation orchard or cemetery.
D. Trees authorized to be removed at the discretion of the River Vale
Construction Code Official or Property Maintenance Official for
purposes of safety, maintenance or other reasons relating to the public
health or general welfare.
A. No person shall cut or remove any tree upon relevant land within the
Township of River Vale without first obtaining an approval tree plan.
B. A tree removal, preservation and planting plan shall be filed with every
application relating to relevant land for approval of a subdivision, site
§ 142-169 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-172
138:472
§ 142-173. Application procedure.
The procedure for applying for and issuance of an approval tree plan shall
be as follows:
plan, planned development, conditional use or zoning variance or prior
to any other development requiring tree removal or planting, except as
otherwise provided in this article.
C. Building permit; performance and maintenance guaranties.
(1) No building permit with respect to relevant land shall be issued for
site clearing, grubbing or the construction of any residential,
commercial, industrial, recreational or community buildings or
accessory buildings unless the property owner or its designated
agent first obtains an approved tree plan.
(2) No permit shall be issued unless the Applicant has filed with the
Township a performance guaranty sufficient in amount to equal the
total cost to the Township, as estimated by the Township Engineer,
of complying with the conditions of the approved tree plan, in the
event that the Applicant does not complete the work as approved.
The form, sufficiency and execution of the performance guaranty
shall be approved by the Township Attorney. Posting of the
guaranty shall be detailed and defined in any developer's
agreement entered into by the appropriate board of review of the
Township, the Township and an applicant. [Amended 11-25-1997
by Ord. No. 0-21-97]
(3) A maintenance guaranty shall be furnished by the Applicant upon
the release of the performance guaranty and/or the approval of the
Township Engineer evidencing that all work has been completed in
accordance with the approved tree plan. The maintenance
guaranty shall begin with the release of the performance guaranty
and shall run for a period of two years pursuant to the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Provisions governing the
maintenance guaranty shall be contained in the developer's
agreement.
D. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless tree removal and
planting has been performed in accordance with the approved tree
plan. Proof that all trees have been planted in accordance with the
approved plan or that the plantings are insured by a valid performance
guaranty shall be submitted to the Construction Code Official.
A. Applications shall be filed with the appropriate board of review of the
Township and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed herein.
Applications for exemptions shall be filed directly with the Township
Construction Code Official. [Amended 11-25-1997 by Ord. No.
0-21-97]
§ 142-172 JUNKYARDS § 142-173
138:473
B. The applications shall be made in duplicate and a copy shall be filed
simultaneously with the Township Engineer. The application shall show
the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the relevant land.
(3) The lot and block numbers of the relevant land, including a street
address.
(4) The purpose or reason for the application.
C. Every application shall be accompanied by a map and exhibits showing:
(1) Tax Map, lot and block number.
(2) Area of the subject relevant land.
(3) Tree survey of all existing trees.
(4) Genus, species and size in inches of all trees involved.
(5) General slope and topography of the relevant land.
(6) Location of streams, water bodies and wetlands.
(7) Map of locations and surrounding properties showing wooded
areas.
(8) A list of trees to be planted, as selected from the preferred trees
list; identification of species to be used as street trees.
(9) Tree removal plan and tree planting plan in relation to principal
and accessory buildings, roads and driveways, parking lots, garden
areas, etc., showing also the relation to survey stakes.
(10) Location of buildings (site plan applications only).
(11) Location of roads, driveways, parking lots, staging areas,
recreation areas and garden areas, where applicable.
(12) Grading plan.
(13) Schedule for tree removal and planting.
(14) Maps, as applicable, showing number, type and location of trees
and wooded areas to be removed.
(15) Any other information deemed pertinent to the application by the
appropriate board of review of the Township, Township Engineer or
Construction Code Official. [Amended 11-25-1997 by Ord. No.
0-21-67]
D. At the discretion of the appropriate board of review of the Township,
the applicant shall provide alternative sketch plan layouts
§ 142-173 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-173
138:474
§ 142-174. Criteria for plan approval and compliance.
§ 142-175. Fees and escrows.
demonstrating that the layout adequately considers and makes
provision for the preservation of existing trees. [Amended
11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 0-21-67]
E. All trees on a subject site shall be flagged in the field for identifications.
A. If no area other than a wooded area or area with trees can be found to
accommodate the building foundation, sewerage system or well,
meeting the approval of the enforcement officer, necessary tree
removal shall be permitted.
B. Any grading must protect standing trees from machine operation, soil
storage or material storage by a distance equal to or greater than the
dripline of the tree by means of a brightly painted snow fence or
suitably visible alternative. Where some grading must take place within
the dripline, in the opinion of the appropriate board of review of the
Township, tree wells should be designed, and constructed to preserve
the trees. Any tree seriously damaged during construction must be
professionally treated or replaced, in accordance with Subsection D of
this section, as deemed appropriate by the enforcing officer and/or the
Township Engineer. [Amended 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 0-21-97]
C. Any tree used in a required planting must be at least 2 1/2 inches in
diameter caliper, must be nursery stock, balled and burlap, and
guaranteed for two years from the date of planting.
D. The removed trees are to be replaced according to the following
formula: Where a tree removal permit is required, two replacement
trees shall be planted on the subject tax lot for every tree removed. All
tree replacement shall be in accordance with § 225-5D of the Township
Code. [Amended 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 307-2015]
E. Trees in the area between the street line and the setback line of the
buildings shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
F. Tree removal from any slope or environmentally sensitive area is
prohibited if it will contribute, in the opinion of the appropriate board
or review of the Township, to extra runoff of surface water onto
adjoining property and erosion and silting, unless other means
approved by the Bergen County Soil Conservation District are provided
to prevent runoff and erosion. [Amended 11-25-1997 by Ord. No.
0-21-97]
A. The applicant, at the time of filing an application for an approved tree
plan, shall deposit with the secretary of the appropriate body an
amount determined herein payable to the Township of River Vale. In
addition, the applicant shall escrow sufficient funds with the secretary
of the appropriate body for payment of the fees of all professionals
§ 142-173 JUNKYARDS § 142-175
138:475
§ 142-176. Violations and penalties.
A party who removes a tree on relevant land, or on other land, which is not
permitted by an approved tree plan shall be subject to a fine as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, for each tree removed and
shall be required to replace the tree removed with like kind in accordance
with the following schedule:
For Removed Trees of 16 Inches or Greater
Size of Existing Tree Removed
(inches) Number of Replacement Trees
From 16 to 23 3 at 4 inches in diameter
From 24 to 32 6 at 6 inches in diameter
33 and greater 9 at 8 inches in diameter
whose services are required, including but not limited to any landscape
architect or horticulturist retained by the Township, the Township
Engineer, the Township Attorney, the attorney of the appropriate board
of review and the engineer of the appropriate board of review. The
escrow funds also shall be applied toward the cost of all required
inspection fees incurred in connection with an approved tree plan.
[Amended 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 0-21-97]
B. Application fees for an approved tree plan shall be as follows:
[Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
(1) Minor subdivisions: $100.
(2) Major subdivisions: $750.
(3) Site plans: $500.
§ 142-175 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-176
138:476
Part 7
[Adopted 7-6-1967SoAisl RCehm. 7o0va Ol f The 1967 Code]
ARTICLE XXXVIII
General Provisions
§ 142-177. Permit required; exceptions.
§ 142-178. Responsibility of owner.
No owner of any lot in the Township of River Vale shall cause, allow, permit
or suffer any soil in or upon such lot to be moved by any developer or
excavator until such developer or excavator has first obtained a soil permit
therefor.
§ 142-179. Review of permit application. [Amended 2-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 142-2006]
§ 142-180. Permit application procedures.
The procedure for applying for and issuance of a soil permit shall be as
follows:
A. No developer and no excavator shall move or cause, allow, permit or
suffer to be moved any soil in or upon any lot in the Township of River
Vale unless and until a soil permit therefor shall first have been issued
by the Secretary of the Joint Planning Board of the Township of River
Vale.
B. This section or any other section of this Part 7, however, shall not apply
to the Township of River Vale or to its designated agents. [Added
7-8-1971 by Ord. No. 71-16]
A. For soil movement of 500 cubic yards or more, the matter of reviewing
and considering all applications for soil movement shall be referred to
the Joint Planning Board for consideration and approval. The Board
Secretary shall issue no permit until the Joint Planning Board approves
the application.
B. For soil movement of less than 500 cubic yards, the matter of reviewing
and considering all applications for soil movement shall be referred to
the Township Engineer for review and recommendation to the
Construction Official.
C. For soil movement of less than 125 cubic yards, the applicant shall
provide evidence of actual soil volume to be moved and file an affidavit
on forms provided by the Township to the Township Engineer stating
that construction activities will not move a greater volume of soil.
A. Form of application. On forms prescribed and supplied by the Joint
Planning Board, the applicant shall set forth, in duplicate:
§ 142-177 JUNKYARDS § 142-180
138:477
(1) His name and address.
(2) The description of the lands in question.
(3) The name and address of the owner of the lands.
(4) The purpose or reason for moving the soil and whether it shall be
done in connection with a proposed subdivision; if so, the date of
filing of the application for subdivision.
(5) The kind and quantity in cubic yards of soil to be moved.
(6) In case of removal, the place to which the soil is to be removed, and
the kind and quantity of soil to be removed.
(7) The proposed date of completion of the work.
(8) A certification that he has placed or caused to be placed stakes at
each corner of the lands from which soil is to be removed, and
further that he has placed or caused to be placed grade stakes at
the existing elevation points designated on the topographical map
pursuant to the provision of this section hereof, clearly marked to
indicate the soil cuts or fill.
(9) Such other pertinent data as the Joint Planning Board may, by
resolution, hereafter require.
B. Signature. Said application shall bear the signature of the applicant and
the endorsement of the owner or owners of said lands signifying
approval of the application, consent to the applicant to perform the
proposed work and the consent to the Township of River Vale in the
event of failure of the applicant to do so, to cause the proposed work to
be completed or otherwise terminated in keeping with the purposes and
objectives of this Part 7.
C. Topographical map. Accompanying the application shall be eight prints
of a topographical map of the lot upon which the proposed soil-moving
operations are to be conducted and of all surrounding lands within 200
feet of the perimeter of said lot prepared and certified by a licensed
professional or civil engineer or land surveyor of the State of New
Jersey, on a scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet, and referred to
United States Coast and Geodetic Survey Data, showing both as to the
lot and as to all of said surrounding lands:
(1) The dimensions of the lot and the lot and block number of the lot
and of each lot in the surrounding lands as shown on the Tax
Assessment Map of the Township of River Vale.
(2) The existing elevations of all lands on a one-hundred-foot grid
layout.
(3) The existing elevations of all buildings, structures, streets, streams,
bodies of water and watercourses, natural or artificial.
§ 142-180 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-180
138:478
(4) All existing surfaces and/or subsurface water-drainage conditions
and provisions therefor.
(5) All wooded areas and all trees having a diameter of six inches or
more at the base.
(6) The limits of the area or areas within the lot or lots in question
within which the soil-moving operations are to be conducted, and
the existing elevations of said limits at intervals of not more than
100 feet.
(7) The proposed final elevations at each point where existing
elevations shown on said maps are to be changed as a result of
completion of the proposed work.
(8) The proposed slopes and lateral supports at the limits of the area
upon completion of the soil-moving operations.
(9) The proposed provisions and facilities for surface-water drainage
and where applicable channels of any streams, bodies of water and
watercourses, natural or artificial, including detailed cross sections
showing proposed channel widths, bank slopes and method of
erosion and control thereof.
(10) Accurate cross sections showing the locations and quantities, in
cubic yards, of soil to be removed.
(11) All proposed elevations in enclosed rectangular boxes, and all
existing elevations to be indicated without any kind of enclosure.
(12) Such other pertinent data as the Joint Planning Board may, by
resolution, require.
D. Filing fee. [Amended 4-26-1990 by Ord. No. 0-6-90; 8-26-2004 by
Ord. No. 0-9-04; 2-18-2006 by Ord. No. 142-2006]
(1) Fees and deposits.
Volume of Soil
(cubic yards) Filing Fee Deposit for Costs
Under 25 $10 None
26-125 $75 $375
126-500 $75 $550
501-1,000 $75 $1,000
1,001 and over $75 $1,500 plus $0.50/cubic
yard
(2) All unexpended portions of the deposit for costs shall be returned
to the applicant upon completion and approval of soil movement
activities by the Township Engineer.
§ 142-180 JUNKYARDS § 142-180
138:479
E. Inspection.
(1) The Township Engineer shall make an inspection of the site from
which soil is to be moved and shall make such engineering studies
as may be required to determine the effect of the removal of soil
from the location as it relates to:
(a) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(b) Surface and subsurface water drainage.
(c) Soil fertility.
(d) Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
(e) Public health and safety.
(f) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the
coordinated, adjusted and harmonious physical development of
the Township.
(2) He shall also inspect the aforesaid site to determine whether stakes
have been placed on each corner thereof and whether grade stakes
have been placed at the existing elevation points designated on the
topographical map pursuant to the provisions of Subsection A
hereof. In the event of refusal of the soil permit, as hereinafter
provided, the fee paid by the applicant shall be refunded, except
that all moneys and costs incurred by the Township of River Vale for
engineering surveys and reports, inspection fees and legal fees
shall be retained by the Township and the balance remaining shall
be refunded to the applicant, together with a statement of the costs
and expenses incurred by the Township of River Vale in the
processing of the soil application.
F. Hearing. [Amended 2-18-2006 by Ord. No. 142-200649]
(1) For applications involving 500 cubic yards or more of soil
movement, the Joint Planning Board shall, within 45 days receipt of
a complete application, fix a date for a hearing for the purpose of
considering the application and shall give the applicant, by
registered mail, notice of the time and place of said hearing. The
applicant shall, at least 10 days prior to the date appointed for said
hearing, serve written notice either in person or by registered mail
upon such persons as are shown by the assessment rolls of the
Township of River Vale to be the owners of such lots as are within
200 feet of the property in question. The applicant shall at the
hearing present to the Joint Planning Board satisfactory proof in
affidavit form of the service of said notices.
49.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections G, H, I and J as
subsections of Subsection F; Subsections F(1)(a) through (d).
§ 142-180 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-180
138:480
§ 142-181. Review of application; factors considered. [Amended
2-18-2006 by Ord. No. 142-2006]
In considering and reviewing the application, the Joint Planning Board
and Township Engineer shall be guided by general purpose of municipal
planning, and shall take into consideration the following factors:
(a) Decision. The Joint Planning Board shall review and consider
the application and shall render its report and
recommendation to the Secretary of the Joint Planning Board
who shall grant or refuse the permit in accordance with the
recommendation. Such report and recommendation shall be
made within 60 days after the receipt of the application.
(b) Appeal. In the event of refusal, the applicant may, not later
than 30 days after the date of such refusal, appeal to the
Township Council. The Township Council may, by a majority
vote, sustain or, by a two-thirds vote of its entire membership,
overrule the Joint Planning Board recommendations.
(c) Soil permit. The soil permit shall be in such form as may be
prescribed by the Joint Planning Board, shall be signed by the
Secretary of the Joint Planning Board and either the Chairman
of the Joint Planning Board or the Chairman of the Soil
Committee of the Joint Planning Board and shall contain any
special conditions set forth in the recommendation.
(d) Permit date. The soil permit shall be dated as of the date it is
actually issued, and the term of said permit shall not exceed
one year. All permits shall automatically expire on the
termination date unless application for renewal has been made
and approved in writing extending such permit.
(2) For all applications involving less than 500 cubic yards of soil
movement, the Township Engineer shall, within 45 days of receipt
of a complete application, review and render a report and
recommendation to the Construction Official, who shall grant or
deny the permit in accordance with the recommendation of the
Township Engineer.
(a) Appeal: In the event of denial or failure of the Township
Engineer to act within the prescribed time, the applicant may,
no later than 30 days after such denial or failure to issue a
report, appeal to the Township Council. The Council may
sustain, modify, or overrule the Township Engineer's
recommendations, and/or order such application to be issued.
(b) Permit date: same as Subsection F(1)(d) above.
A. Soil erosion by water and wind.
B. Surface and/or subsurface water drainage.
§ 142-180 JUNKYARDS § 142-181
138:481
§ 142-182. Operations prohibited.
No person to whom a soil permit has been issued shall:
§ 142-183. Topsoil removal, storage and replacement.
C. Soil fertility.
D. Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
E. Public health and safety.
F. Land values and uses.
G. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Township.
A. Conduct or maintain on the premises any sand, gravel or similar kind of
pit, any sand or gravel washing or screening machinery or equipment,
any business or industry not permitted in the district in which said
premises are located and classified by Part 9, Zoning, of this chapter, as
amended and supplemented, or any endeavor or enterprise other than
the grading and regrading of said premises in accordance with the
provision of said permit, and where applicable, the necessary disposal
of soil incidental to said grading or regrading.
B. Conduct or maintain any soil-moving operations without having first
made adequate provision by means of road oil, or otherwise, for the
laying of dust incidental to the use of vehicles, machinery and
equipment on the lands described in the soil permit.
C. Neglect to dispose of, on or before the completion date stated in the
application, any partially or whole excavated boulders or other
incombustible debris resulting from the soil-moving operations, by
burial or removal, or any partially or wholly excavated stumps, felled or
uprooted trees or other combustible debris resulting from the soilmoving
operations, by combustion or removal from the premises.
D. Conduct any soil-moving operations beyond the expiration date as set
forth in the soil permit or extended expiration date as may duly be
granted by the Joint Planning Board.
A. Whenever any developer or excavator shall move topsoil in or upon any
lot, provision shall be made for the storage of said topsoil within the
boundary lines of said lot.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, all of the topsoil so stored shall be
uniformly replaced over the entire area or surface of the lot on or
before the completion date set forth in the soil permit so that the final
grade or grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance with the
proposed final grades shown on the topographical map.
§ 142-181 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-183
138:482
§ 142-184. Excavating below grade.
No developer or excavator shall, at any time in the course of the work, dig
or excavate more than six inches below the proposed final grades as shown
on the topographical map unless:
§ 142-185. Raising grade of lot.
No developer or excavator shall deposit soil upon, fill in or raise the grade
of any lot without first making provision for:
C. No developer or excavator shall remove to any point beyond the
boundary lines of the lot any topsoil whatsoever unless and until topsoil
not inferior in quality to that to be removed shall first have been
replaced uniformly to a depth of not less than six inches, measured from
the proposed final grades as shown on the topographical map, over the
entire surface or area of the lot, except only such portions thereof as
shall be or shall have become, since the date of filing of said
topographical map, permanently covered by a building or structure,
street pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway or other paved area or by
any body of water or waterway. In no event shall the developer or
excavator remove from the lot more topsoil than that comprising the
surplus or excess remaining after the replacement of the topsoil as
aforesaid.
A. The soil permit specifies otherwise and the performance bond,
hereinafter referred to, makes specific provision for replacement, on or
before the completion date set forth in the soil permit, of soil of
sufficient quantity and kind to restore the final grades to those shown
on the topographical map; or
B. After issuance of the soil permit, the developer or excavator, before
digging or excavating below said minimum level, shall apply to the Joint
Planning Board and be granted an amendment of the application and
topographical map then in effect, which amendment may be granted
upon such terms as the Joint Planning Board may deem necessary to
assure adherence to the purpose and objectives of this Part 7.
A. The use in said work of soil or such other materials as will not result in
deviation from the proposed final grades or the uniformity thereof by
reason of abnormal shrinkage or settlement.
B. The collection and storage upon the lot of the original topsoil to the end
that said topsoil shall not be buried beneath soil or other material of
inferior quality, and the uniform replacement of the topsoil so stored
over the entire area or surface of the fill soil or other material, so that
the final grade or grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance
with the proposed final grades shown on the topographical map. In the
event that such provision be not practicable, provision shall be made for
the uniform placement over the entire area or surface of the fill soil or
other material, except only such portions thereof as shall be or shall
§ 142-183 JUNKYARDS § 142-185
138:483
§ 142-186. Approval of application; performance bond; amendment
of terms.
have become permanently covered by a building or structure, street
pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway or other paved area or by any body
of water or waterway, of a layer of topsoil not inferior in quality to that
of the original topsoil to a depth of not less than six inches, measured
from the proposed final grades as by another person or shown on the
topographical map.
A. In the event that the Joint Planning Board recommends approval of the
soil removal application, the Secretary of the Joint Planning Board shall,
forthwith, give notice to the applicant of the action of the Board, and
further, the amount of the performance bond required as hereinafter
set forth. In the event that the applicant fails to post the required
performance bond within 60 days of said notice, then the
recommendation of the Joint Planning Board shall be automatically
rescinded.
B. No soil permit shall be issued unless the applicant therefor shall have
posted with the Township of River Vale a performance bond in form and
with surety acceptable to the Township of River Vale, in such amount as
the Joint Planning Board shall determine, conditioned upon full and
faithful performance by the principal, within the time specified in the
application, of all the proposed work in accordance with the provisions
of this Part 7 and of the soil permit issued pursuant hereto.
C. The amount of said bond shall be determined at the rate of not less than
$0.10 per cubic yard and not in excess of $0.50 per cubic yard of the
amount of soil to be removed; provided, however, that in no event shall
said bond be less than the principal amount of $2,000. In ascertaining
the rate upon which to compute the amount of the bond, the Joint
Planning Board shall take into consideration such factors as may bear
upon the facility with which the proposed work may be performed,
including but not limited to the type and character of soil, the extent of
the area over which the soil-moving operations are to be conducted, the
extent and depth of the various cuts and fills, the extent to which the
area of operations is wooded, the proximity of the proposed operations
to streets, buildings, structures, natural or artificial streams or
watercourses and general drainage conditions.
D. Before the holder of any soil permit shall proceed before the Joint
Planning Board with any application for any amendment or alteration of
the terms and conditions of any outstanding soil permit, there shall be
submitted to the Joint Planning Board the written consent of the surety
on said bond approving said application for amendment or alteration
and consenting to extension of the bond coverage thereto.
E. Applications for the release of any bonds posted in accordance with the
terms of this Part 7 and/or the resolutions of the Joint Planning Board
shall be accompanied by an affidavit stating that the soil-moving
§ 142-185 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-186
138:484
§ 142-187. Government-sponsored programs exempt.
Nothing in this Part 7 shall be construed to affect or apply to any person
engaged in the moving of soil in and upon lands enrolled in the Soil
Conservation Program of the Northeastern Jersey Soil Conservation District
of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service,
and for which lands an approved farm plan has been established by said
agency, provided that all soil-moving operations in and upon such lands are
performed in accordance with said approved farm plan.
§ 142-188. Inspection of operations.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this Part 7, any duly
authorized officer, agent or employee of the Township of River Vale shall
have the right to enter into and upon any lands in or upon which soil-moving
operations are being conducted, to examine and inspect such lands.
§ 142-189. Definitions.
The terms used in this Part 7 shall be deemed and construed to have the
following meanings:
DEVELOPER — Any person who, either directly or through an agent or
independent contractor, engages or intends to engage in land subdivision or
in the construction of two or more dwelling houses, business or industrial
buildings, in any subdivision for the purpose of sale to or occupancy by
another person or persons.
EXCAVATOR — Any person who moves soil in excess of 25 cubic yards
to, from or within any land area or lot within the Township of
Rivervale.[Amended 2-18-2006 by Ord. No. 142-2006]
LOT — Any parcel of land or portion thereof, the boundary lines of which
can be ascertained by reference to the maps and records, or either, in the
office of the Tax Assessor of the Township of River Vale or in the office of
the Bergen County Clerk. For the purposes of this Part 7, a lot shall also
be deemed to be any contiguous parcels of land under common ownership,
which ownership can be ascertained by reference to the maps and records,
or either, in the office of the Tax Assessor of the Township of River Vale or
in the office of the Bergen County Clerk.
MOVE — To dig; to excavate; to remove; to deposit; to place; to fill; to
grade; regrade; level; or otherwise alter or change the location or contour;
to transport; to supply. This term shall not be construed to include plowing,
spading, cultivating, harrowing or discing of soil, or any other operation
operation has been completed in accordance with the application and
all plans, maps and other data filed therewith, and in accordance with
all resolutions and conditions therein adopted by the Joint Planning
Board. Said affidavit shall be executed by a licensed professional or civil
engineer of the State of New Jersey.
§ 142-186 JUNKYARDS § 142-189
138:485
usually and ordinarily associating with the tilling of soil for agricultural or
horticultural purposes.
OWNER — Any person seized in fee simple of any lot, or having such other
interest or estate therein as will permit exercise of effective possession
thereof or dominion thereover.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation or
any group of two or more of them.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, without
regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth,
and is composed of 2% or more, by weight, of organic matter and has the
ability to support vegetation.
§ 142-190. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate this Part 7 shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14,
for each offense, in the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 142-189 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-190
138:486
Part 8
[Adopted 7-6-1S9u6b7diAvsis Ciohn. O72f LOafn Tdhe 1967 Code]
ARTICLE XXXIX
Title
§ 142-191. Citation of title.
This Part 8 shall be known and may be cited as "Land Subdivision Ordinance
of River Vale."
§ 142-191 JUNKYARDS § 142-191
138:487

ARTICLE XL
Purpose
§ 142-192. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this Part 8 shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the Township of River Vale in order
to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of
the municipality. It shall be administered to ensure the orderly growth
and development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and
adequate provision for circulation, utilities and services.
§ 142-192 JUNKYARDS § 142-192
138:489

ARTICLE XLI
Approving Agency
§ 142-193. Administration by Joint Planning Board.
The provisions of this Part 8 shall be administered by the Joint Planning
Board in accordance with Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953.50
50.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 142-193 JUNKYARDS § 142-193
138:491

ARTICLE XLII
Definitions
§ 142-194. Terms defined.
As used in this Part 8, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 58:1A-1 et seq.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which
is presented to the Joint Planning Board for final approval in accordance
with these regulations, and which if approved shall be filed with the proper
county recording officer.
LOT — A parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions
by description, as on a subdivision of record, or survey map or by metes and
bounds for purpose of sale, lease or separate use.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line of a street on which a lot fronts or abuts
the street line. In the case of a through lot, the longest lot line abutting a
street will be considered the front lot line.[Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 217-2009]
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line that is not considered a front lot line or a
side lot line.[Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
LOT LINE, SIDE — The lot boundary line that connects a front lot line with
a rear lot line. A lot may only have two side lot lines.[Amended 8-24-2009
by Ord. No. 217-2009]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — All subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the municipality, which shall
have been duly adopted by the Joint Planning Board.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision containing not more than six lots
having a depth of not more than 200 feet, fronting on an existing improved
street, not involving any new street or road or the extension of municipal
facilities and not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of
the parcel or adjoining property and not in conflict with any provision or
portion of the Master Plan; Official Map, Part 9, Zoning, or this Part 8.
To determine whether or not there may be conflict with the provisions or
portion of the Master Plan, Official Map or Zoning Ordinance, a sketch of
the proposed layout must be submitted.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with the Official Map and
Building Permit Act (1953),51 or any prior act authorizing such adoption.
Such a map shall be deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location
§ 142-194 JUNKYARDS § 142-194
138:493
and width of the streets, public parks and playgrounds and drainage rightof-
way shown thereon.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same
under this Part 8.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted in
lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before the Joint
Planning Board or other approving body approves a plat, including
performance bonds, escrow agreements and other similar collateral or
surety agreements.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision, which is submitted to the Municipal Clerk for Joint
Planning Board consideration and tentative approval, and meeting the
requirements of Article XLIV (§ 142-199 et seq.) of this Part 8.
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy to
be used for the purposes of discussion and classification, and meeting the
requirements of Article XLIV (§ 142-199 et seq.) of this Part 8.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to
law or approved by official action, or a street or way on a plat duly filed
and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the
appointment of a Joint Planning Board and the grant to such Board of
the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
For the purpose of this Part 8, streets shall be classified as follows:
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such a development.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways, and which provide access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
51.Editor's Note: This statute was repealed by L. 1975, c. 291, the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). Various sections of the Municipal Land Use Law have replaced
the Official Map and Building Permit Act (1953), N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.30 to 40:55-1.42. For
provisions on the Official Map, see mainly N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
§ 142-194 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-194
138:494
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under
this Part 8 to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for
another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale or building development; except that the
following divisions shall not be considered subdivisions; provided, however,
that no new streets or roads are involved: divisions of land for agricultural
purposes where the resulting parcels are three acres or larger in size,
divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions or divisions of
property upon court order. "Subdivision" also includes resubdivision, and
where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to
the lands or territory divided.
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A Committee of at least three Joint Planning
Board members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the purpose of
classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this Part 8 and
such other duties relating to land subdivision which may be conferred on
this Committee by the Board.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
E.
§ 142-194 JUNKYARDS § 142-194
138:495

ARTICLE XLIII
Procedure
§ 142-195. Submission of sketch plat.
A. Any owner of land within River Vale shall, prior to subdividing or
resubdividing land, as defined in this Part 8, submit to the Secretary of
the Joint Planning Board, or the designated official, at least two weeks
prior to the regular meeting of the Board an original and eight black-onwhite
prints of a sketch plat of the proposed subdivision, together with
three completed application forms, for purposes of classification and
preliminary discussion. At the time of submission a fee of $250 shall be
paid to the Township Clerk, as well as a deposit of $500 for costs.
[Amended 4-14-1969; 8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
B. The Joint Planning Board, for the purpose of minor subdivision approval
procedure, is hereby empowered to waive full notice and hearing in all
those cases in which the Subdivision Committee of the Joint Planning
Board, appointed by the Chairman with the approval of the Board,
unanimously find no cause for review of the sketch plat by the entire
Board or for unfavorable action upon the subdivision. In such cases, the
Subdivision Committee shall classify and approve said sketch plat as a
minor subdivision. Such finding shall be deemed approval and a
notation to the effect shall be made on the sketch plat and signed by the
Chairman of the Board or Chairman of the Subdivision Committee. In
the event that County Planning Board approval is required, the sketch
plat shall first be forwarded to that Board for its consideration. Except
where Joint Planning Board approval is necessary, the Secretary of the
Joint Planning Board shall return the plan to the subdivider within one
week following the meeting at which approval was granted. The failure
of the Subdivision Committee to act upon the matter within one week
following the meeting at which such sketch plat is presented shall be
deemed to constitute disapproval.
C. Copies.
(1) Before the Municipal Clerk returns any approved sketch plat to the
subdivider, the owner shall furnish the original and eight copies, at
least one of which shall be sent to the following:
(a) Municipal Clerk.
(b) Municipal Engineer.
(c) Building Inspector or Zoning Officer.
(d) Tax Assessor.
(e) Secretary of the Joint Planning Board.
(f) County Planning Board.
§ 142-195 JUNKYARDS § 142-195
138:497
§ 142-196. Submission of preliminary plat.
(2) The cost of the copies will be charged to the subdivider and shall be
collected before the return of the original sketch plat to the
subdivider.
D. Either a deed description or plat map drawn in compliance with N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq. shall be filed by the subdivider with the county
recording officer within 90 days from the date of return of the approved
sketch plat.
E. If the plat is classified as a major subdivision, a notation to that effect
shall be made on the plat, which will be returned to the subdivider for
compliance with the procedure in §§ 142-196 and 142-197 of this
article.
F. When, in the opinion of the Joint Planning Board, undue hardship would
result from strict compliance with the major subdivision approval
procedure, the general purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and
standards established by this Part 8 would not be impaired, and no new
street or extension of a street is shown, the Joint Planning Board is
hereby empowered to authorize prosecution and disposition of the
application as a minor subdivision, provided that the Board shall not, in
any case in which an application has originally been classified as major,
waive full notice, hearing or the filing fees and deposit for costs
applicable to major subdivisions. [Added 8-14-1969]
G. In addition to the requirements of Subsection D, the original plat of a
minor subdivision or of any subdivision approved pursuant to the
provisions of Subsection F shall, upon execution, remain on file in the
office of the Township Clerk as a permanent public record of the action
of the Board, together with any official minutes or resolutions of the
Board pertaining thereto. [Added 8-14-1969]
A. At least six black-on-white prints of the preliminary plat, together with
three completed application forms for preliminary approval, shall be
submitted to the Township Clerk two weeks prior to the Joint Planning
Board meeting at which consideration is desired. At the time of
submission, fees are to be paid by the applicant as follows: A fee of $500
plus $50 per lot shall be paid to the Township Clerk as an additional
filing fee. In addition, there shall be made a deposit for costs of an
additional $1,500 plus $50 per lot. Any portion of the deposit for costs
not expended shall be returned to the subdivider. The Township Clerk
shall immediately notify the Secretary of the Joint Planning Board of the
receipt of the preliminary plat fees. [Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No.
0-9-04]
B. The Secretary of the Joint Planning Board shall notify by mail at least
five days prior to the hearing all property owners within 200 feet of the
extreme limits of the subdivision as their names appear on the
municipal tax record. Said notice shall state the time and place of
§ 142-195 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-196
138:498
§ 142-197. Improvements or guaranties prior to final approval.
[Amended 8-14-1969]
hearing, a brief description of the subdivision and that a copy of said
subdivision has been filed with the Municipal Clerk for public
inspection. The Secretary shall also cause notice of the hearing to
be published in the official newspaper or a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
C. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the Secretary of
the Joint Planning Board prior to the hearing to the following persons:
(1) Secretary of County Planning Board.
(2) Municipal Engineer.
(3) Secretary of Board of Health.
(4) Such other municipal, county or state officials as directed by the
Joint Planning Board.
D. The Joint Planning Board shall act on the preliminary plat within 90
days after submission to the Municipal Clerk, but in no case before the
expiration of the twenty-day period within which the County Planning
Board may submit a report on said subdivision. In all cases the
recommendation of the County Board shall be given careful
consideration in the final decision of the local Joint Planning Board. If
the County Planning Board has approval authority pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:27-12,52 its action shall be noted on the plat, and, if disapproved, two
copies of the reasons for disapproval shall be returned with the plat. If
either the Joint Planning Board or County Planning Board disapprove a
plat, the reasons for disapproval shall be remedied prior to further
consideration. The person submitting a plat shall be notified of the
action of the Planning Board within 90 days of its submission. If
approval is required by any other officer or public body, the same
procedure as applies to submission and approval by the County
Planning Board shall apply.
E. If the Joint Planning Board acts favorably on a preliminary plat, the
Chairman of the Joint Planning Board shall affix his signature to the plat
with a notation that it has received preliminary approval and return it to
the subdivider for compliance with final approval requirements.
F. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision shall confer upon the
applicant the rights established by Section 37 of P.L. 1975, c. 291
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49), as the same may be amended from time to time,
for a period of three years from the date on which the resolution of
preliminary approval is adopted or for such extended periods as
provided therein. [Amended 4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 0-1-93]
52.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1968, c. 285.
§ 142-196 JUNKYARDS § 142-197
138:499
A. At the time specified in the Subsection B, a builder's agreement shall be
entered into between the owner and subdivider and the Joint Planning
Board and Township Council of River Vale. Said agreement shall
specifically detail all items of public improvements to be performed, the
amounts of bonds to be furnished, other requirements of the Joint
Planning Board and all other items as agreed and stipulated between
the owner and subdivider and the governing body and Joint Planning
Board of the Township of River Vale. Said agreement shall be prepared
by the Joint Planning Board and approved by the Township Council.
B. At the time of the granting of preliminary approval and before
commencement of improvements or soil-moving operations, the Joint
Planning Board may require the posting of a performance guaranty, as
approved by the Joint Planning Board Attorney, in an amount not to
exceed 120% of the cost of the public improvements and work as
required by the Joint Planning Board, which cost shall be determined by
the Township Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth
in Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4). The Township
Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements
covered by the performance guaranty, which itemized cost estimate
shall be appended to each performance guaranty posted by the obligor.
The Joint Planning Board shall require that a sum not in excess of 10%
of such estimated cost shall be posted with the Township as a cash
performance bond. Subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2, as the same may be amended from time to time,
the Joint Planning Board shall require that a sum equal to 7% of such
estimated cost, or $1,250, whichever is greater, be deposited with the
Township before commencement of operations to cover the expenses
incurred and to be incurred by the Township for engineering services
and legal expenses in connection with the subdivision and application
and in connection with the inspection and certification of improvements
within the development, but in no instance shall the deposit required
exceed a reasonable amount in light of the scale and complexity of the
development. In the event that the expenses incurred for engineering
services and legal expenses exceed the balance held by the Township
for such purposes, then the Township Administrator shall notify the
subdivider or developer that further moneys must be deposited. The
Joint Planning Board shall take no further action on the application
unless and until this further deposit is made. The builder's agreement
shall provide that if the Township's approved expenses for such
purposes shall exceed the amount deposited, the subdivider or
developer shall pay such excess amount to the Township, and shall
further provide that any portion of the deposit for costs not required to
be expended for such purposes shall be refunded to the subdivider or
developer, as the case may be. No such deposit shall be charged with an
amount unless the same shall represent a reimbursement to the
Township for payments by it for services rendered, upon proper
vouchers, as provided by law. In every case, any charge to the deposit
provided for herein shall be reviewed and approved by the municipality
as to the necessity for the performance of the service and the
§ 142-197 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-197
138:500
reasonableness of the amount charged therefor, to the same extent
as if there were no provision for reimbursement to the Township and
in light of the standards set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2 governing
escrow payments for professional services. The Township Engineer
shall perform the following inspections in connection with the
certifications of improvements within the development: [Amended
4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 0-1-93]
(1) Prior to the start of any excavation work, the developer shall notify
the Township Engineer. At the time, the Township Engineer shall
inspect the construction location and grade stakes, original ground
conditions and weather conditions and shall decide whether work
is to proceed or be delayed.
(2) During rough grade work, the Township Engineer shall conduct
periodic inspection of work progress and investigate any
subsurface conditions that are encountered. If, during the course of
construction, unforeseen conditions, such as springs, aquifer
layers, high groundwater tables and miscellaneous unknowns are
encountered, it shall be determined by the Township Engineer
whether or not the developer shall install additional catch basins,
storm drains, french drains or any other drainage appurtenances.
(3) The Township Engineer shall inspect all drainage trenches and
storm-drain pipes prior to any backfilling of the trenches. The
storm-drain pipes, pipe joints and pipe bedding shall be backfilled
and tamped in accordance with standard specifications approved
by the Township Engineer.
(4) The Township Engineer shall inspect excavation, subbase and
pouring of curbs and sidewalks. Said construction shall conform to
plans and specifications, the approved maps and Township
specifications and regulations.
(5) The tickets for deliveries on the site of materials or supplies may be
inspected to determine the quantities used.
(6) The Township Engineer shall inspect and check the materials and
amount of said materials used for the subbase material. Said
materials shall conform to the requirements as set forth on the
plans and specifications and to Township specifications and
requirements. When approval is given by the Township Engineer,
the work may proceed.
(7) The Township Engineer shall inspect final pavement construction
work during the course of said construction. The pavement shall be
constructed in accordance with the requirements as set forth on
the plans and specifications, the approved maps and Township
specifications and regulations.
§ 142-197 JUNKYARDS § 142-197
138:501
(8) The Township Engineer shall inspect the site of grading of
individual lots so as to avoid dangerous conditions or the creation
of low spots on lawns, driveways and other areas.
(9) The installation of concrete monuments shall be inspected by the
Township Engineer.
(10) Utilities shall be inspected by the Township Engineer in
conjunction with the various utility companies concerned.
(11) The Township Engineer shall inspect the installation of shade trees
in conjunction with a member of the Shade Tree Committee.
C. Any and all moneys posted by the developer or subdivider as a deposit
for costs of the Township's professional engineering and legal expenses
shall be deemed a credit to reduce by such amount the required posting
of 7% of the cost of construction of subdivision improvements. The
balance of any remaining moneys on deposit with the Township of River
Vale shall be refunded to the applying parties at any time following
expiration of 60 days from the receipt by the Township Clerk of the
certification of the Board Secretary that all costs and expenses of the
Township arising out of or due to the subdivision applicant have been
paid or sufficient provision therefor has otherwise been made.
D. A deposit of $50 to the Township of River Vale shall be made for each
concrete monument as shown on the plat and not actually in place,
which moneys shall be refunded to the owner on demand after the
monuments have been set by the owner's engineer to the satisfaction of
the Township Engineer. If the monuments are not set within 30 days
after written notice to the owners by the Township Engineer, the
Township shall retain said moneys as liquidated damages, and the
governing body shall then direct the Township Engineer to place the
monuments. The Township, at its option, may, in lieu of the above
deposit, accept a bond approved by the Board Attorney. [Amended
8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
E. Prior to release of the performance bond, the applicant shall file with
the Township Engineer as-built drawings, in ink, on tracing cloth to
such scale as required by the Township Engineer, accurately showing
the location, profile, size and appurtenances of all storm drains, catch
basins, septic tanks and septic systems, sanitary sewers and water
mains and all utilities, including service connections, constructed
within the subdivision. Such as-built drawings shall be and become the
property and public record of the Township of River Vale. Upon
submission of the as-built tracings to the Township Engineer and upon
the improvements being completed, installed and accepted by the
Township and upon compliance with the law and upon the performance
of all other terms of the builder's agreement, the Township Council,
after review and recommendation by the Joint Planning Board, shall
release the performance bond, provided that a maintenance bond in an
amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the public improvements and
§ 142-197 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-197
138:502
§ 142-198. Submission of final plat of major subdivision. [Amended
8-14-1969; 4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 0-1-93]
work, or of the original installation, is posted, which cost shall be
determined by the Township Engineer according to the method of
calculation set forth in Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A
40:55D-53.4). The maintenance bond shall be reviewed for form and
approved by the Joint Planning Board Attorney and shall run for a
period not to exceed two years from final acceptance of the
improvement. [Amended 4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 0-1-93]
A. The final plat shall be submitted to the Municipal Clerk for forwarding
to the Joint Planning Board for final approval within three years from
the date of preliminary approval. The Municipal Clerk shall immediately
notify the Secretary of the Joint Planning Board upon receipt of a final
plat, and the Joint Planning Board shall act upon the final plat within 45
days after the date of submission for final approval to the Municipal
Clerk.
B. The original tracing, one translucent tracing, cloth copy, two cloth
prints, six black-on-white prints and three copies of the application form
for final approval shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Joint
Planning Board at least two weeks prior to the date of a regular meeting
of the Joint Planning Board. At the time of submission, fees are to be
paid to the Township Clerk by the applicant as follows: A filing fee of
$500 plus $100 per lot. Unless the preliminary plat has been approved
without changes, the final plat shall incorporate all changes or
modifications required by the Joint Planning Board. [Amended
8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
C. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the Municipal
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact
location and elevation, identifying those portions already installed and
those to be installed, and that the subdivider has complied with one or
both of the following:
(1) Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
these regulations.
(2) A performance guaranty has been posted with the Township Clerk
in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required
improvements.
D. Any plat which requires County Planning Board approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:27-1253 shall be forwarded to the County Planning Board for
its action prior to final approval by the Joint Planning Board.
53.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1968, c. 285. See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50.
§ 142-197 JUNKYARDS § 142-198
138:503
E. If the Joint Planning Board approves the final plat, a notation to that
effect shall be made on each plat and shall be signed by the Chairman
and the Secretary of the Joint Planning Board.
F. Failure of the Joint Planning Board to act within the allotted time or a
mutually agreed upon extension shall be deemed to be favorable
approval, and the Municipal Clerk shall issue a certificate to that effect.
G. Upon final approval, copies of the final plat shall be filed by the Joint
Planning Board with the following:
(1) Municipal Clerk.
(2) Municipal Engineer.
(3) Building Inspector.
(4) Tax Assessor.
(5) County Planning Board.
(6) Official issuing certificates for approved lots.
H. Expiration of approval.
(1) Except as provided hereinbelow, approval of a major subdivision
shall expire 95 days from the date of signing of the plat unless
within such period the plat shall have been duly filed by the
developer with the county recording officer. The Joint Planning
Board may, for good cause shown, extend the period for recording
for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of the
signing of the plat.
(2) The Joint Planning Board may extend the ninety-five-day or onehundred-
ninety-day period if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Joint Planning Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
filing because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals
from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities and that
the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to
the period of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals,
as determined by the Joint Planning Board. The developer may
apply for the extension either before or after what would otherwise
be the expiration date.
I. No plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording officer
unless it has been duly approved by the Joint Planning Board and signed
by the Chairman, Acting Chairman or Secretary.
§ 142-198 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-198
138:504
ARTICLE XLIV
Plat Details
§ 142-199. Sketch plat.
The sketch plat shall be based on Tax Map information or some other
similarly accurate base at a scale (preferably not less than 100 feet to be
shown on one sheet and shall show to the inch) to enable the entire tract or
include the following information:
§ 142-200. Preliminary plat.
A. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
B. All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be
subdivided.
C. The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
D. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
E. All streets or roads and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
A. The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at
a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. Preliminary plats shall
be designed and drawn by a licensed New Jersey land surveyor or by a
planner holding full or associate membership in the American Institute
of Planners. The plat shall be designed in compliance with the
provisions of Article XLVI (§ 142-205 et seq.) of this Part 8 and shall
show or be accompanied by the following information:
(1) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
(2) The tract name, Tax Map sheet, block and lot number, date,
reference meridian, graphic scale and the following names and
addresses:
(a) The name and address of the record owner or owners.
(b) The name and address of the subdivider.
(c) The name and address of the person who prepared the map.
(3) Acreage of the tract to be subdivided to nearest tenth of an acre.
(4) Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope
and natural drainage of the land and the high and low points and
tentative cross sections and center-line profiles for all proposed
new streets. Contours shall be shown at five-foot intervals for
slopes averaging 10% or greater and at two-foot intervals for land
of lesser slope.
§ 142-199 JUNKYARDS § 142-200
138:505
§ 142-201. Final plat.
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 50 feet and in compliance with all of the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the
following:
(5) The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets,
structures, including driveways, watercourses, bridges, culverts,
drainpipes and any natural features such as wooded areas and rock
formations. Driveway locations may be changed, provided that the
Joint Planning Board is advised of the need for alternate, possible
driveway locations upon submission of the preliminary plat.
[Amended 4-19-1979 by Ord. No. 0-9-79]
(6) Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas
and electricity) showing feasible connections to existing or any
proposed utility systems. When an individual water supply and/or
sewage disposal system is proposed, the plan for such system must
be approved by the appropriate local, county or state health
agency. When a public sewage disposal system is not available, the
developer shall have percolation tests made and submit the results
with the preliminary plat. Any subdivision or part thereof which
does not meet with the established requirements of this Part 8 or
other applicable regulation shall not be approved. Any remedy
proposed to overcome such a situation shall first be approved by
the appropriate local, county or state health agency.
(7) A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to
the land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat.
B. Prior to the consideration of this plat, a deposit may be required to
cover the cost of review and investigation of preliminary plans or for
inspection of street or other improvements.
A. The date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines; with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs and central angles of all
curves.
C. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than
residential shall be noted.
D. Each block shall be numbered consecutively beginning with number
one.
§ 142-200 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-201
138:506
E. The minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
F. The location and description of all monuments.
G. The names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
H. A certification by the engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of details of
the plat.
I. A certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land or that
the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
J. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of such a
municipality, county or state, approval shall be certified on the plat.
K. Cross sections and profiles of streets approved by the Municipal
Engineer may be required to accompany the final plat.
L. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
M. A certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
§ 142-201 JUNKYARDS § 142-201
138:507

ARTICLE XLV
Improvements
§ 142-202. Improvements required.
§ 142-203. Certification and performance guaranty.
No final plat shall be approved by the Joint Planning Board until the
completion of all such required improvements has been certified to the Joint
A. Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have
installed or shall have furnished performance guaranties for the
ultimate installation of the following:
(1) Streets.
(2) Street signs.
(3) Curbs and/or gutters.
(4) Sidewalks.
(5) Streetlighting.
(6) Shade trees. Street trees shall be located on the street line so as
not to interfere with utilities or sidewalks and shall be of one of the
following types: Norway maple, sugar maple or plane trees.
(7) Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or
used as spoil. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall
be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all
areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
(8) Monuments. Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by
Section 4 of N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. and shall be placed in
accordance with said statute.
(9) Water mains, culverts, storm sewers and sanitary sewers. All such
installations shall be properly connected with an approved system
and shall be adequate to handle all present and probable future
development.
B. Sanitary sewers shall be installed by all subdividers in accordance with
certain standards on file in the Township Engineer's office and in
accordance with the design standards set forth hereafter in this article.
[Added 8-1-1968]
C. All of the above-listed improvements shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the Municipal Engineer who shall be notified by the
developer at least 24 hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and
approved.
§ 142-202 JUNKYARDS § 142-203
138:509
Planning Board by the Municipal Engineer, unless the subdivision owner
shall have filed with the municipality a performance guaranty sufficient
in amount to cover the cost of all such improvements or uncompleted
portions thereof as estimated by the Municipal Engineer, and assuring the
installation of such uncompleted improvements on or before an agreed date.
Such performance guaranty may be in the form of a performance bond
which shall be issued by a bonding or surety company approved by the
governing body; a certified check, returnable to the subdivider after full
compliance; or any other type of surety approved by the Municipal Attorney.
§ 142-204. Approval and term of performance guaranty. [Amended
4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 0-1-93]
A. The performance guaranty shall be approved by the Joint Planning
Board Attorney as to form, sufficiency and execution. Such performance
guaranty shall run for a period to be fixed by the Joint Planning Board
but in no case for a term of more than three years. However, the time
allowed for installation of the improvements for which the performance
guaranty has been provided may be extended by the Township Council
by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such extension, the
amount of any performance guaranty shall be increased or reduced, as
the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the
installation, which cost shall be determined by the Township Engineer
according to the method of calculation set forth in Section 15 of P.L.
1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4) as of the time of the passage of the
resolution.
B. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the municipality for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected, and the Township may,
either prior to or after receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete such
improvements.
§ 142-203 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-204
138:510
ARTICLE XLVI
Design Standards
§ 142-205. Requirements and principles.
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof.
§ 142-206. Standards.
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage
good development patterns within the municipality. Where either or both
an Official Map or Master Plan has or have been adopted, the subdivision
shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The streets,
drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds shown
on an officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be considered
an approval of subdivision plats. Where no Master Plan or Official Map
exists, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the final plat
in accordance with Section 20 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 195354 and
shall be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious development of
the municipality and enhance the public welfare in accordance with the
following design standards.
§ 142-207. Streets.
A. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official
Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets.
B. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
C. Subdivision abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting, or some other
means of separation of through and local traffic as the Joint Planning
Board may determine appropriate.
D. Right-of-way width.
(1) The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line
and shall not be less than the following:
(a) Arterial streets: 60 feet to 80 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 50 feet to 60 feet.
(c) Minor streets: 50 feet.
(d) Marginal access streets: 40 feet.
(2) The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily,
commercial and industrial development shall be determined on an
54.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
§ 142-205 JUNKYARDS § 142-207
138:511
§ 142-208. Blocks.
individual basis, and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and
loading needs and maximum access for fire-fighting equipment.
E. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been placed in the governing body under conditions
approved by the Joint Planning Board.
F. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the street
width requirements of this Part 8 shall dedicate additional width along
either one or both sides of said road. If the subdivision is along one side
only, 1/2 of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
G. Grades for arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%. Grades on
other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have a minimum
grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.
H. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at intersections
shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less
than 20 feet.
I. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited. This requirement shall be deemed to prohibit street offsets
in which the center lines are proposed to be aligned instead of offset.
[Amended 8-14-1969]
J. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
K. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for minor streets and 300
feet for arterial and collector streets.
L. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
M. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and
shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than 50
feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street. If a
dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be
provided and provisions made for future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
N. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name.
§ 142-207 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-208
138:512
§ 142-209. Lots.
§ 142-210. Public use and service areas.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by Part 9, Zoning,
and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of
street traffic.
B. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required
in locations deemed necessary by the Joint Planning Board. Such
walkway shall be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to street.
C. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of Part
9, Zoning.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets, and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in width
except lots fronting on streets described in § 142-207D(1)(d) and (2) of
this article.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the Joint Planning Board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
F. Side lot lines shall be straight for the full depth of the lot. [Added
12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 0-16-89]
A. Easements; setbacks. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 0-17-89]
(1) In large-scale development, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements
shall be at least 15 feet wide and located in consultation with the
companies or municipal departments concerned.
(2) In all residential and other subdivisions involving building
development, no buildings or structures shall be located within a
minimum setback of 25 feet from the center line of a natural gas or
liquefied gas transmission line or within 25 feet of overhead
electric or other high-tension lines. In respect of overhead or aerial
lines, the setback shall be measured from a line drawn vertically
from the outer edge of any overhead electric or other high-tension
§ 142-208 JUNKYARDS § 142-210
138:513
§ 142-211. Sanitary sewers.55 [Added 8-1-1968]
line or from any supporting structure or stanchion supporting an
overhead powerline.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway
channel or street, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
C. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
A. In general the design standards shall follow the latest New Jersey State
Department of Health Rules and Regulations for the Design of
Sewerage, Water Treatment and Supply Facilities except as otherwise
indicated in this Part 8.
B. The maximum manhole spacing for sewers 15 inches in diameter or
smaller shall be 300 feet. The maximum manhole spacing for sewers
larger than 15 inches shall be 400 feet. Flushing manholes shall be
provided at the ends of all sanitary sewers.
C. The minimum diameter of building sewer pipe shall be six inches.
D. The details for construction of sewer appurtenances appended hereto
are as follows:56
Drawing No. 1, Trench Details
Drawing No. 2, Standard Manhole
Drawing No. 3, Drop Manhole Connection
Drawing No. 4, Flushing Manhole
Drawing No. 5, Typical Manhole Frame and Cover
Drawing No. 6, Building Sewer Connection
Drawing No. 7, Deep Building Sewer Connection
E. Asbestos cement sewer pipe and building sewer pipe shall be a
minimum of Class 2400.
F. Vitrified clay sewer pipe and building sewer pipe shall be extra-strength
pipe. Where trench loading conditions require additional strength, the
pipe shall be installed with a concrete cradle or encasement.
G. Cast-iron pipe shall be tar coated and a minimum of Class 22.
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Sewers.
56.Editor's Note: Drawing Nos. 1 through 7 are on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 142-210 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-211
138:514
H. The trench loading of the sewer pipe shall be computed by the Marston
Formula assuming a unit weight of backfill as 130 pounds per cubic
foot, the value of Ku and Ku as 0.130 with an H-20 truck loading plus an
allowance of 50% for impact.
I. The allowable load on the pipe shall not exceed the three-edge bearing
strength of the pipe times a trench bedding factor of 1.8 divided by a
factor of safety of 1.5.
J. At the time of the granting of preliminary approval of major
subdivisions and before commencement of improvements or soilmoving
operations, the Joint Planning Board in all cases in which
sanitary sewers are required shall require the applicant to post with the
Township Clerk, in addition to any other fees and deposits required by
this Part 8, a sum not to exceed 10% of the estimated cost of the
installation of the sanitary sewer facilities, to cover the Township's
professional engineering and legal expenses in respect of such sewer
improvements. The design, materials and installation of the sanitary
sewers required by the Board shall be subject to the inspection and
approval of the Township Sewer Engineer. The determination of said
Engineer shall be controlled by the design standard herein established,
to the end that the sanitary sewer improvements installed by the
subdivider shall be a safe, sound and adequate extension and integral
part of the Township's projected public sanitary sewer system. The
foregoing requirements for sanitary-sewer systems may be provided for
in the builder's agreement, and the administrative provisions of this
Part 8 in connection with deposits for costs, approval of expenses by the
Township in all cases, submission of vouchers and charges to the
Township less than and in excess of the amount deposited shall govern
as it relates to charges by the Township to the additional deposit for
costs for sanitary-sewer improvements. [Added 8-14-1969]
§ 142-211 JUNKYARDS § 142-211
138:515

ARTICLE XLVII
Penalties
§ 142-212. Violations and penalties.
If, before final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or sells
or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a
subdivision on which, by ordinance, the Joint Planning Board is required
to act, such person shall be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, and each parcel, plot or lot so disposed of shall
be deemed a separate violation.
§ 142-213. Civil actions permissible.
A. In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not
such that a structure on said land in the subdivision would meet
requirements for a building permit under Section 3 of the Official Map
and Building Permit Act (1953),57 the municipality may institute and
maintain a civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief.
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with Section 24 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of
1953,58 but only if the municipality has a Planning Board or a
Committee thereof with power to act and which:
(a) Meets regularly on a monthly or more frequent basis; and
(b) Whose governing body has adopted standards and procedures
in accordance with Section 20 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of
1953.59
B. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the subdivider
or his assigns or successor, to secure the return of any deposit made or
purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense
and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within
two years after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer,
sale or conveyance of said land, or within six years if unrecorded.
57.Editor's Note: This statute was repealed by L. 1975, c. 291, the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). Various sections of the Municipal Land Use Law have replaced
the Official Map and Building Permit Act (1953), N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.30 to 40:55-1.42.
58.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1975, c. 291. See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
59.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 1975, c. 291. See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 142-212 JUNKYARDS § 142-213
138:517

ARTICLE XLVIII
Variances
§ 142-214. Power of Joint Planning Board to permit variance from
regulations.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Township of River Vale. Any action taken by the
Joint Planning Board under the terms of this Part 8 shall give primary
consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the
entire community. However, if the subdivider or his agent can clearly
demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the
literal enforcement of one or more of these regulations is impracticable
or will exact undue hardship, the Joint Planning Board may permit such
variance or variances as may be reasonable and within the general purpose
and intent of the rules, regulations and standards established by this Part 8.
§ 142-214 JUNKYARDS § 142-214
138:519

Part 9
[Adopted 7-6-1967ZAosn iCnhg. 84 Of 1967 Code]
ARTICLE XLIX
Administration and Procedures
§ 142-215. Interpretation.
§ 142-216. Enforcement.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Part 9 shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
B. Wherever the provisions of any statute of the State of New Jersey or
other ordinance or regulation of the Township of River Vale require a
greater width or size of yards, buildings or open spaces or require a
lower height of buildings or a lesser number of stories or require a
greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied or impose restrictions
more extensive than are required by the regulations of this Part 9, the
provisions of such statute of the State of New Jersey or other ordinance
or regulation of the Township of River Vale shall govern.
C. It is the intention of this Part 9 to zone, restrict and limit the use of land
within the Township of River Vale; and the use of any land, whether or
not there is a building thereon, for any use prohibited hereby, in the
district in which the same is located, shall be unlawful.
A. This Part 9 shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor. No building permit or certificate of occupancy
shall be issued by him except where the provisions of this Part 9 are
complied with. [Amended 2-23-1995 by Ord. No. 0-2-95]
B. No building or structure shall be erected, added to or structurally
altered in the Township of River Vale until there has been filed with the
Zoning Officer a plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions, radii and angles of the lot to be built upon, the exact size
and location on the lot of the main and accessory buildings to be
erected, the exact size and location of the sanitary plant and such other
information as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of this Part 9. One copy of such plan shall be returned to
the owner when approved by the Zoning Officer. [Amended 2-23-1995
by Ord. No. 0-2-95]
C. Separation.
(1) Where a lot is formed from part of a lot already improved, the
separation must be effected in such manner as not to impair any of
the provisions of this Part 9 whether related to the then-existing
improvement or to the proposed new improvement.
§ 142-215 JUNKYARDS § 142-216
138:521
§ 142-217. Joint Planning Board.
(2) In addition to the limitations set forth in Subsection C(1) above, no
action under Part 9, Zoning, shall cause to be created a
nonconformity upon any contiguous lots or property. [Added
11-28-2005 by Ord. No. 138-2005]
D. Such fees for building permits or the filing of plans may be charged as
are now or may hereafter be fixed by ordinance, together with fees
payable to the Board of Health for sanitary or plumbing permits and
inspections.
A. A Joint Planning Board is hereby established which shall, in appropriate
cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, make
special exceptions to the terms of this Part 9 in harmony with its
general purpose and intent and in accordance with the variances and
rules herein contained and by law established.
B. Said Joint Planning Board shall consist of seven regular members and
two alternate members to be appointed by the Township Council
immediately upon adoption hereof. Said persons shall not hold any
elective office or positions within the Township. Of the original
appointees of said Board, one member shall be appointed for a term of
one year, two members for the term of two years and two members for
the term of three years. Successors to such original appointees shall be
appointed for the term of four years. Alternate members shall be
appointed for a term of two years. Vacancies in said Joint Planning
Board shall be filled in the same manner for the unexpired term of any
member whose term becomes vacant; provided, however, that should
the Legislature hereafter provide for a different number of members or
altering their method of appointment or term, this Part 9 shall be
deemed to be amended to such extent and appointments thereafter
made in harmony therewith. [Amended 2-21-1980 by Ord. No.
0-2-80]
C. A quorum shall consist of four members. The meetings of the Joint
Planning Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and/or at such
other times as the Board by its bylaws may decide. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each
application for development or other question as to which a roll call
vote is required by law and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office
of the Board and shall be a public record. [Amended 2-21-1980 by
Ord. No. 0-2-80; 4-22-1993 by Ord. No. 0-1-93]
D. Said Board shall perform all the duties and have all of the powers now
or hereafter provided by law to be exercised by Boards of Adjustment
and shall determine the true location of any district boundary line.
E. If the Joint Planning Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members is prohibited by Section 56 of P.L. 1975, c. 291
§ 142-216 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-217
138:522
§ 142-218. Amendments.
§ 142-219. Certificate of occupancy required. [Amended 2-23-1995
by Ord. No. 0-2-95]
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any building or premises
or part thereof, now or hereafter created, erected, changed, converted
or enlarged wholly or partly, in its use or structure, until a certificate
of occupancy shall have been issued by the Construction Official. Such
certificate shall show that such building or premises or part thereof and
the proposed use thereof are in conformity with the provisions of this Part
9. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to issue a certificate of
occupancy within 10 days after a request for the same shall have been filed
in his office by any owner, after having first determined that the building
and the proposed use thereof conform to all the requirements herein set
forth.
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69) from acting on a matter due to the member's
personal or financial interest therein, Class IV members of the Joint
Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as
temporary members of the Joint Planning Board. The Class IV members
of the Joint Planning Board shall be called upon to serve in order
of seniority of continuous service to the Joint Planning Board until
there are the minimum number of members necessary to constitute
a quorum to act upon the matter without any personal or financial
interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be made
between Class IV members of equal seniority, the Chairman of the Joint
Planning Board shall make the choice. [Added 4-22-1993 by Ord. No.
0-1-93]
A. The Township Council may from time to time, on its own motion or on
petition, amend, supplement or repeal the regulations and provisions of
this Part 9, or any part thereof.
B. Whenever the owners of 50% or more of the street frontage in any
district or any specified part thereof, as determined by the Joint
Planning Board, shall present to the Township Council a petition duly
signed and acknowledged, requesting an amendment, supplement,
change, modification or repeal of the regulations prescribed for said
district or specified part thereof, it shall be the duty of the Township
Council to hold a public hearing thereon and cause notice thereof to be
given, for the purpose of granting an opportunity to the signers of said
petition to be heard.
A. Under such rules and regulations as may be established by the
Township Council, a temporary certificate of occupancy for a part of a
building may be issued by the Construction Official.
B. Upon written request from the owner, the Construction Official shall
issue a certificate of occupancy for any building or premises existing at
the time of passage of this Part 9, certifying after inspection, the extent
§ 142-217 JUNKYARDS § 142-219
138:523
§ 142-220. Violations and penalties; additional remedies.
and kind of use made of the building or premises, including the number
of employees and whether such use conforms to the provisions of this
Part 9.
C. Each applicant for a certificate of occupancy shall pay for the same the
fee which is now or hereafter may be provided by ordinance.
A. For any and every violation of the provisions of the Building Zone
Ordinance of the Township of River Vale, 1944, of this Part 9 and any
supplement or amendment thereto, heretofore or hereafter adopted,
the owner or owners, architect, general agent or agents, contractor or
contractors of any building or premises or any other person or persons
interested as lessee, tenant or otherwise in any building or premise
where such violation has been committed or shall exist or any other
person who permits, commits, takes part in or assists in such violation
shall, for each and every such violation, be subject to the penalties in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, at the discretion of the
court or Judge before whom such person may be convicted. [Amended
11-12-1970]
B. Each and every day that any such violation continues shall be
considered a separate and specific offense.
C. Nothing in this Part 9 shall be construed as depriving the Township of
River Vale or the Township Council or any interested person of any
other available remedy.
§ 142-219 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-220
138:524
ARTICLE L
Division Into Districts
§ 142-221. Zoning districts and map. [Amended 2-4-1972 by Ord.
No. 0-1-72; 4-13-1972 by Ord. No. 0-9-72; ]
A. For the purpose of this Part 9, the Township of River Vale is hereby
divided into classes or districts as follows: [Amended 10-14-1976 by
Ord. No. 0-17-76; 2-16-1978 by Ord. No. 0-2-78; 11-26-1985 by
Ord. No. 0-11-85; 6-22-1989 by Ord. No. 0-10-89; 8-23-1990 by
Ord. No. 0-9-90; 12-13-1990 by Ord. No. 0-18-90; 5-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 0-3-91; 5-28-1992 by Ord. No. 0-4-92; 3-10-2008 by Ord.
No. 192-2008; 6-22-2009 by Ord. No. 213-2009; 5-23-2011 by
Ord. No. 249-2011; 11-27-2017 by Ord. No. 328-2017; 12-9-2019
by Ord. No. 362-2019]
A Residence District for one-family dwellings
A-1 Residence District for one-family dwellings
B Residence District for one-family dwellings
B-1 Residence District
C Commercial District for business center
SH Senior Housing District
HDD Housing District for the Disabled
MF-20 Residence District for multiple-family dwellings
PO Professional Office District
Open Space and Recreation Zone
PRD Planned Residential Development District
SFAH Single-Family Affordable Housing District
MFAH Multifamily Affordable Housing District
CN Conservation District
TH-1 Townhouse Zone (T.H. Zone)
AH-1 Affordable Housing-1 Zone
OL Downtown Inclusionary “Four Corners” Overlay Zone
B. The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on
the Zoning Map, Township of River Vale, Bergen County, New Jersey,
prepared by Yurasek Associates and dated March 26, 1992,60 which
accompanies and is declared to be a part of this Part 9. The Township
Clerk shall maintain copies of the said map at the Township offices
available to examination by the public during normal business hours.
The boundaries of the Commercial District and the Housing District for
60.Editor's Note: The date of the Zoning Map was revised to 5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 199-2008,
adopted 6-9-2008. See the Table of Zoning Map Amendments, which is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 142-221 JUNKYARDS § 142-221
138:525
the Disabled are also set forth in Subsections C and D, respectively, of
this section. The boundaries of the Single-Family Affordable Housing
District and the Conservation District are set forth on the schedules
which accompany and are declared to be a part of this Part 9.61 The
boundaries of the Multifamily Affordable Housing District are set forth
on Schedules 1 through 5 which accompany and are declared to be a
part of this Part 9.62 [Amended 11-26-1985 by Ord. No. 0-11-85;
4-28-1988 by Ord. No. 0-6-88; 8-23-1990 by Ord. No. 0-9-90;
12-13-1990 by Ord. No. 0-18-90; 5-9-1991 by Ord. No. 0-3-91;
5-28-1992 by Ord. No. 0-4-92]
C. The C Commercial District consists of the following lots, as shown on
the Tax Assessment Map for the Township: [Added 4-28-1988 by Ord.
No. 0-6-88]
(1) In Block 1719, Lots 3, 4, 5, 5A and 6.
(2) In Block 1801, Lots 7, 8, 9, 9.01, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21 and 22.
(3) In Block 2101, Lots 1, 2, 58 and 63.
(4) In Block 2206, Lots 10, 11, 12, 12.01, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 40,
41, 43 and 44.
D. The HDD Housing District for the Disabled consists of Block 2301, Lots
10 and 11, as shown on the Tax Assessment Map for the Township.
[Added 8-23-1990 by Ord. No. 0-9-90]
E. Heliports, helistops and related facilities prohibited. Heliports,
helistops and related facilities intended for the takeoff and landing of
helicopters or any other form of aircraft are specifically prohibited in
any zoning class or district. [Added 12-18-1980 by Ord. No.
0-28-80]
F. Riding academies. The stabling, keeping or letting out for hire of horses
and the boarding of horses not owned by the owner or occupant of the
premises are prohibited uses in all zones or districts. [Added
5-19-1983 by Ord. No. 0-7-83]
G. The SH Senior Housing District consists of Block 2101, Lots 2, 3 and 28,
and Block 701, Lot 8. [Added 2-28-2002 by Ord. No. 0-1-02]
61.Editor's Note: A description of the boundaries of the SFAH Single-Family Affordable
Housing District may be found in the Table of Zoning Map Amendments, which is included
as an attachment to this chapter. The schedules are on file in the office of the Township
Clerk.
62.Editor's Note: A description of the boundaries of the MFAH Multifamily Affordable
Housing District may be found in the Table of Zoning Map Amendments, which is included
as an attachment to this chapter. The schedules are on file in the office of the Township
Clerk.
§ 142-221 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-221
138:526
ARTICLE LI
Height and Bulk of Buildings
§ 142-222. Limiting schedule adopted.63 [Amended 8-24-2009 by
Ord. No. 217-2009]
There is hereby established and declared to be part of this Part 9, Zoning,
the adopted Township of River Vale Bulk Requirements Schedule, which
is made part of these regulations. The Township of River Vale Bulk
Requirements Schedule provides the permissible height and bulk of
buildings, and establishes the minimum sizes of lots and buildings, families
per building, mandatory open spaces, minimum yard sizes, and other
limitations. Regulations as to the use of land, buildings and premises
applying to the several districts are set forth hereinafter in Article LII (§
142-223 et seq.). The Bulk Requirements Schedule shall not replace any
information contained in Article LII.
63.Editor's Note: Provisions of the schedule are in Article LVIII. Instead of using the original
chart form, to facilitate inclusion of future amendments, these provisions are set in a style
to conform to the rest of the Zoning Ordinance. Information regarding uses of a particular
district may be found under separate section headings in Article LVIII.
§ 142-222 JUNKYARDS § 142-222
138:527

ARTICLE LII
Use of Buildings and Permits
§ 142-223. A Residence District. [Amended 2-4-1972 by Ord. No.
0-6-72]
In the A Residence District, no building shall be used and no building shall
be erected or altered which is arranged, intended or designed to be used,
and no land shall be used, except for one or more of the following uses:
A. A single dwelling, whether attached or detached, used as a residence by
not more than two persons or by one family. For purposes of this article,
a "family" is defined as more than two persons living together as a
single nonprofit housekeeping unit, whose relationship is of a
permanent and domestic character, as distinguished from groups of
persons or associations, such as but not limited to fraternities,
sororities, dormitories, clubs or group homes. Nothing herein contained
shall be construed to prohibit the placement of persons in group homes
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66 et seq. [Amended 2-18-1982 by Ord.
No. 0-2-82]
B. A private garage or other accessory building customarily incidental to
any use permitted by this section, provided that such accessory
building shall be on the same plot with the building to which it is
accessory, and also provided that such accessory building shall not be
used for residence purposes.
C. A church or other place of worship or a parish house.
D. Public school under the administration of the Board of Education of the
Township of River Vale.
E. Free public library, free public museum, free public art gallery, public
park or public recreation ground maintained and operated by the
Township of River Vale and any other municipal building or use.
F. Reservoir or water supply reservation.
G. The office or studio of a physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer, artist,
architect, engineer, musician, accountant, real estate and/or insurance
broker or agent residing on the premises, provided that said building
containing said office and/or studio is located only on a county road, and
provided further that not more than three employees or assistants are
engaged in connection with such use on the premises, and provided
further that there is no display of goods or advertising on the premises
other than a professional nameplate not to exceed 10 inches in height
and 18 inches in length, and provided further that in the office or studio
of an artist or musician the sale or display of goods is not permitted.
[Amended 6-12-1975 by Ord. No. 0-10-75; 5-31-1979 by Ord. No.
0-18-79]
§ 142-223 JUNKYARDS § 142-223
138:529
H. Golf courses. Golf courses shall be permitted if on not less than 164
acres of contiguous or adjoining land. However no elevated or
multitiered driving range is permitted. Illumination of any driving range
is also prohibited. [Amended 3-27-1997 by Ord. No. 0-6-97]
I. Farming.
J. Family day-care homes. "Family day-care home" means the private
residence of a family day-care provider which is registered as a family
day-care home pursuant to the Family Day Care Provider Registration
Act, P.L. 1987, c. 27 (N.J.S.A 30:5B-16 et seq.). [Added 4-22-1993 by
Ord. No. 0-1-93]
K. Community residences for the developmentally disabled or for persons
with head injuries and community shelters for victims of domestic
violence. A community residence for the developmentally disabled or
for persons with head injuries or a community shelter for victims of
domestic violence for six persons or less, excluding resident staff, shall
be permitted. Subject to conditional use approval by the Joint Planning
Board, a community residence for the developmentally disabled or for
persons with head injuries or a community shelter for victims of
domestic violence for more than six persons, excluding resident staff,
shall be permitted on the following conditions: [Added 11-25-1997 by
Ord. No. 0-22-97]
(1) Off-street parking. There shall be one space for each resident plus
one space for each staff member.
(2) Resident staff shall each have a separate bedroom.
(3) Bathrooms. There shall be one bathroom facility for every three
occupants, with a minimum of two bathroom facilities.
(4) Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 20% greater than
the minimum lot area required for the district where the property is
situated for each occupant over six. For example, the minimum lot
area for a residence or shelter with eight occupants shall be 40%
greater than the minimum lot area for the district where the
property is situated.
(5) Signs. No signs shall be permitted on the residence or shelter
designating it a community residence for the developmentally
disabled or for persons with head injuries or a community shelter
for victims of domestic violence.
(6) Conformity with neighborhood. The residence or shelter shall be
maintained and conform in design to single-family residences in the
neighborhood.
(7) Driveway. The driveway shall be consistent in design with
driveways in the neighborhood.
§ 142-223 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-223
138:530
§ 142-224. A-1 Residence District. [Amended 11-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 0-11-85; 4-9-2018 by Ord. No. 332-2018]
The permitted uses of buildings and premises in the A-1 District shall be the
same as those established for the A District, except that the following use
shall also be permitted in the A-1 Residence District:
(8) Site plan approval. The conditional use applicant shall also obtain
site plan approval.
(9) No permit shall be issued if:
(a) The proposed residence is located within 1,500 feet of an
existing such residence or shelter.
(b) The total number of residents in such existing community
residence and shelter exceeds 50 persons or 0.5% of the total
population of the municipality, whichever is greater.
(c) The proposed residence or shelter would be nonconforming in
the district where proposed.
A. Residential/golf course, subject to the standards established herein.
(1) Residential/golf course development regulations.
(a) Minimum tract area. The total land area required for
residential/golf course development shall be 150 acres. The
golf course may include lands outside the Township of River
Vale, however, the minimum tract area requirement herein
specified shall be exclusive of any such lands.
(b) Required principal uses. The residential/golf course
development shall contain the following use components:
[1] A minimum eighteen-hole regulation golf course. The golf
course shall be a minimum length of 6,000 yards
collectively measured by each of 18 holes, from the center
of the rearmost tee to the center of the green of each hole.
The course shall be held under separate ownership and
subdivided from the residential units provided for herein.
[2] The residential component consisting of any, or all of the
following designed to appeal to an age-targeted luxury
market comprising young professional and empty nester
households: quadplexes and townhouses, except that not
less than 70% of all residential dwellings shall be
townhouse units.
[3] Ten percent of all the residential units shall be set aside
and designated as family rental units affordable to lowand
moderate-income households. Said set-aside
provisions shall be pursuant to the New Jersey Uniform
§ 142-223 JUNKYARDS § 142-224
138:531
Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC), with the exception
that in lieu of 10% of affordable units in rental projects
being required to be at 35% of median income, 13% of
affordable units in such projects shall be required to be
at 30% of median income, the current applicable rules as
included in the Township's Master Plan Housing Element,
and/or any and all affordable housing decisions made by
the New Jersey Superior, Appellate, or Supreme Court (the
"affordable units"). The ten-percent affordable set-aside
is a required component of any residential/golf course
development.
[4] A building containing 100% affordable units (the
"affordable building"). Ten percent of all the total number
of the residential units developed on the residential
component shall be affordable and located in the
affordable building and shall be phased with the total
residential units pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(d).
(c) Permitted accessory uses.
[1] Accessory uses shall be permitted in conjunction with the
golf course use, provided that the operation of such uses
are clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the golf
course:
[a] Clubhouse facilities including dining, a lounge,
meeting, banquet and catering facilities primarily for
on-site consumption.
[b] Tennis and golf pro shop.
[c] Swimming pool, tennis, racquet courts, paddle tennis
and/or similar outdoor amenities typical to country
club uses in the region and designed for club member
use.
[d] A driving range and practice putting green.
[e] Maintenance facilities for storage of equipment and
supplies used on site.
[f] Caretaker dwellings and housing for seasonal
employees working on site. Said housing shall be
prohibited should the golf course component cease to
exist and/or be open for use.
[g] Gatehouses not to exceed 175 square feet of interior
area designed to match the exterior architectural style
of the residential units.
[h] Off-street parking minimum: four spaces per hole, and
one per driving range tee.
§ 142-224 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-224
138:532
[i] Signage, including a monument identification sign and
directional signage as approved by the Planning
Board.
[2] The following accessory uses shall be permitted in
conjunction with the residential use:
[a] Active recreational facilities including clubhouses,
swimming pools, and tennis courts, for the exclusive
use of residents and guests.
[b] Passive open space recreational amenities including
walking trails and jogging paths, exercise courses,
gathering and seating areas.
[c] Facilities intended for the social and recreational
needs of residents, such as exercise rooms, lounge
areas, game and resident meeting rooms.
[d] Gatehouses not to exceed 175 square feet of interior
area designed to match the exterior architectural style
of the residential units. A gatehouse entry feature with
a divided median and enhanced landscape plantings
may be incorporated into the design of the shared
access driveway or residential access driveway.
[e] Signage, including a monument identification sign and
directional signage as approved by the Planning
Board.
(d) Residential development and design standards.
[1] The residential development shall follow the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS), as
amended.
[2] Vehicular and pedestrian access shall be directly from
Bergen County roads. Access from local streets is not
permitted.
[3] The maximum gross residential density shall not exceed
1.5 dwelling units per acre as applied to the total tract
area for the residential/golf course development. Total
number of: i) market rate dwelling units shall not exceed
226; and ii) affordable dwelling units shall not exceed 24.
[4] There shall be no more than three bedrooms per unit. All
units shall have a minimum of a one-car garage exclusive
of the affordable units. Affordable building units shall not
have a garage.
§ 142-224 JUNKYARDS § 142-224
138:533
[5] There shall be no more than five dwellings in any single
building containing townhouse units. The affordable
building shall contain no more than 24 units.
[6] No less than 50% of all buildings containing townhouses
shall contain four or fewer dwelling units.
[7] No more than four attached units may be constructed
without providing a front exterior facade setback/stagger
of a minimum of two feet.
[8] Setbacks.
[a] Minimum distance between buildings:
[i] Front to front: 50 feet.
[ii] Side to side: 15 feet.
[iii] Front to side: 15 feet.
[iv] Rear to rear: 30 feet.
[v] Side to rear: 20 feet.
[b] The above setbacks may be reduced by up to 20% if
any of the following are met: i) there is an angle of 20°
or more between the buildings; ii) the encroachment
is for a deck or enclosed patio extension; iii) the
building projection is less than 15 feet wide.
[9] Maximum height of a principal building or structure: 2 1/2
stories or 45 feet, with the exception that the affordable
building shall have a maximum height of three stories, 50
feet.
[10] Maximum height of an accessory building or structure:
one story or 25 feet.
[11] Minimum setback of a principal building or structure to a
public street right-of-way, other than an existing municipal
street: 50 feet. Said setback excludes reserved road
easements.
[12] Minimum setback of an accessory building or structure to
a public street: 25 feet.
[13] Any land that is not used for principal or accessory
buildings or structures, streets, parking areas, driveways,
walkways, hardscaped areas, patios or decks shall be
maintained as passive open space.
[14] Minimum building setback to internal roadways: 22 feet
from the pavement edge where there is an intervening
§ 142-224 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-224
138:534
driveway serving a garage and a public sidewalk adjacent
to the road; 10 feet otherwise. No parking shall be
permitted over sidewalks.
[15] To insure that the residential component of development is
not located in any area where it can be reasonably
anticipated that golf balls may land and injure a resident,
pedestrian visitor or motorist, a golf course safety zone
shall be established using generally acceptable guidelines
for same as part of the overall project design.
[16] Residential design guidelines. To the extent practical,
townhouse dwelling units should be designed such that
units either have direct or partial golf course views; back
onto internal open space corridors; or are placed within
small neighborhood clusters. Clusters of dwelling units
should be designed in consideration of the natural
landscape. Where possible, mature trees shall be
preserved and incorporated into the overall landscape
design. Stormwater management ponds should be
designed to serve as an open space amenity to the
residential component of the development, as well as serve
their intended function for flood control, groundwater
recharge, and fire protection purposes.
[17] Townhouse dwelling units should have a compatible
architectural theme, with variations in exterior design and
color which complement such a theme. This shall include
varying building and/or facade orientation, modifying
dwelling unit widths and heights, changing rooflines and
altering color and fenestration patterns. A minimum of
30% of any exterior building facade area should be
comprised of either a brick or stone material, or
combination thereof.
[a] The facades of townhouses in a group shall be varied
by changed front yard setbacks and variation in
materials or design so that not more than two abutting
townhouses will have the same front yard setback and
the same or essentially the same architectural
treatment of facades and rooflines.
[b] The appearance of attached garages shall be
minimized, with the remainder of the elevation
devoted to living area or porch. Attached garages
located on the unit frontage shall be recessed from the
building face or porch facade four feet minimum).
Where two-car garages for two different units are
adjacent, the garage faces for the two units should be
offset from each other (four feet minimum). Garage
doors shall have extensive fenestration, including
§ 142-224 JUNKYARDS § 142-224
138:535
panels, trim details and windows. Paired, single-car
garage doors are encouraged.
[18] The internal street network shall be designed to provide
visual interest by employing any or all of the following:
curvilinear streets, primary and secondary culs-de-sac
with or without associated landscaped islands, and shared
internal driveways. Internal streets shall be designed in
accordance with the New Jersey RSIS including on-street
parking, sidewalks, planted buffers, except as otherwise
established herein. The "rural lane" RSIS definition shall
be applied to "lanes" leading to eight or fewer townhouse
units or two quadplex buildings (eight units.).
[19]No individual resident unit shall be constructed so as to
provide direct vehicular ingress or egress to any major
county thoroughfare arterial, or collector street. The
affordable building parking lot entrance may have direct
access to a county road.
[20] A traffic investigation shall be provided as part of the Land
Use Board review of the residential/golf course
development.
[21] Fire protection access. All buildings proposed to be
constructed within any project containing private streets
must be so arranged and located that firefighting
apparatus can park and reach any building with a onehundred-
fifty-foot-long hose extending form such
equipment. This one-hundred-fifty-foot hose length must
be measured as the structure/building is laid on the
ground and may not be measured as the aerial radius from
the parked equipment.
[a] In addition, fire hydrants must be so located and
provided within the project boundaries so that 400
feet of fire hose, extending on the ground from the
hydrant, can reach the furthermost part of any
building within the boundaries of the site. Entrances
to all buildings containing residential dwellings must
be illustrated on the sign plan of any project
containing private streets.
[b] Townhouse developments shall provide fire hydrants
on or adjacent to the area to be developed as required
by the Fire Department.
[22] A homeowners' association or condominium association
shall be established to maintain all common areas
associated with residential development. The affordable
building and associated common areas shall be maintained
by the affordable property owner.
§ 142-224 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-224
138:536
(e) Landscaping.
[1] Street trees shall be provided along all interior street
frontages of a site, at least every 30 feet on average, but in
no case more than 40 feet.
[2] A minimum of 10 feet of landscaping or grass area shall be
provided between the front elevation of each townhouse
unit and the common access drive, as measured from the
edge of pavement or sidewalk, if present. Paths or
walkways to individual front doors, utility easements and
driveways may occur in this area, but only if the dominant
amount of the area remains available to support significant
landscaping. At least one tree per unit front must be
provided.
[3] At least 30% of the total site area, exclusive of the golf
course, must be devoted to landscaping. No landscaped
strip or tree pocket smaller than 25 square feet may be
counted toward the total required landscaping. Utilities
may occur within required landscaping, but only if
underground utilities will not preclude appropriate
planting, including trees, and only if utilities are
adequately screened from view.
(f) Landscape buffers.
[1] Width and location. There shall be a minimum twenty-fivefoot-
wide opaque landscaped buffer provided along all
public road rights-of-way which completely visually
separates the residential component of the development.
Buffers shall consist of natural vegetation, earthen berms,
evergreen and pine trees, shrubs, deciduous trees,
decorative walls, fencing, or combinations thereof
designed to provide a year-round visual screen and
separation from the public roads.
[2] Required planting area. Total landscaping required within
the buffer is set forth below. Width for a buffer shall be
measured from the respective property line. Where buffers
turn at property corners, the length measurements
determining plant quantities are not required to overlap.
[3] Calculating required plantings. The total amount of
required landscaping within the required buffer shall be
calculated based on a point system. The point system, as
established below, ensures that a minimum level of
landscaping is achieved during development while
maintaining flexibility. When calculating points or
quantities of plants, fractions shall be rounded upward to
the higher whole number.
§ 142-224 JUNKYARDS § 142-224
138:537
Plant Type Points
Large tree 12
Small tree 6
Large shrub 3
Medium shrub 2
Small shrub 1
[4] Points for individual vegetation in buffers:
[5] Existing healthy vegetation may be counted toward the
required landscaping, if it is used as a year-round sight
obstruction buffer. The Planning Board and Board
Engineer shall conduct site inspections in order to
determine whether the existing vegetation is useable as a
visual obstruction buffer. In order to do so, the landscape
plan shall indicate the type, number and size of existing
plants which are sufficient to comply with the respective
buffer yard. It shall not be necessary to indicate the total
inventory of existing plants. Only plants required to meet
the provisions of this section are required to be listed.
[a] The following minimum buffer planting standards
shall be used to provide year-round opaque screening:
[i] Planted earthen berm four feet high from the
existing ground surface.
[ii] Minimum number of large and small trees, one
per 40 linear feet.
[iii] Minimum number of points per linear feet of
buffer = 1.2.
(g) Vegetation size standards. The minimum allowable plant size
for new installations shall be as set forth herein. Due to the
variation between genus and species, the caliper or height
necessary for newly installed plant materials may vary.
[1] Large trees shall measure a minimum 2.5 inches in caliper
at chest height and be eight feet to 10 feet in height at the
time of planting.
[2] Small trees shall measure a minimum 1.5 inches to 2.5
inches in caliper at chest height for single-stem trees or
one inch to 1.5 inches in caliper for multistem trees, and at
least six feet to eight feet in height at the time of planting.
[3] Large shrubs shall measure a minimum of 3 1/2 feet to
four feet in height at the time of planting. Shrubs planted
for screening purposes shall form the required density to
§ 142-224 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-224
138:538
block visibility within three years from the date of
installation.
[4] Medium shrubs shall measure a minimum of two feet to
3 1/2 feet in height at the time of planting. A mix of
deciduous and evergreen shrubs is encouraged in order to
obtain a variety of color and texture throughout the year.
[5] Small shrubs shall measure a minimum of 18 inches to 24
inches in spread and/or height at the time of planting. A
mix of deciduous and evergreen shrubs is encouraged in
order to obtain a variety.
[6] Living ground covers shall provide 100% coverage on the
ground within one year of installation, except for mulch or
turf which shall provide 100% coverage upon installation.
Organic mulch may be used around plantings to maintain
soil moisture and prevent the growth of weeds, but cannot
be substituted for required plantings. Inorganic ground
covers consisting of river rock or similar materials may be
substituted for organic ground cover.
[7] All plant material, except ground covers, shall be approved
by the Planning Board. Consideration shall be given to the
environmental conditions of the site, such as soil,
topography, climate, microclimate, pattern of sun
movement, prevailing winds and precipitation, and air
movement to ensure that plant materials will be
established successfully. Tree selection for street yards, or
other locations within utility rights-of-way, shall consider
the presence or planned addition of overhead utility lines.
Such trees shall be small and medium trees that are pestand
disease-resistant and are slow growing.
[8] Trees for reforestation restitution/replacement shall be
indigenous to the Township.
[9] The Planning Board Engineer may approve the installation
of comparable substitution plant materials to satisfy the
requirements of the approved landscape plan when the
approved plants and landscape materials are not available
at the time that installations are to occur, or when other
unforeseen conditions prevent the use of the exact
materials shown on the approved landscape plan.
Significant changes that require the replacement and
relocation of more than 25% of the plant materials shall
require a new landscape plan and approval by the
Planning Board.
[10] Except for street yard trees, a mix of genus and species of
trees, shrubs, ground covering, perennials and annuals is
encouraged, but not required, in order to avoid potential
§ 142-224 JUNKYARDS § 142-224
138:539
§ 142-225. Accessory buildings. [Amended 3-27-1997 by Ord. No.
0-6-97; 8-28-1997 by Ord. No. 0-15-97; 7-24-2003 by Ord. No.
0-7-03R]
loss due to infectious disease, blight, or insect infestation.
Street yard trees shall retain a reasonably uniform pattern
along a street with the same block or corridor.
(h) Restitution/reforestation for trees removed. The provisions of
the Township ordinances pertaining to tree removal and
replacement shall apply in addition to the above-required
buffers above.
(i) Site lighting. Landscape plans shall include provisions for
lighting on site and along public street frontages. Post-top
mounted L.E.D. lights are recommended. Lighting should be
adequate to assure safety and visibility in common areas but
should not produce glare or be of an intensity inappropriate for
a residential environment. The Planning Board shall have
ultimate authority over the number and placement of
streetlighting fixtures.
A. No accessory building shall be constructed, erected, altered or placed
upon the lot without first obtaining a building permit. The application
for the building permit shall include the name of the owner of the
property; the lot and block number of the property as shown in the Tax
Map; the street address of the property; and a survey or a sketch and
survey showing the proposed accessory building composition, height,
length, width and location as to where the proposed accessory building
is to be located on the lot.
B. No accessory building shall be used for residence purposes, nor to
conduct a commercial, retail or wholesale business, nor the storage of
any dangerous substance or chemicals which provide a threat to the
safety and welfare of those who inhabit the principal building or the
immediate vicinity or presents a danger or threat to the environment.
Danger or threat to safety and welfare of the public or the environment
is to be determined by the Board of Health or Zoning Official.
C. No more than three accessory buildings per lot are permitted, subject
to the following conditions:
(1) No accessory building shall occupy an area greater than 600
square feet. Only one accessory building per lot may exceed 150
square feet and shall not occupy an area greater than 600 square
feet. The remaining two accessory structures may not exceed 150
square feet each.
(2) Any accessory building which occupies 150 square feet or less shall
be located a minimum of five feet from the side property lines and
§ 142-224 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-225
138:540
§ 142-226. B Residence District.
In any B Residence District, no building or premises shall be used and no
building or part of a building shall be erected which is used in whole or in
part for any use prohibited in the A Residence District.
§ 142-226.1. B-1 Residence District. [Added 11-27-2017 by Ord. No.
328-2017]
five feet from the rear property line; setbacks shall be measured
from the farthest point of the overhang of the roof.
(3) Any accessory building which exceeds 150 square feet shall be
located a minimum of 10 feet from the side property lines and 10
feet from the rear property line; setbacks shall be measured from
the farthest point of the overhang of the roof.
D. No accessory building shall exceed a height of 14 feet.
E. No accessory building shall be located in the front yard.
F. No accessory building shall be located closer to the street line than the
building line of the principal building.
G. No accessory building shall be constructed prior to the construction of
the principal building.
H. No accessory building shall be located within 10 feet of any other
existing structure.
I. The limitations imposed by this section upon the location of an
accessory building shall be waived when the accessory building is
incorporated as an integral part of the building to which it is accessory.
A. Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the A Residence District and HDD/
Housing District for the Disabled are permitted in the B-1 District.
B. B-1 conditional uses.
(1) Catering establishments subject to the following conditions:
(a) Minimum lot size: two acres.
(b) Minimum front yard setback: 45 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard setback: 30 feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard setback: 35 feet.
(e) Minimum parking requirements: one space/250 square feet.
Gross floor area total, excluding storage and mechanical
equipment areas, and roofed patios or porches.
§ 142-225 JUNKYARDS § 142-226.1
138:541
§ 142-227. C Commercial District.
(f) Required landscape buffer: On all property lines abutting an
adjacent residential use, the catering facility property must
include a fifteen-foot-wide landscape planted buffer. Mature
and heritage trees shall be used in the planted landscape
buffer. Fencing may also be included in the buffer area. The
buffer area is subject to review and approval by the Land Use
Board and Land Use Engineer.
A. Principal uses and structures. Subject to compliance with the
provisions set forth in § 142-273, Minimum requirements for parking,
the following principal uses and structures shall be permitted:
[Amended 3-7-1983 by Ord. No. 0-4-83; 12-27-1984 by Ord. No.
0-19-84; 8-13-2007 by Ord. No. 184-2007]
(1) Business, professional and executive offices and personal business
service establishments such as travel agencies, real estate or
insurance agent or brokers, lawyer, accountant, medical doctor or
similar professional offices.
(2) Retail sales and service businesses which carry only merchandise
intended to be sold at retail on the premises, provided that there is
no fabricating, manufacturing, converting, altering or assembling
of articles except as incidental to the particular retail trade to be
conducted. By way of illustration, including but not limited to, the
following retail uses are permitted: antique shops, appliances
shops, art studios, art supply shops, barbershops, beauty parlors,
bicycle shops, bookstores, butcher shops, camera stores, card
shops, computer stores, dyeing and pressing done exclusively for
individual retail customers but not including work done for the
trade or the wholesale market, clothing and dress shops,
confectioneries, coin stores, delicatessens, department stores,
drapery stores, drugstores, dry-cleaning and laundry
establishments (excluding those which use equipment for laundry
or dry-cleaning processing on premises), flower shops, furniture
and furnishing stores, gift shops, grocery stores, hardware and
paint stores, hobby shops, interior decorators, jewelers, leather
goods shops, linen stores, liquor stores, music and record shops,
musical instrument sales, office equipment stores, optician shops,
pet shops, photographers, plumbing, radio, stereo and television
sales and repair shops, retail bakeries, shoe repair shops, shoe
sales stores, sporting goods stores, stamp stores, stationers, tailor
shops, telephone and other electronic equipment sales and rentals,
theaters, tobacconists, toy stores, travel and ticket agencies,
religious article sales, undertaker and funeral parlor, and video
equipment and sales, rentals and repairs.
(3) Service establishments, including barber and beauty shops,
manicure shops, hairdressers, health and fitness spas and tailors
and dressmakers.
§ 142-226.1 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-227
138:542
(4) Banks and similar financial institutions.
(5) Restaurants, taverns or bars, ice cream and soft drink parlors,
take-out, delivery establishments (except drive-in and drivethrough
establishments) and outdoor cafes on private property.
(a) For purposes of this Subsection A(5), a drive-in or drivethrough
establishment is defined as "a business or
establishment engaged in the sale of food and food products
that are prepared and packaged in paper or other types of
disposable wrappers or containers. Patrons order the food
from their motor vehicles. The food is served to the patrons in
their motor vehicles for possible consumption in or out of theft
motor vehicles, on or off the premises."
(b) For purposes of this Subsection A(5), take-out and delivery
establishments are defined as "retail establishments where
food and drink are sold in a form ready for consumption, where
the consumption may occur off premises. In such
establishments, the consumer purchases the food and/or drink
inside of the principal building, or an employee of the
establishment delivers the food and/or drink to the customer
off the premises." For any such delivery establishments, the
motor vehicles used to deliver the food and/or drink to the
customer shall not contain labeling or advertising for the
business establishment.
(6) Buildings used for club, fraternal, recreational and athletic or
social purposes.
(7) Nursery schools and day-care centers and childrens' play facilities.
B. No internal-combustion engine shall be used in any building unless
vibration is eliminated and it is equipped and operated with an effective
muffler or silencer so as to eliminate noise.
C. No land, building or premises shall be used for any trade, industry or
purpose that may be noxious or offensive by reason of the production or
emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas or refuse matter or noise, fumes,
vibration or similar substance or condition that is or is likely to be
offensive, dangerous or injurious to public health or safety.
D. The restrictions on the uses of lands and premises, contained in
Subsection A, shall be deemed to prohibit the outdoor storage, display
or sale of all items, goods, wares, supplies or merchandise, such as, but
without limitation of the generality of the foregoing, outdoor storage of
motor vehicles or power or other equipment outdoor storage or sale of
surplus materials, junk or contractor's equipment; outdoor or drive-in
food markets; or outdoor storage or sale of supplies, parts, components,
raw materials, goods in process or finished or unfinished goods; but no
provision of this Part 9 shall be construed to prohibit the outdoor
§ 142-227 JUNKYARDS § 142-227
138:543
storage, display or sale of trees, shrubs, plants or other garden supply
products, which shall be permitted uses in the Commercial District.
E. Residential uses. [Added 7-10-1975 by Ord. No. 0-11-75]
(1) Single-family residences, lawfully existing in the C Commercial
District as nonconforming uses, may be added to or enlarged
without reference to their status as nonconforming uses, and no
use variance for such expansion or enlargement shall be required,
provided that the height, lot size, open space, lot coverage, floor
area and other bulk regulations applicable to the A Residence
District will be observed by such addition or enlargement.
(2) Any use of land or building permitted in the A Residence District
under the provisions of § 142-223C through G, inclusive, is
permitted in the C Commercial District, including specifically,
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, professional uses
under § 142-223G at any single-family house lawfully existing in the
C Commercial District.
(3) A detailed site plan meeting the requirements of Part 6, Site Plan
Review, of this chapter shall be prepared for Joint Planning Board
review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit or
certificate of occupancy for any such professional or other use of
land or buildings in the C Commercial District authorized by this
subsection.
F. With respect to lots divided by a zone boundary line into a residential
district and a commercial district, if the appropriate board in the course
of site plan or subdivision review determines that, by reason of the need
for off-street parking for the proposed commercial use, the residentially
zoned portion of the lot may be so used without injury to adjoining
residential uses or residentially zoned lots, the appropriate board may
permit the applicant to construct and pave the residentially zoned
portion of the lot for such additional commercially generated parking
spaces as the appropriate board determines to be necessary to meet the
requirements of such commercial use, subject to the following
limitation and safeguards:
(1) Any such off-street parking area shall be screened from all
adjoining residential uses and residentially zoned lands by fencing,
evergreen landscaping or other suitable screening in such manner
as shall be approved by the appropriate board.
(2) No such facility shall include a driveway or driveway aisle located
within 10 feet of adjacent property used or developed for
residential purposes.
(3) Each automobile space shall be set back not less than five feet from
any adjacent property used or developed for residential purposes.
§ 142-227 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-227
138:544
§ 142-228. SH Senior Housing District. [Added 6-22-1989 by Ord.
No. 0-10-89]
(4) Each automobile space shall comply as to size and area with the
requirements of this Part 9, Zoning.
(5) Such off-street parking areas and all driveways and maneuvering
areas giving access thereto shall be designed in such manner as to
produce a minimum of glare to the adjoining residential district and
in such manner as to constitute a minimum of disturbance to or
encroachment upon the use and enjoyment of the adjoining
residential properties.
(6) Any parking facility permitted hereunder designed to
accommodate 20 or more vehicles (for the entire use) shall contain
one planting island, containing at least 50 square feet of permeable
surface for each 10 parking spaces or fraction thereof. Such
permeable surface area shall be either planted or covered with
organic material, such as wood chips or other similar permeable
material approved by the appropriate board. At least one tree shall
be planted in each required planting island.
A. Permitted uses. In an SH Senior Housing District, no building shall be
used, and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used and no land shall be used except for the
following permitted use:
(1) One or more dwelling units intended and specifically designed to
provide well-constructed and adequate housing for persons
hereinafter defined. Such housing shall be occupied by persons 62
years of age or older (hereinafter "senior persons"). A minimum of
20% of the units in an SH Senior Housing District shall be occupied
by senior persons with low or moderate income. The requirements
for low- and moderate-income housing set forth in § 142-235 shall
be complied with. One person under the age of 62 may reside in a
dwelling unit with a senior person or persons if the presence of
such person is essential to the physical care or economic support of
the senior person or persons. Each dwelling unit shall consist of
complete living accommodations, including cooking facilities,
sleeping accommodations and individual bathroom facilities.
[Amended 5-9-1991 by Ord. No. 0-3-91R]
(2) In addition, an SH Senior Housing District may contain, as
incidental uses accessory to the dwelling units, recreational
facilities, workshops, living areas for the common use of project
residents and kitchenettes where food may occasionally be
prepared for serving in a common living area.
(3) Golf courses. [Added 7-25-1991 by Ord. No. 0-14-91]
§ 142-227 JUNKYARDS § 142-228
138:545
(4) Accessory buildings customarily incidental to a golf course use.
However no elevated or multitiered driving range is permitted.
Illumination of any driving range is also prohibited. [Added
7-25-1991 by Ord. No. 0-14-91; amended 3-27-1997 by Ord.
No. 0-6-97]
B. Minimum site area requirement. Each site shall contain a minimum of
three acres.
C. Minimum site frontage requirement. Each site shall have a minimum
frontage of 200 feet along a public street.
D. Minimum site depth requirement. Each site shall have a minimum
depth of 200 feet.
E. Maximum density. The maximum number of dwelling units on the site
shall not exceed 15 units per acre. [Added 10-24-1991 by Ord. No.
0-21-91]
F. Maximum building area. The building area of the site shall not exceed
15%.
G. Height of buildings, number of stories. Buildings shall be not less than
15 feet and not more than 35 feet in height. Buildings shall be no more
than three stories in height [Amended 10-24-1991 by Ord. No.
0-21-91]
H. Minimum yard requirements. The minimum yard requirements shall be
as follows:
(1) Front yard: not less than 50 feet.
(2) Rear yard: not less than 50 feet.
(3) Side yard: not less than 50 feet, except where the site abuts a
single-family residential district, in which case the side yard shall
not be less than 75 feet.
(4) Corner lots, the minimum front yard requirement shall apply to
both street frontage.
I. Minimum off-street parking requirements. The number of off-street
parking spaces shall be not less than as required by § 142-269 of this
chapter.
J. Site plan approval and agreements. A detailed site plan of the proposed
development shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with Parts
1 and 6 of this chapter of the Code of the Township of River Vale. An
approved detailed site plan, along with any supplemental agreements
required by the Joint Planning Board, shall be filed prior to the issuance
of a building permit.
K. Conditional use. The following uses shall be conditional uses in the SH
District: assisted living, assisted senior housing, adult retirement
§ 142-228 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-228
138:546
communities, congregate-care apartment housing, continuing-care and
nursing homes. [Added 2-28-2002 by Ord. No. 0-1-02]
(1) Accompanying any of the above uses may be any of the following
accessory uses: adult day care, auditorium/multipurpose room,
chapel/prayer room, craft/hobby room, exercise room, game room,
greenhouse, library, gift shop, bank, beauty salon, dental/medical
office, pharmacy.
(2) The development of the above conditional uses shall be subject to
the following area and bulk requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: five acres.
(b) Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(d) Minimum building setback:
[1] From public right-of-way: 25 feet.
[2] From property line (residential zone): 35 feet.
[3] From property line (nonresidential zone): 25 feet.
[4] To internal cartway: 10 feet.
[5] To parking area: five feet.
[6] To residential area: 35 feet, provided that in the aggregate
of any two side yards abutting a residential area shall be a
minimum of 80 feet.
(e) Minimum aggregate maximum building height: 35 feet.
(f) Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
(g) Maximum impervious coverage: 65%.
(h) Minimum landscaped buffer width: 10 feet.
(i) Minimum setback of parking to lot line: 10 feet.
(j) Minimum building setback: --.
(k) Maximum density: 25 dwelling units per acre.
(l) Minimum parking spaces: 0.50 spaces per unit.
L. Minimum off-street parking requirements. The number of off-street
parking spaces for all conditional uses under this chapter shall be 0.60
per unit.
M. Permitted accessory uses in the SH District. Accessory uses for
assisted-living facilities for senior citizens shall permit and may include:
§ 142-228 JUNKYARDS § 142-228
138:547
§ 142-229. HDD Housing District for the Disabled. [Added
8-23-1990 by Ord. No. 0-9-90]
(1) Congregate dining facilities for residents of the facility and their
guests and staff.
(2) Indoor and outdoor recreation areas for residents of the facility and
their guests.
(3) Indoor common laundry facilities for use by residents and staff.
(4) Commissaries, dispensaries, doctors' and nurses' offices,
barbershops and beauty salons, staff offices, meeting and
conference rooms, and other support facilities operated entirely for
the benefit of the residents.
(5) Alternate emergency power facilities.
A. Definition. For the purposes of this section, "disabled" is hereby defined
as a severe, chronic disability of a person which:
(1) Is attributable to mental or physical impairment or combination of
mental and physical impairments.
(2) Is manifested before the person attains age 22.
(3) Is likely to continue indefinitely.
(4) Results in substantial functional limitations in three or more of the
following areas of major life activity:
(a) Self-care.
(b) Receptive and expressive language.
(c) Learning.
(d) Mobility.
(e) Self-direction.
(f) Capacity for independent living.
(g) Economic self-sufficiency.
(5) Reflects the person's need for a combination and sequences of
special, interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other
services which are of lifelong or extended duration and are
individually planned or coordinated.
B. Permitted uses. In an HDD Housing District for the Disabled, no
building shall be erected or altered which is arranged, intended or
designed to be used and no land shall be used except for the following
permitted use:
§ 142-228 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-229
138:548
(1) One or more dwelling units intended for apartment living and
specifically designed or adapted to provide well-constructed and
barrier-free housing for persons who are disabled, as defined
herein. The dwelling units shall be occupied by disabled persons
with low and moderate incomes. Not more than two persons who
are not disabled may reside in a dwelling unit if the presence of
such person or persons is related to or essential to the support and
care of the disabled person. Each dwelling unit shall consist of
complete living accommodations, including but not limited to
cooking facilities, storage, sleeping accommodations and bathroom
facilities.
(2) In addition, an HDD Housing District for the Disabled may contain,
as incidental uses accessory to the dwelling units, lobby, office,
multipurpose room, game room, mechanical room and laundry
room and such exterior amenities as may be required by statute,
ordinance or resolution.
C. Minimum site area requirement. Each site shall contain a minimum of
1.25 acres.
D. Minimum site frontage requirement. Each site shall have a minimum
frontage of 200 feet along a public street.
E. Minimum site depth requirement. Each site shall have a minimum
depth of 200 feet.
F. Maximum density. The maximum dwelling units on the site shall not
exceed a density of 15 units per acre.
G. Maximum building area. The building area shall not exceed 30%.
H. Height of buildings. Buildings shall not be less than 15 feet and not
more than 24 feet in height and shall not exceed one story.
I. Minimum yard requirements. The minimum yard requirements shall be
as follows:
(1) Front yard: not less than 50 feet.
(2) Rear yard: not less than 50 feet.
(3) Side yard: not less than 25 feet, except where the site abuts a
single-family residential use, in which case the side yard shall not
be less than 35 feet.
(4) Corner lots, the minimum front yard requirement shall apply to
both street frontages.
J. Minimum off-street parking requirements. The number of off-street
parking spaces shall be not less than as required by § 142-269 of this
chapter.
§ 142-229 JUNKYARDS § 142-229
138:549
§ 142-230. MF-20 Residence District. [Added 2-4-1972 by Ord. No.
0-3-72]
K. Site plan approval and agreements. A detailed site plan of the proposed
development shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with Part 6
of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses. In an MF-20 Residence District, no building shall be
used, and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, and no land shall be used except for
one or more of the following permitted uses: [Amended 3-27-1997 by
Ord. No. 0-6-97]
(1) Multiple-family dwellings.
(2) Municipally owned or operated facilities.
(3) Private swimming pools and similar recreation facilities for
exclusive use of the occupants.
(4) Other accessory buildings customarily incidental to any use
permitted by this section, provided that such accessory building
shall be on the same site with the building to which it is accessory
and also provided that such accessory building shall not be used for
residence purposes.
B. Minimum site area requirement. Each site shall contain a minimum
area of 20 acres.
C. Minimum site frontage requirement. Each site shall have a minimum
frontage of 600 feet along a public street.
D. Minimum site depth requirement. Each site shall have a minimum
depth of 600 feet.
E. Maximum density. The maximum number of dwelling units on the site
shall not exceed a density of 20 units per acre.
F. Maximum building area. The maximum building area of the site shall
not exceed 15%.
G. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum height of buildings shall
not exceed five stories and in no event more than 52 feet including
mechanicals, exclusive of firesafety apparatus and devices as required
by law.
H. Minimum yard requirements. The minimum yard requirements of the
site shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard: a minimum of 100 feet.
(2) Rear yard: a minimum of 100 feet.
(3) Side yard: a minimum of 100 feet.
§ 142-229 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-230
138:550
§ 142-231. PO Professional Office District. [Added 2-4-1972 by Ord.
No. 0-4-72]
I. Minimum off-street parking requirements. The minimum off-street
parking spaces required, shall be not less than 1.5 spaces for each
dwelling unit, with the ability to expand the off-street parking facilities
to a maximum of two spaces per dwelling unit, if deemed necessary by
the governing body or the Joint Planning Board at a future date.
J. Minimum off-street loading requirements. The minimum off-street
loading spaces required, shall be not less than two spaces for each
multiple-family structure.
K. Site plan approval and agreements. A detailed site plan of the proposed
development shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with Part 6
of this chapter of the Code of the Township of River Vale. An approved
detailed site plan, along with any supplemental agreements required by
the governing body or the Joint Planning Board shall be necessary prior
to the issuance of a building permit.
L. Bedroom schedule. The following schedule or ratio of bedroom units
shall apply: there shall be a minimum of 75% of dwelling units with no
more than one bedroom, with the balance of dwelling units having no
more than two bedrooms.
M. Minimum dwelling unit floor area requirements. The following shall be
minimum dwelling unit floor area requirements:
(1) Efficiency dwelling unit: 800 square feet.
(2) One-bedroom dwelling unit: 1,000 square feet.
(3) Two-bedroom dwelling unit: 1,200 square feet.
A. Permitted uses. In a PO Professional Office District no building shall be
used, and no building shall be erected or altered which is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, and no land shall be used, except for
one or more of the following permitted uses:
(1) The professional offices of physicians, surgeons, dentists, lawyers,
engineers, architects, landscape architects, city planners,
accountants, real estate brokers, insurance brokers or stock and
bond brokers.
(2) Banking facilities where such use does not exceed 35% of the total
floor area of the building.
(3) Other accessory buildings customarily incidental to any use
permitted by this section, provided that such accessory building
shall be on the same site with the building to which it is accessory,
and also provided that such accessory building shall not be used for
residence purposes.
§ 142-230 JUNKYARDS § 142-231
138:551
§ 142-232. Open Space and Recreation Zone. [Added 6-22-2009 by
Ord. No. 213-200964]
B. Minimum site area requirements. Each site shall contain a minimum
area of 1.5 acres.
C. Minimum site frontage requirement. Each site shall have a minimum
frontage of 150 feet along a public street.
D. Minimum site depth requirement. Each site shall have a minimum
depth of 150 feet.
E. Maximum building area. The maximum building area of the site shall
not exceed 25%.
F. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum height of buildings shall
be three stories, and the height thereof shall not in any event exceed 35
feet.
G. Minimum yard requirements. The minimum yard requirements shall be
as follows:
(1) Front yard: a minimum of 75 feet.
(2) Rear yard: a minimum of 75 feet.
(3) Side yard: a minimum of 25 feet, except where the site abuts a
single-family residential district, in which case the side yard shall
not be less than 75 feet.
(4) Corner lots, the minimum front yard requirements shall apply to
both street frontages.
H. Minimum off-street parking requirements. The minimum off-street
parking spaces required shall be not less than required by § 142-269 of
the Code of the Township of River Vale.
I. Minimum off-street loading requirements. The minimum off-street
loading space required shall be not less than one space for each
professional office structure or one space for each 40,000 square feet of
floor area in such use or portion thereof, whichever is greater.
J. Site plan approval and agreements. A detailed site plan of the proposed
development shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with Parts
1 and 6 of this chapter of the Code of the Township of River Vale. An
approved detailed site plan, along with any supplemental agreements
required by the governing body or the Joint Planning Board, shall be
necessary prior to the issuance of a building permit.
A. Permitted uses. In an Open Space and Recreation Zone no building
shall be used, and no building shall be erected or altered which is
64.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 142-232, EO Executive Office District,
added 4-13-1972 by Ord. No. 0-17-76, as amended.
§ 142-231 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-232
138:552
arranged, intended or designed to be used, and no land shall be used,
except for one or more of the following permitted uses, all with required
best management practices (BMPs):
(1) A country club with one clubhouse.
(2) Golf courses.
(3) Park and recreation areas with low percentages of impervious
coverage (10% maximum impervious coverage, e.g., passive
recreation areas, athletic fields, picnic areas, botanical gardens.)
(4) Watershed and reservoir areas.
(5) Municipally owned or operated facilities.
(6) Other accessory buildings customarily incidental to any use
permitted by this section, provided that such accessory buildings
shall be on the same site with the building to which it is accessory,
and also provided that such accessory buildings shall not be used
for residence purposes. However, no elevated or multitiered
driving range is permitted. Illumination of any driving range is also
prohibited.
B. Minimum lot area requirement. Each lot shall contain a minimum area
of 25 acres.
C. Minimum lot frontage requirement. Each lot shall have a minimum
frontage of 600 feet along a public street.
D. Minimum lot depth requirement. Each lot shall have a minimum depth
of 600 feet.
E. Maximum building area. The maximum building area shall not exceed
1% of the lot area.
F. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum number of stories above
grade level in any building shall be 2 1/2 stories. Grade level means
average grade level of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the
building.
G. Minimum yard requirements. The minimum yard requirements shall be
as follows:
(1) Front yard: a minimum of 100 feet.
(2) Rear yard: a minimum of 100 feet.
(3) Side yard: a minimum of 100 feet.
H. Minimum off-street parking requirements. The minimum off-street
parking spaces required shall be not less than required by § 142-269 of
this chapter.
§ 142-232 JUNKYARDS § 142-232
138:553
§ 142-233. SFAH Single-Family Affordable Housing District. [Added
12-13-1990 by Ord. No. 0-18-90]
I. Minimum off-street loading requirements. The minimum off-street
loading spaces required shall be not less than two spaces for each
principal structure, or one space for each 40,000 square feet of floor
area in such use or portion thereof, whichever is the greater.
A. Permitted uses. In an SFAH District, permitted uses shall include all
such uses as are permitted in the B Residence District. The limiting
schedule shall be as set forth for the B Residence District at § 142-265
of this chapter with the following amendments:
(1) Minimum area of lot: 6,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum width of lot: 60 feet.
(3) Minimum frontage of lot: 60 feet.
(4) Minimum front setback: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum side setback, each side: 10 feet.
(6) Minimum rear setback: 30 feet.
(7) Maximum coverage. [Amended 7-24-2003 by Ord. No. 0-7-03R]
(a) Maximum impervious coverage. The maximum coverage of the
lot by the principal and accessory buildings, structures and
uses, including walkways, patios, garages and any other
impermeable material, shall not exceed 40% of the gross lot
area.
(b) Maximum building coverage. The maximum coverage of the lot
by the principal and any accessory buildings shall not exceed
25% of the gross lot area.
B. Low- and moderate-income housing obligation. A low- and moderateincome
housing set aside as provided in § 142-235, entitled "Low- and
moderate-income housing requirements," shall be required in any
development in the SFAH District, or, in lieu thereof, the landowner of
lands in the SFAH District shall have executed a binding undertaking to
deposit to a trust fund established and administered by the Township
for the purpose of construction and/or rehabilitation of low- and/or
moderate-income housing units outside the development site, such
agreed sum as fairly reflects the cost to the landowner of the subsidies
which would otherwise have been required to implement said set-aside
obligation. The sum which fairly reflects the cost to the landowner of
such subsidies shall be determined in accordance with such standards,
where applicable, as have been and shall be established by the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (hereinafter "COAH"). [Amended
5-9-1991 by Ord. No. 0-3-91R]
§ 142-232 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-233
138:554
§ 142-234. MFAH Multifamily Affordable Housing District. [Added
5-9-1991 by Ord. No. 0-3-91R]
C. Fees. Fees shall be the same as those set forth for planned
developments at § 142-133 of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses. In an MFAH District, the following uses are permitted:
(1) Single-family semidetached (patio home), defined as a single-family
dwelling on a separate lot with open yard space on at least three
sides of the unit. An open court may be featured around which the
unit is constructed.
(2) Single-family detached, defined as a building containing one
dwelling unit surrounded by a front, rear and two side yards.
(3) Multifamily townhouse, defined as a building designed as a series
of attached single-family dwellings containing not fewer than three
nor more than eight units. The units may share no more than two
common walls attached side to side, side to rear or rear to rear.
(4) Multifamily multiplex, defined as a group of not fewer than four nor
more than 16 dwelling units, architecturally designed with some
units placed on top of other units. A one-and-one-half-story unit
may be stacked on a one-story unit. The units may share no more
than three common walls attached side to side, side to rear or rear
to rear.
(5) Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, defined to include
clubhouses, tennis, squash and similar courts, swimming pools,
skating facilities, basketball courts, ball fields, tot lots and other
similar recreation and open space uses when incidental to a
primary use within an MFAH District. Indoor tennis courts shall not
be permitted, and all structures proposed for recreational use shall
be approved by the Joint Planning Board.
(6) Offices or other facilities designed and intended solely for the
purpose of managing the activities and responsibilities assigned to
a project's specific homeowner's association or comparable
management entity or to conduct the normal or incidental activities
related to the operation and maintenance of a recreational facility
permitted by this chapter.
(7) Recreation facilities may be located off-site with the concurrence of
the governing body on such terms and conditions as may be
reasonably established by the governing body to address the costs
to the Township as well as conditions peculiar to the site, and the
health, safety and welfare of the Township. [Added 6-27-2002 by
Ord. No. 0-7-02]
B. Minimum tract size. The minimum tract size shall be five acres, except
that the size of each noncontiguous parcel under the same ownership
§ 142-233 JUNKYARDS § 142-234
138:555
which is part of the same five-acre or greater development plan may
be not less than two acres; and for single-family semidetached and
single-family detached homes, the minimum lot size shall be as set forth
in Subsection E. Each development site shall contain sufficient access
to an approved and improved public street. Proposed internal streets,
roads to be dedicated and rights-of-way shall not be deemed to divide
acreage of a development and shall be considered as part of the gross
site area.
C. Minimum setbacks from reservoirs and waterway tributaries; drainage
control. No building, structure or paved area shall be constructed
within 200 feet of the maximum flood elevation of Lake Tappan of 56.0
feet based on a one-hundred-year storm as per the Federal Emergency
Management Agency map dated October 15, 1981 (hereinafter the
"FEMA Map"). No building, structure or paved area shall be
constructed within 50 feet of the maximum flood elevation of the
Pascack Brook, the Hackensack River or any waterway tributary to the
Hackensack River based on a one-hundred-year storm as per the FEMA
Map. Drainage from new building sites and pavement shall be collected
by storm drains directed into appropriate detention and infiltration
basins with filtering systems for nonpoint pollution.
D. Setback from gas lines and high-tension wires. No building or structure
shall be located within a minimum setback of 25 feet from the center
line of a natural gas or liquefied gas transmission line or within 25 feet
of overhead electric or other high-tension lines. In respect to overhead
or aerial lines, the setback shall be measured from a line drawn
vertically from the outer edge of any overhead electric or other hightension
line or from any supporting structure or stanchion supporting
an overhead powerline.
E. Internal development standards shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family semidetached (patio):
(a) Minimum lot area: 5,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot area, corner lot: 6,500 square feet.
(c) Minimum lot width: 55 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet from the right-of-way.
(e) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(f) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet, both sides; zero feet, one
side.
(g) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(h) Minimum setback accessory buildings, side and rear: five feet.
§ 142-234 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-234
138:556
(i) Maximum height: 35 feet; 2 1/2 stories. ("One-half-story" shall
be defined as the top floor of a structure with a sloping roof
such that the floor area is not more than 1/2 of the floor area of
the story below.)
(2) Single-family detached:
(a) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet from the right-of-way.
(d) Minimum rear yard setback: 30 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet, both sides; 10 feet, one
side.
(f) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(g) Minimum setback accessory buildings, side and rear: five feet.
(h) Maximum height: 35 feet; 2 1/2 stories. ("One-half-story" shall
be defined as the top floor of a structure with a sloping roof
such that the floor area is not more than 1/2 of the floor area of
the story below.)
(3) Multifamily townhouse:
(a) Maximum units per structure: eight.
(b) Maximum units, same plane per structure: four (with two-foot
break).
(c) Minimum distance between structures:
[1] Side to side: 25 feet.
[2] Rear to rear: 40 feet.
[3] Rear to side: 40 feet.
[4] Front to front: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum setback to internal cartway: 25 feet from pavement
edge.
(e) Minimum setback to internal parking: 20 feet from pavement
edge.
(f) Maximum height: 35 feet; 2 1/2 stories. ("One-half-story" shall
be defined as the top floor of a structure with a sloping roof
such that the floor area is not more than 1/2 of the floor area of
the story below.)
(g) Maximum length in one direction: 250 feet.
§ 142-234 JUNKYARDS § 142-234
138:557
(4) Multifamily multiplex:
(a) Maximum units per structure: 16.
(b) Maximum units, same plane: six (with a two-foot break).
(c) Minimum distance between buildings:
[1] Side to side: 30 feet.
[2] Rear to rear: 50.
[3] Rear to side: 50 feet.
[4] Front to front: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum setback to internal cartway: 30 feet from pavement
edge.
(e) Minimum setback to internal parking: 20 feet from pavement
edge.
(f) Maximum height: 35 feet, 2 1/2 stories. ("One-half-story" shall
be defined as the top floor of a structure with a sloping roof
such that the floor area is not more than 1/2 of the floor area of
the story below.)
(g) Maximum length of structure: 200 feet.
F. Buffer requirements. No building, structure or paved areas other than
walls, fences and/or access roads shall be placed within 25 feet from all
perimeter boundary lines of the site.
G. Density requirements. Densities shall not exceed an overall average of
seven dwelling units per acre of gross development site area.
Consistent with the internal development standards set forth in
Subsection E above, unit concentrations shall be permitted which
create sectional densities exceeding the prescribed overall average
maximum density, provided that the overall total development density
does not exceed seven dwelling units per acre.
H. Low- and moderate-income housing set-aside. All developments within
an MFAH District shall be required to provide a 20% low- and
moderate-income housing set-aside in accordance with § 142-235 of
this chapter. Additionally, 50% of the required affordable housing units
may be built off-site on such terms and conditions as may be reasonably
established by the governing body to address the costs to the Township
as well as conditions peculiar to the site, and the health, safety and
welfare of the Township. [Amended 6-27-2002 by Ord. No. 0-7-02]
I. Common recreation areas and open space. The minimum required area
for common recreation and open space use shall be a total of 30% of the
gross site area, with at least 10% of the gross site area for such
§ 142-234 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-234
138:558
recreational activities as sitting areas, picnic areas, playfields,
playgrounds, basketball courts, tennis courts and swimming pools.
J. Circulation and off-street parking. The requirements of §§ 142-103
through 142-114 of this chapter shall apply, except as follows:
(1) Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than
162 square feet, exclusive of access drives, or aisles, and shall
measure nine feet in width by 18 feet in length and shall be of
usable shape and condition.
(2) The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be as
follows:
(a) Single-family semidetached: two per unit.
(b) Single-family detached: two per unit.
(c) Townhouse and multiplex (by bedroom distribution):
[1] Efficiency: 1.5 per unit.
[2] One bedroom: two per unit.
[3] Two or more bedrooms: 2.2 per unit.
(3) All parking areas within multifamily projects on property owned in
common by an association shall have spaces designated for
handicapped use. The number, location and size of these spaces
shall conform to applicable state standards.
(4) Required parking spaces may be enclosed or unenclosed.
(5) Pavement width; culs-de-sac. There shall be adequate provision for
ingress and egress to all parking spaces. Access drives, aisle widths
and culs-de-sac shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Pavement width of aisle or access drive: 25 feet.
(b) Pavement width of public street: 28 feet.
(c) Right-of-way width of public street: 50 feet.
(d) Minimum radius of cul-de-sac, exclusive of parking: 50 feet.
(e) Maximum cul-de-sac length: 1,000 feet.
K. Utility improvements. Every development shall conform to the
standards and procedures applicable to planned residential
developments set forth in § 142-115 of the Code.
L. Garbage and trash services. Garbage, refuse and trash removal and
disposal services for multifamily units shall be arranged privately by or
on behalf of the occupants of a development and shall conform to the
standards as prescribed by the State of New Jersey and the Township of
§ 142-234 JUNKYARDS § 142-234
138:559
River Vale for recycling of solid waste. Unless otherwise prohibited by
state law, garbage, refuse and trash removal from multifamily units
shall not be an obligation of the Township. The provisions of Chapter
186, Recycling, of the Code of the Township of River Vale are
incorporated herein as though set forth at length.
M. Snow and ice removal. Every development shall conform to the
standards and procedures applicable to planned residential
developments set forth in § 142-117 of this chapter.
N. Improvement standards.
(1) Curb. Concrete curb, where required, shall be six-by-nine-bytwenty-
inch vertical concrete curb constructed of Class B concrete,
air-entrained as specified in the New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Roadway and Bridge
Construction, latest edition. Preformed bituminous cellular-type
joint filler, 1/2 inch thick, shall be used at all expansion joints at
intervals not greater than 20 feet. At the option of the developer,
Belgian block curb shall be permitted for decorative or traffic
control purposes. An appropriate construction detail shall be
submitted for approval with the subdivision and/or site plan
application.
(2) Sidewalks.
(a) Sidewalks, where required, shall be four feet wide and four
inches thick, except crossing driveways, where the thickness
shall be increased to six inches, reinforced at the midpoint with
welded wire fabric. All sidewalk construction shall be in
accordance with applicable requirements of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications.
Concrete shall be Class C, air-entrained. Preformed bituminous
cellular joint filler 1/2 inch thick shall be placed at intervals not
exceeding 20 feet. Dummy (formed) joints shall be cut into the
concrete sidewalk between the expansion joints at equal
intervals not exceeding the width of the sidewalk.
(b) Reinforced concrete aprons shall be constructed at all
driveways between the curb and the sidewalk. Aprons shall be
six inches thick and reinforced at the midpoint with welded
wire fabric. Concrete shall be Class C, air-entrained. At each
driveway the curb shall be depressed to form a driveway
opening. The bottom of the curb shall be lowered to maintain
full curb depth across the depression.
(c) Curb ramps for the physically handicapped shall be
constructed on all street curb returns and, where appropriate,
in parking areas. Construction of curb ramps shall be in
accordance with applicable state standards.
(3) Roadway construction.
§ 142-234 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-234
138:560
(a) All roadways, whether public or private, including subgrade
subbase, base courses and pavements, shall be constructed in
accordance with New Jersey Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications. All roadways shall be constructed
with a bituminous concrete flexible pavement structure. The
pavement structure design shall be the responsibility of the
developer and his engineer. The pavement design, if different
than the suggested standard outlined herein, shall be based
upon traffic loading projections and field sampling and
laboratory analysis of the subgrade soils to be encountered in
the development and shall follow current design
recommendations of the Asphalt Institute or the generally
recognized standards.
(b) Bituminous concrete pavements shall have an equivalent
structural depth of at least 7 1/2 inches for parking aisles,
access drives, minor streets and collector streets having a
minimum wearing surface of not less than 1 1/2 inches of
pavement, Type FABC-1, a minimum bituminous stabilized
base course of not less than two inches and a dense graded
aggregate base course to provide the remaining depth.
Flexible bituminous concrete pavements shall have an
equivalent structural depth of at least 10 inches for other
street classifications having a minimum wearing surface of not
less than two inches of pavement, Type FABC-1, a minimum
bituminous stabilized base course of not less than four inches
and a dense graded aggregate base to provide the remaining
depth.
(4) Sanitary sewer systems.
(a) All developments shall be serviced by a public sanitary sewer
system under the jurisdiction of the owner of the utility having
franchise (service rights) for the property within which the
development is proposed. Any final approval granted by the
Joint Planning Board under the provisions of this chapter shall
be conditioned upon the approval of the sanitary sewer
systems by the appropriate agencies having jurisdiction,
including the Bergen County Utilities Authority and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. All
construction shall be in accordance with the current
requirements of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection as well as BOCA's National Standard Plumbing
Code.
(b) The minimum size of sanitary sewers shall be eight inches in
diameter. The minimum size of individual service connections
shall be six inches in diameter from the main branch to the
cleanout and four inches in diameter from the cleanout to the
dwelling. Common laterals serving multifamily dwellings shall
§ 142-234 JUNKYARDS § 142-234
138:561
be permitted where a homeowners' association or similar
entity is responsible for maintenance of the common laterals.
(c) Sanitary sewer pipe, including individual service connections,
may be constructed of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe at
the developer's option conforming to the requirements of STM
Specifications D-3034, SDR-35 Type PSM polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) sewer pipe and fittings. The joints for PVC sewer pipe
shall be with an integral bell-and-spigot-type rubber gasket
joint. Each integral bell shall consist of a formed bell complete
with a single rubber gasket to provide a watertight installation.
(d) All sewers shall be subject to either an infiltration or
exfiltration test. Exfiltration tests shall be conducted in lieu of
filtration tests when the pipe has been laid above the
groundwater level. Infiltration/exfiltration rates shall not
exceed 100 gallons per inch of internal diameter per mile of
pipe per day.
(5) Storm drainage facilities.
(a) All stormwater management plans shall demonstrate careful
consideration of the general and specific concerns, values and
standards of the Township's Master Plan and applicable county,
regional and state storm drainage control programs and shall
be based on environmentally sound site planning and
engineering techniques. All plans shall utilize the best
available technology to minimize off-site stormwater runoff,
increase on-site filtration, simulate natural drainage patterns
and minimize off-site discharge patterns of pollutants to
ground- and surface water and encourage natural filtration
functions.
(b) All storm drainpipes shall be slip, joint-type reinforced
concrete pipe meeting the requirements of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation's standard specifications and of
a wall thickness sufficient to meet the proposed condition of
services; but in any event, no wall thickness shall be less than
Class 3, Wall B. Concrete pipe below 30 inches or larger shall
be jointed using a preformed bituminous mastic pressure-type
joint sealer or rubber-ring-type joint. All storm drains shall be
tangent between inlets, manholes or other structures.
(c) Inlets and manholes shall be constructed where required in
accordance with the New Jersey Department of
Transportation's Standard Specifications. In continuous runs,
spacing between structures shall not exceed 300 feet.
Structures shall be located so as to not interfere with primary
routes of pedestrian travel or any proposed handicap ramp.
(d) Stormwater drainage systems shall conform to designs based
upon a fifteen-year-frequency storm, using a one-hour intensity
§ 142-234 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-234
138:562
of two inches. The Manning Formula shall be utilized in the
sizing of stormwater drainage systems. A friction factor (n) of
zero and 0.012 shall be used for concrete pipe.
(e) In order to minimize the effect of stormwater runoff on
downstream drainage areas and facilities, each project will be
required to manage the excess runoff, including quality, in a
manner which adequately protects the downstream area.
Where water quality control is required to protect downstream
water supply sources or environmentally sensitive wetland
areas, a water quality detention basin shall provide for the
prolonged retention of runoff from a small design storm, either
a one-year-frequency Type II storm or a storm of 1 1/4 inches
of rainfall in a two-hour period. Provisions shall be made for
runoff to be retained and released so that 90% is released
within 18 hours. If this requirement results in a pipe smaller
than three inches in diameter, the period of retention shall be
waived so that three inches will be the minimum pipe size
used.
(f) Where control of post-development rates of runoff is required
to protect downstream properties or drainage facilities,
detention facilities shall be required to control the rate of
discharge for a one-hundred-year-frequency storm. The design
storm shall be computed either as a Type II, twenty-four-hour
storm in accordance with the United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service Technical Release No.
55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, or as the estimated
maximum rainfall for the estimated time of concentration when
using the Rational Method.
(g) The Joint Planning Board shall consider reasonable
alternatives to the construction of detention basins for control
of stormwater quantity or quality. Measures, including but not
limited to tanks, infiltration, dry wells or sheet flow, through
vegetated areas may be used for this purpose.
(6) Landscaping.
(a) Landscaping design and planning shall be integrated into the
overall design and shall not be considered as an afterthought.
Proposed landscape design schemes shall be evaluated in their
relationship to the existing natural landscape or to the
developed or proposed landscape, including those on adjacent
properties. The existing natural landscape character shall be
preserved whenever possible and practicable.
(b) Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall site plan,
designed and integrated into building arrangements,
topography, parking, setback and buffering requirements.
Landscaping shall include trees, bushes, shrubs, ground cover,
§ 142-234 JUNKYARDS § 142-234
138:563
perennials, plants and the use of building and paving materials
in an appropriate manner.
(c) The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as
practicable and, where desirable, by minimizing tree and soil
removal. Any grade changes shall be in keeping with the
general appearance of neighboring developed areas.
Treatment and design of proposed screening shall be shown
and shall be such as may be maintained throughout the year.
Areas of the lot not occupied by buildings, parking or walkways
shall be planted with grass, shrubs or other decorative
landscaping.
(d) A landscaping plan shall be submitted with each development
application. The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees,
shrubs, plant material, ground cover and natural features such
as boulders or rock outcroppings. It should show where they
are or will be located and the planting details. A tree-by-tree or
bush-by-bush inventory of existing conditions shall not be
required except for existing trees in excess of 12 inches caliper
in those areas disturbed by the development; however, an area
inventory showing existing site conditions and proposed
landscaping shall be required.
(e) One of the uses of landscaping will be to buffer and accentuate
boundaries and to involve the masking out or concealing of any
objectionable area. The achievement of this is left to the
designer. Buffering shall be employed to mask from the public
view or adjacent properties such service areas as trash and
garbage areas, outside equipment of an unaesthetic character
and accessory buildings or areas not enhancing or in keeping
with the aesthetics of the project or neighborhood.
(f) Buffering, where required, shall be located around the
perimeter of the site to minimize headlights of vehicles, noise,
light from structures and the movement of people and vehicles
and to shield activities from adjacent properties. Buffering may
consist of fencing, evergreens, shrubs, deciduous trees or
combinations thereof to achieve the stated objectives.
(g) Buffers may consist of walls, fences, landscaping and berms
that shall be used to minimize any adverse impacts or
nuisances on the site or from adjacent areas. Buffer areas shall
be required for the following areas:
[1] Along property lines shielding various uses from one
another.
[2] Where interior roads or driveways run parallel with
roadways exterior to the site.
[3] Where parking areas abut other properties.
§ 142-234 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-234
138:564
[4] In the general areas of garbage storage areas, loading and
unloading areas and outdoor storage areas.
[5] As windbreak areas.
[6] To shield areas from deleterious noise or other adverse
conditions.
(h) Where evergreens are used as buffer materials, they shall be
planted in two staggered planted rows. The rows shall be four
to five feet apart, and the evergreens shall be planted eight
feet on center. Where earthen berms are utilized, they shall be
maintained with a minimum height of four feet, and a
maximum slope shall be suitably stabilized to prevent erosion.
(i) In parking lots, at least 5% of the parking areas shall be
landscaped. The landscaping should be located in protected
areas, along walkways, at center islands and at the end of bays.
In narrow islands, low spreading plants such as creeping
juniper, English ivy, myrtle or pachysandra are appropriate.
(j) All landscaping in parking areas shall be carefully located so as
not to obstruct vision. A variety of different types of trees
should be grouped to break up the mass of cars.
(k) For parking areas or lots, the paved parking surface shall
contain planting islands or planting beds as required in this
chapter. Such planting islands shall have a minimum
permeable surface of 50 square feet and shall be protected by
continuous concrete curbing or other permitted barriers.
Surface areas shall be planted or covered with organic
materials such as wood chips and may not be paved or covered
with stone, brick, concrete, slate or other like materials. Trees
having specifications approved by the Joint Planning Board
shall be planted within such islands at a ratio of one tree per
island. In lieu of planting islands, planting beds projected from
the perimeter shall be approved by the Joint Planning Board.
(l) Any person erecting a new building shall be required to plant
shade trees at intervals specified in this chapter along the
street line, either at the right-of-way line or on the side of the
sidewalk opposite from the curb or the place provided therefor.
Such trees shall not be less than 1 3/4 inches in diameter,
breast high, well branched and not less than 10 feet high with
branches starting not less than six feet from the crown of the
root system. The type of trees shall be designated by said Joint
Planning Board and shall be obtained from an accredited
nursery, with replacement guaranteed if such trees die within
two growing seasons.
(m) Foundation plantings shall be provided, with the exception of
single-family detached dwellings which will be left to the
§ 142-234 JUNKYARDS § 142-234
138:565
discretion of the applicant. All foundation plantings shall
consist of a continuous mulched landscape bed meandering
along the entire facade length, wherever primary unit
entrances occur. The landscape bed shall consist of an
appropriate mixture of deciduous evergreens and ornamental
trees, shrubs and ground covers.
O. Common recreation areas and open space owned in common.
(1) Common recreation areas and open space ownership. The
landowner or developer shall provide for and establish an
organization for the ownership and maintenance of any recreation
areas and/or open space which are owned in common by the
residents of any development, and such organization shall not be
dissolved nor shall it dispose of any such common areas by sale or
otherwise (except to an organization established to own and
maintain the common recreation areas and development open
space) without the written consent and approval of the governing
body of the Township of River Vale. Before dissolving and before
disposing of any recreation areas or open space owned in common,
the organization shall first be required to offer to dedicate those
common areas to the municipality, in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
(2) Continuous maintenance of recreation areas owned in common and
open space owned in common. In the event that such organization
shall fail to maintain the common areas in reasonable order and
condition, the Township may require the owners or occupants of
multifamily units within multifamily developments to do so.
(3) Cost of maintenance. The cost of any maintenance performed by
the Township shall be assessed pro rata against the properties
within the development which own the common recreation area or
common open space, in accordance with values as assessed at the
time of imposition of the lien, which assessment shall be a lien and
tax on said properties to be added to and become a part of the taxes
to be levied and assessed thereon and enforced and collected with
interest by the same officers and in the same manner as other
taxes.
P. Fees. Fees shall be the same as those set forth for planned
developments as § 142-132 of this chapter.
Q. The reference to the mean high-water level set forth in this section with
reference to detention basin construction is hereby deleted. [Added
6-27-2002 by Ord. No. 0-7-02]
§ 142-234 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-235
138:566
§ 142-235. Low- and moderate-income housing requirements.
[Added 5-9-1991 by Ord. No. 0-3-91R; amended 10-28-1993 by Ord.
No. 0-18-93; 2-29-1996 by Ord. No. 0-4-96]
This section of the Code of the Township of River Vale sets forth regulations
regarding low- and moderate-income housing units in River Vale that are
consistent with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq., as effective on June
6, 1994. These rules are pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.) and River Vale's constitutional obligation to provide its
fair share of low- and moderate-income housing.
A. River Vale's new construction or inclusionary component will be divided
equally between low- and moderate-income households as per N.J.A.C.
5:93-2.20.
B. Except for inclusionary developments constructed pursuant to lowincome
tax credit regulations:
(1) At least 1/2 of all units within each inclusionary development will
be affordable to low-income households;
(2) At least 1/2 of all rental units will be affordable to low-income
households; and
(3) At least 1/3 of all units in each bedroom distribution pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.3 will be affordable to low-income households.
C. Inclusionary developments that are not restricted to senior citizens will
be structured in conjunction with realistic market demands so that:
(1) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is at least
10% and no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(2) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units are twobedroom
units;
(3) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units are threebedroom
units; and
(4) Low- and moderate-income units restricted to senior citizens may
utilize a modified bedroom distribution. At a minimum, the number
of bedrooms will equal the number of senior citizen low- and
moderate-income units within the inclusionary development.
D. In conjunction with realistic market information, the following criteria
will be used in determining maximum rents and sale prices:
(1) Efficiency units will be affordable to one-person households.
(2) One-half of all one-bedroom units will be affordable to one-person
households, and 1/2 of all one-bedroom units will be affordable to
two-person households, or, if adopted as a Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH) regulation, all one-bedroom units will be
§ 142-235 JUNKYARDS § 142-235
138:567
affordable on the basis of an average of 1.5 persons per onebedroom
unit.
(3) One-half of all two bedroom units will be affordable to two-person
households, and 1/2 of all two-bedroom units will be affordable to
three-person households, or, if adopted as a COAH regulation, all
two-bedroom units will be affordable on the basis of an average of
three persons per two-bedroom unit.
(4) One-half of all three-bedroom units will be affordable to fourperson
households and 1/2 of all three-bedroom units will be
affordable to five-person households, or, if adopted as a COAH
regulation, all three-bedroom units will be affordable on the basis
of an average of 4.5 persons per three-bedroom unit.
(5) Median income by household size will be estimated by a regional
weighted average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits
published by the Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4b.
(6) The maximum average rent and price of low- and moderate-income
units within each inclusionary development will be affordable to
households earning 57.5% of median income.
(7) Moderate-income sales units will be available for at least three
different prices, and low-income sales units will be available for at
least two different prices.
(8) For both owner-occupied and rental units, the low- and moderateincome
units will utilize the same heating source as market units
within an inclusionary development.
(9) Low-income units will be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 50% of the median income
approved by COAH; moderate-income units will be reserved for
households with a gross household income less than 80% of the
median income approved by COAH as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.16.
(10) The regulations outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.15 and 5:93-9.16 will be
applicable for purchased and rental units.
E. For rental units:
(1) Developers and/or municipal sponsors may establish one rent for a
low-income unit and one for a moderate-income unit for each
bedroom distribution.
(2) Gross rents, including an allowance for utilities, will be established
so as not to exceed 30% of the gross monthly income of the
appropriate household size as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(a). The utility
allowance will be consistent with the utility allowance approved by
HUD for use in New Jersey.
§ 142-235 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-235
138:568
F. For sale units:
(1) The initial price of a low- and moderate-income owner-occupied
single-family housing unit will be established so that after a down
payment of 5%, the monthly principal, interest, homeowners'
insurance, property taxes (based on the restricted value of the lowand
moderate-income unit) and condominium or homeowner fee do
not exceed 28% of the eligible gross monthly income.
(2) Master deeds of inclusionary developments will regulate
condominium or homeowner association fees or special
assessments of low- and moderate-income purchasers at 100% of
those paid by market purchasers. This 100% is consistent with the
requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(e). Once established within the
master deed, the 100% will not be amended without prior approval
from COAH.
(3) The Township of River Vale will follow the general provisions
concerning uniform deed restriction liens and enforcement through
certificates of occupancy or reoccupancy on sale units as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3.
(4) The Township of River Vale will require a certificate of reoccupancy
for any occupancy of a low- or moderate-income sales unit resulting
from a resale as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3(c).
(5) Municipal, state, nonprofit and seller options regarding sale units
will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.5 through 5:93-9.8.
Municipal rejection of repayment options for sale units will be
consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.9.
(6) The continued application of options to create, rehabilitate or
maintain low- and moderate-income sale units will be consistent
with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.10.
(7) Eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of controls on
sale units will be consistent with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9-1.1.
(8) The regulations detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.12 through 5:93-9.14
will be applicable to low- and moderate-income units that are for
sale units.
G. In zoning for inclusionary developments, the following is required:
(1) Low- and moderate-income units will be built in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(d):
Minimum Percent of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
Percent of Market Housing
Units Completed
0% 25%
10% 25%, plus 1 unit
§ 142-235 JUNKYARDS § 142-235
138:569
Minimum Percent of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
Percent of Market Housing
Units Completed
50% 50%
75% 75%
100% 90%
___________
100
(2) A design of inclusionary developments that integrates low- and
moderate-income units with market units is encouraged as per
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(e).
H. A development fee ordinance was approved by COAH and adopted by
the Township of River Vale on October 28, 1993, as § 142-34 of this
chapter.
I. To provide assurances that low- and moderate-income units are created
with controls on affordability over time and that low- and moderateincome
households occupy these units, the Township of River Vale will
designate the Affordable Housing Management Service (AHMS) of the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs with the responsibility of
ensuring the affordability of sales and rental units over time. The
Affordable Housing Management Service will be responsible for those
activities detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(a).
(1) In addition, the Affordable Housing Management Service will be
responsible for utilizing the verification and certification
procedures outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(b) in placing households in
low- and moderate-income units.
(2) Newly constructed low- and moderate-income sales units will
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for at
least 30 years. The Affordable Housing Management Service will
require all conveyances of newly constructed units to contain the
deed restriction and mortgage lien adopted by COAH and referred
to as Appendix E as found in N.J.A.C. 5:93.
(3) Housing units created through the conversion of a nonresidential
structure will be considered a new housing unit and will be subject
to thirty-year controls on affordability. The Affordable Housing
Management Service will require an appropriate deed restriction
and mortgage lien subject to COAH's approval.
J. Rehabilitated units (not applicable).
K. Regarding rental units:
(1) Newly constructed low- and moderate-income rental units will
remain affordable to low- and moderate-income households for at
§ 142-235 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-235
138:570
least 30 years. Affordable Housing Management Service will
require an appropriate deed restriction and mortgage lien subject
to COAH's approval.
(2) Affordability controls in accessory apartments will be for a period
of at least 10 years, except if the apartment is to receive a rental
bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.13, then the controls on
affordability will extend for 30 years.
(3) Alternative living arrangements will be controlled in a manner
suitable to COAH, that provides assurances that such a facility will
house low- and moderate-income households for at least 10 years
except if the alternative living arrangement is to receive a rental
bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.13, then the controls on
affordability will extend for 30 years.
L. Section 14(b) of the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.,
incorporates the need to eliminate unnecessary cost-generating
features from River Vale's Land Use Ordinances. Accordingly, River
Vale will eliminate development standards that are not essential to
protect the public welfare, and, to expedite or fast-track municipal
approvals/denials on inclusionary development applications, River Vale
will adhere to the components of N.J.A.C. 5:93-10.1 through 5:93-10.3.
M. The Township of River Vale has a fair share obligation of 121 units of
which 121 is new construction. This ordinance will apply to all
developments that contain proposed low- and moderate-income units
that are listed below and any future developments that may occur:
Block Lot Location Acres Owner
701 9 Rivervale Road 3.4 Fuji Corp.
1002 1,10
(part)
Poplar Road 15.4 United Properties
Group
1001.01 1,2,3
(part)
10 (part)
Poplar Road 15.3 United Properties
Group
1001.01 9 Poplar Road 10.8 Pine Lake at River
Vale
2301 10,11 Rivervale Road 1.4 Spectrum for Living
(1) The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and
minority groups, regardless of sex, age or number of children, to
housing units which are being marketed by a developer/sponsor,
municipality and/or designated administrative agency of affordable
housing. The plan will address the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.
In addition, the plan prohibits discrimination in the sale, rental,
financing or other services related to housing on the basis of race,
color, sex, religion, handicap, age, familial status/size or national
§ 142-235 JUNKYARDS § 142-235
138:571
origin. The Township of River Vale is in a housing region consisting
of Bergen, Passaic, Sussex, and Hudson Counties. The affirmative
marketing program is a continuing program and will meet the
following requirements: All newspaper articles, announcements
and requests for applications for low- and moderate-income units
will appear in the following daily regional newspaper: The Record.
(2) The primary marketing will take the form of at least one press
release sent to the above publication and a paid display
advertisement. Additional advertising and publicity will be on an
as-needed basis.
(3) The advertisement will include a description of the:
(a) Street address of units.
(b) Direction to housing units.
(c) Number of bedrooms per unit.
(d) Range of prices/rents.
(e) Size of units.
(f) Income information.
(g) Location of applications, including business hours and where/
how applications may be obtained.
(4) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests for
applications for low- and moderate-income housing will appear in
the following neighborhood oriented weekly newspapers, religious
publications and organizational newspapers within the region:
(a) The Record.
(b) Community Life.
(5) The following regional radio and/or cable television station(s) will
be used:
(a) Cablevision of New Jersey.
(6) The following is the location of applications, brochures, signs and/
or posters used as a part of the affirmative marketing program
including specific employment centers within the region:
(a) Municipal Building.
(b) Municipal Library.
(c) Developer's sales office.
(7) Community contact person(s) and/or organizations in Bergen,
Passaic, Sussex and Hudson Counties which will aid in the
§ 142-235 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-235
138:572
affirmative marketing program with particular emphasis on
contacts that will reach out to groups that are least likely to apply
for housing within the region will be selected by the Affordable
Housing Management Service or with its approval.
(8) Quarterly flyers and applications will be sent to each of the
following agencies for publication in their journals and for
circulation among their members: Bergen, Passaic, Sussex and
Hudson County Board of Realtors in Bergen, Passaic, Sussex and
Hudson Counties.
(9) Applications will be mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
(10) Additionally, quarterly informational circulars and applications will
be sent to the chief administrative employees of each of the
following agencies in the counties or Bergen, Passaic, Sussex and
Hudson Counties: Welfare or Social Service Board, Rental
Assistance Office (local office of DCA), Office of Aging, Housing
Agency or Authority, Library, Area Community Action Agencies.
(11) The selection method that will be used to select occupants of lowand
moderate-income housing will be determined by the Affordable
Housing Management Service.
(12) The Affordable Housing Management Service is the agency that
will be under contract with River Vale to administer the affirmative
marketing program. The Affordable Housing Management Service
has the responsibility to income-qualify low- and moderate-income
households to place income-eligible households in low- and
moderate-income units upon initial occupancy; to provide for the
initial occupancy of low- and moderate-income units with incomequalified
households; to continue to qualify households for
reoccupancy of units as they become vacant during the period of
affordability controls; to assist with advertising and outreach to
low- and moderate-income households; and to enforce the terms of
the deed restriction and mortgage loan as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1. The
Township Administrator within the Township of River Vale is the
designated housing officer to act as liaison to the Affordable
Housing Management Service. The Affordable Housing
Management Service will provide counseling services to low- and
moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit
issues, mortgage qualifications, rental lease requirements and
landlord/tenant law. Service providers will be obtained to provide
the above services.
(13) Households who live or work in the COAH-established housing
region may be given preference for sales and rental units
constructed within that housing region. Applicants living outside
the housing region will have an equal opportunity for units after
regional applicants have been initially serviced. The Township of
River Vale intends to comply with N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.7.
§ 142-235 JUNKYARDS § 142-235
138:573
(14) All developers of low- and moderate-income housing units will be
required to assist in the marketing of the affordable units in their
respective developments.
(15) The marketing program will commence at least 120 days before the
issuance of either temporary or permanent certificates of
occupancy. The marketing program will continue until all low- or
moderate-income housing units are initially occupied and for as
long as affordable units are deed restricted and occupancy or
reoccupancy of units continues to be necessary.
(16) The Affordable Housing Management Service will comply with
monitoring and reporting requirements as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.6
and 5:93-12.1.
N. Rehabilitation program (not applicable).
O. The following sites have been designated to meet River Vale's
inclusionary component outlined in the Housing and Fair Share Plan
which was adopted by the Joint Planning Board on October 17, 1994.
The following zones are applicable to the designated sites:
Block Lot Location Acres Owner Zone
701 9 Rivervale
Road
3.4 Fuji Corp. SH
1002 1.10 (part) Poplar Road 15.4 United
Properties
Group
MFAH
1001.01 1, 2, 3
(part) 10
(part)
Poplar Road 15.3 United
Properties
Group
MFAH
1001.01 9 Poplar Road 10.8 Pine Lake at
River Vale
MFAH
2301 10,11 Rivervale
Road
1.4 Spectrum for
Living
HDD
P. Regional contribution agreements.
(1) In lieu of providing required low- and moderate-income housing
units within the development, the developer may voluntarily offer,
and the governing body of the Township may accept, prior to the
execution of the developer's agreement or by amendment to an
existing developer's agreement, cash contributions to a trust fund
established and administered by the Township for the purpose of
construction and/or rehabilitation of low- and/or moderate-income
housing units outside the development site. Such in-lieu
contributions may be for up to a maximum of 50% of the
developer's low- and moderate-income housing obligation. Such
contributions shall not reduce the number of units permitted on the
development site.
§ 142-235 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-235
138:574
§ 142-236. CN Conservation District. [Added 5-28-1992 by Ord. No.
0-4-92; amended 8-26-1999 by Ord. No. 0-17-99; 11-23-1999 by Ord.
No. 0-23-99]
In a CN District, the land shall remain in its natural state and shall not be
improved nor disturbed. The only permitted uses in the CN District shall
be woodland areas, historic preservation areas, natural areas, open spaces,
natural water reserves, nature trails and other similar conservation uses.
The Township Council, in its discretion, may allow an area equal to no more
than 15% of a Conservation District to be used for passive recreational
purposes or, in exceptional cases defined and formally proposed by the Joint
Planning Board of the Township of River Vale, the Township Council may
affirm by resolution a designated area within the Conservation District for
water quality management purposes.
§ 142-236.1. TH-1 Townhome Zone (T.H. Zone). [Added 3-10-2008
by Ord. No. 192-2008]
(2) The amounts of such contributions shall be such agreed sums as
fairly reflect the cost to the landowner of the subsidies which would
otherwise have been required to implement its set-aside obligation.
Calculation of the sum which fairly reflects cost to the landowner of
such subsidies shall be determined in accordance with such
standards, where applicable, as have been and shall be established
by COAH. The timing of payments shall be in accordance with
COAH regulations, N.J.A.C. 5:92-11. The total number of
contributions shall not exceed the amount necessary to enter into
agreements with receiving municipalities to accept 50% of the
Township's fair share number as determined by COAH.
A. Definitions. Definitions shall be in accordance with Part 1, Article I,
General Provisions, of Chapter 142 of the Township of River Vale Land
Use Ordinance, and the following additional definitions shall apply with
respect to the additional terms set forth in this section:
AGE-RESTRICTED DWELLING OR UNIT — A townhouse, as
hereinafter defined, designated for permanent occupancy by
households composed of at least one permanent resident, who is a head
of the household and has attained the age of 55 years and in which
actual occupancy and use are confined accordingly, consistent with all
federal and state standards, laws, rules and regulations.
COMMON RECREATION AREA — One or more parcels of land and/or
water within a development site, designed and intended primarily for
the use and enjoyment of the residents therein. Such areas may contain
such complementary structures and improvements for active or passive
recreational pursuits as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit
and enjoyment of the residents of the development.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and approved by the Township to be set aside, dedicated,
§ 142-235 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.1
138:575
designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for
the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining
or neighboring such open space, provided that such areas may be
improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to
the natural openness of the land. It may include common recreation
areas, fields, woodland areas, parks, playgrounds, golf courses, tennis,
squash and similar courts, skiing and skating facilities, nature trails,
lakes and swimming pools, camping facilities and other similar open
space, including walkways and sidewalks.
PLAN — The written and graphic provisions for development of a
development, including a plat of a subdivision; all covenants relating
to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures; intensity
of use or density of development; public and private streets, ways
and parking facilities; common open space; and public facilities. The
phrase "provisions of the plan," when used in this section, shall mean
the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition, the
developer's agreement, the minutes and resolutions of the Joint
Planning Board, the application and the plan itself.
TOWNHOUSE — A building or structure designed for or occupied by
no more than one family or household and attached to other similar
buildings or structures by not more than two party walls (which shall be
of masonry or other approved fire-rated construction) extending from
the foundation to the underside of the roof and providing two direct
means of access from the outside. Furthermore, each such dwelling
unit shall be provided with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for
the use of each family or household of the townhouse.
B. Uses. In the TH-1 Townhome Zone (T.H. Zone), only the following uses
are permitted:
(1) Townhouses.
(2) COAH units, as set forth below.
(3) Age-restricted units.
(4) When incidental to a primary use within a TH-1, indoor and outdoor
common areas, recreational areas, and community facilities
provided for the exclusive use of its residents, and subject to the
following regulations:
(a) Common recreation areas intended for recreational purposes
shall include facilities for active and passive recreation
particularly suitable for residents.
(b) Any multipurpose facility shall be designed and equipped to
meet the social and recreational needs of the anticipated
residents of the TH-1. This may include exercise rooms, hobby
and craft rooms, lounge areas, meeting rooms, card rooms,
rooms providing support facilities for outdoor recreational
§ 142-236.1 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.1
138:576
facilities or other similar facilities, all as required to meet the
needs of the residents.
(c) Attached common garage structures and indoor and/or outdoor
areas devoted to off-street parking.
(d) One double-faced ground-type sign identifying the
development may be located at each entrance to said
development provided such sign meets all the requirements of
Article LIII of this Code, with the following exception:
[1] Any such sign located within the TH-1 is limited to 18
square feet in area on each side and is mounted no greater
than four feet above finished grade on a freestanding wall
or a structure not exceeding six feet in height above the
ground level. The design, location and landscaping of such
sign shall be as approved by the Joint Planning Board.
(5) Open space.
C. Requirements for TH-1 Townhome Zone (T.H. Zone).
(1) Use and occupancy restrictions.
(a) Principal permitted uses. Except as otherwise set forth below
in Subsection C(1)(d), COAH obligations, and Subsection
C(1)(e), Age-restricted housing obligations, principal
permitted uses in a T.H. Zone shall include one or more
multifamily residential buildings with said dwelling units
specifically designed and intended for and limited to
occupancy for residential purposes only.
(b) Bedroom distribution for fair-market units. Except with respect
to affordable housing units as set forth below in Subsection
C(1)(d) and age-restricted housing units as set forth in
Subsection C(1)(e), every development in the T.H. Zone shall
establish a distribution for the number of bedrooms such that:
a minimum of 40% shall be one-bedroom units; up to 60% may
contain two-bedrooms; and no more than two units shall be
three-bedroom units. Except with respect to affordable
housing units as set forth in Subsection C(1)(d) and agerestricted
housing units as set forth in Subsection C(1)(e),
through its corporation, association or owners, the land and
buildings in any T.H. Zone shall be restricted, by bylaws, rules,
regulations and restrictions of record, to the preceding
restrictions on bedroom distribution.
(c) Federal Fair Housing Act. The T.H. Zone shall comply with all
applicable requirements of the Federal Fair Housing Act and
all amendments thereto, except as noted above, and all
applicable rules and regulations of the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) regarding such use,
§ 142-236.1 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.1
138:577
ownership and occupancy and shall further comply with all
applicable HUD rules and regulations for self-certification of
compliance with the Act and with HUD's rules and regulations.
(d) COAH obligations. Notwithstanding anything herein to the
contrary, any development consisting of more than five units in
the T.H. Zone shall comply with the standards and procedures
set forth below relating to affordable housing requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:94 and 5:95 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26, which contain
COAH's Round 3 substantive and procedural rules, as amended
and/or revised ("COAH obligations"). All residential developers
in T.H. Zone building more than five units must meet the
requirements of the affordable housing obligation set forth
below. No division, site plan approval or building permit shall
be granted to a developer having an affordable housing
obligation pursuant to this section unless the developer
participates in the production of affordable housing pursuant
to this article.
[1] Minimum phasing schedule. Any developments consisting
of more than five units in the T.H. Zone shall contain a
minimum percentage of 20% of affordable housing units
on the property. By way of example, in the event a
developer was to construct a total of 59 housing units on
the property, 12 such housing units must be affordable
housing. All affordable housing units shall be distributed
throughout the T.H. Zone in a spatially even manner.
[2] Certificates of occupancy. Certificate of occupancy for the
remaining free-market units shall not be issued unless the
developer has obtained certificates of occupancy for the
affordable units in compliance with the above schedule.
[3] Cash contribution alternatives. No cash contribution
alternative will be accepted in lieu of construction of the
required affordable housing.
[4] Affordable Housing Official. The Township may appoint an
Affordable Housing Official who will be responsible for
monitoring and implementing the provisions of this article
and assuring that the affordable units remain affordable to
affordable households. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for an affordable unit without the written approval
of the Township or the Affordable Housing Official. Such
approval shall be denied unless the unit is subject to an
individual or master deed containing a covenant running
with the land which assures that the unit will remain
affordable to affordable households for a period of at least
the minimum required by COAH.
§ 142-236.1 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.1
138:578
[5] Sales, etc. No affordable unit shall be sold or resold,
rented or rerented without the written approval of the
Township or the Affordable Housing Official. In order to
obtain such approval, the seller or lessor shall be required
to demonstrate that the proposed sale or lease complies in
all respects with the provisions of this article and COAH
obligations.
[6] Pricing of units. Every development subject to the
requirements of this article shall contain a number of lowand
moderate-income units consistent with COAH
obligations. All units subject to the requirement of this
section shall be subject to price stratifications as set forth
in the COAH obligations. Pricing of units shall be stratified
to insure that there are a variety of sales prices or, as the
case may be, rental rates pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26, as
amended or revised.
[a] Rents or sale prices of units shall be established in
accordance with the uniform affordability controls set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.
[b] In establishing prices and rents, the uniform housing
affordability controls rely on the regional income
limits determined as follows:
[i] Median income by household size shall be
established by a regional weighted average of the
uncapped Section 8 income limits published by
HUD. To compute this regional income limit, the
HUD determination of median county income for
a family of four is multiplied by the estimated
households within the county. The resulting
product for each county within the housing region
is summed. The sum is divided by the estimated
total households in each housing region. This
quotient represents the regional weighted
average of median income for a household of four.
This regional weighted average is adjusted by
household size based on multipliers used by HUD
to adjust median income by household size.
[ii] The price and rent of low- and moderate-income
units may be increased annually based on the
percentage increase in the Housing Consumer
Price Index for the United States. This increase
shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for
units constructed pursuant to low-income tax
credit regulations shall be indexed pursuant to
the regulations governing low-income tax credits.
§ 142-236.1 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.1
138:579
[7] Bedroom distribution. Every development subject to the
requirements of this article shall establish a distribution
for the number of bedrooms in the affordable units in
accordance with the uniform affordability controls set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26, as amended or revised.
[8] Affirmative marketing program. Every development
subject to the requirements of this article shall submit an
affirmative marketing program designed to disseminate
information regarding the availability of affordable income
units. The affirmative marketing process for available
affordable units shall begin at least four months prior to
expected occupancy. Advertising and outreach shall take
place during the first week of the marketing program and
each month thereafter until all available units have been
leased or sold. The program shall include at least the
following:
[a] One advertisement will be published in at least the
following newspaper(s) [and any other newspaper(s)
deemed necessary by the Township] of general
circulation (or at the within the housing region):
[i] The Record.
[ii] Community Life.
[b] The advertisement will include the following:
[i] The location of the units;
[ii] Directions to the housing units;
[iii] A range of prices for the housing units;
[iv] The size, as measured in bedrooms, of the housing
units;
[v] The maximum income permitted to qualify for the
housing units;
[vi] The business hours when interested households
may obtain an application for a housing unit; and
[vii] Application fees, if any.
[c] One advertisement will be broadcasted on the
following regional radio and/or cable television
station(s) (and any other such station deemed
necessary by the Township):
[i] Cablevision of New Jersey.
§ 142-236.1 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.1
138:580
[d] Additionally, all newspaper articles, announcements
and requests for applications for low- and moderateincome
housing will appear in at least the following
(and any other such newspapers deemed necessary by
the Township):
[i] The Record.
[ii] Community Life.
[e] Applications will be mailed to prospective applicants
upon request.
[f] The following is the location of applications,
brochure(s), sign(s), and/or poster(s) currently used
as part of the affirmative marketing program:
[i] The county administrative building and/or the
county library for each county within the housing
region;
[ii] The municipal administrative building(s) and the
municipal library;
[iii] The developer's sales/rental office.
[g] The following is a current list of community and
regional organizations that will aid in soliciting lowand
moderate-income applicants:
[i] Religious groups.
[ii] Tenant organizations.
[iii] Civic organizations.
[h] The following is a description of the random selection
method that will be used to select occupants of lowand
moderate-income housing: Each applicant upon
submission of an application will be designated a
number. Two categories will be created: one for lowincome
households and one for moderate-income
households. A blind drawing will be undertaken: one
each for low- and moderate-income households who
are eligible for the specific affordable units.
[i] A waiting list of all eligible candidates will be
maintained in accordance with the provisions
contained in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
[j] Households who live or work in Housing Region 1
shall be given preference for sales and rental units
constructed within this housing region. Applicants
living outside this housing region will have an equal
§ 142-236.1 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.1
138:581
opportunity for units after regional applicants have
been initially serviced.
(e) Age-restricted housing obligations. Notwithstanding anything
herein to the contrary, any development consisting of more
than five units in the T.H. Zone shall comply with the standards
and procedures set forth below relating to age-restricted
housing obligations. All residential developers in the T.H. Zone
building more than five units must meet the requirements of
the age-restricted housing obligation set forth below. No
division, site plan approval or building permit shall be granted
to a developer having an affordable housing obligation
pursuant to this section unless the developer participates in
the production of age-restricted housing pursuant to this
article.
[1] Minimum phasing schedule. Any developments consisting
of more than five units in the T.H. Zone shall contain a
minimum percentage of 16% of age-restricted housing
units on the property. By way of example, in the event a
developer was to construct a total of 59 housing units on
the property, 10 such housing units must be age-restricted
housing. All age-restricted housing units shall be placed
together as a separate unit within the T.H. Zone.
[2] Use and occupancy restrictions applicable to agerestricted
housing.
[a] Principal permitted uses for the age-restricted
housing units shall include one or more multifamily
residential buildings with said dwelling units
specifically designed and intended for and limited to
occupancy by households composed of at least one
permanent resident 55 years of age or older and with
children under the age of 19 being expressly
prohibited.
[b] Through its corporation, association or owners, the
land and buildings for the age-restricted housing units
shall be restricted, by bylaws, rules, regulations and
restrictions of record, to permanent use and
occupancy by persons of 55 years of age or older,
subject to the following exceptions, consistent with
the requirements of the Federal Fair Housing Act, as
amended; all units shall meet the age requirements
herein:
[i] A spouse or other person under the age of 55
years who is residing with a person who is 55
years of age or over and qualified to reside in the
unit may reside in the age-restricted housing.
§ 142-236.1 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.1
138:582
[ii] An adult under 55 years of age may reside in a
unit in the age-restricted housing if it is
established that the presence of such person is
essential to the physical care of one or more of the
occupants of the same unit who are qualified to
reside in the unit. A certified letter from a medical
doctor must be provided indicating the necessity
of such care.
[iii] Children over the age of 19 shall be permitted to
reside in the same unit with a parent if the parent
is 55 years of age or over and qualified to reside in
the age-restricted housing unit.
[c] The age-restricted housing shall comply with all
applicable requirements of the Federal Fair Housing
Act and all amendments thereto, except as noted
above, and all applicable rules and regulations of the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) regarding such use, ownership and occupancy
and shall further comply with all applicable HUD rules
and regulations for self-certification of compliance
with the Act and with HUD's rules and regulations.
The residency restriction applicable to the
development may be reviewed by the Township
Attorney for compliance with the Federal Fair Housing
Act.
(2) Area and density requirements. The following requirements shall
apply to any tract proposed for T.H. Zone development:
(a) Minimum tract area. There shall be a minimum tract area of
five acres having a minimum road frontage of 200 feet.
(b) Maximum density and number of units. There shall be no more
than 15 dwelling units per gross lot acre within the T.H. Zone
and a maximum of 59 dwelling units per development.
(c) Maximum building coverage. The total ground floor area of all
buildings, including accessory buildings and common garages,
shall not exceed 40% of the gross tract area.
(d) Maximum impervious coverage. The total coverage of the tract
by all buildings, paved or other hard surfaces (including brick
pavers and/or loose-placed stone patios) and parking areas,
but excluding drainage structures and detention and retention
basins, shall not exceed 65% of the gross tract area (such
calculation to include all open space included in the proposed
site plan).
(3) Setback and height requirements. The following setback and height
requirements shall apply to the development of the T.H. Zone:
§ 142-236.1 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.1
138:583
(a) Limiting schedule.
Limit Setback
Minimum front setback
(feet)
10; or 30 feet if adjacent to a
county road
Minimum side yard setback
(feet)
10; or 30 feet if adjacent to a
county road
Minimum rear yard setback
(feet)
10; or 30 feet if adjacent to a
county road
Minimum distance between
buildings
10 feet, subject to public safety
issues as determined in good
faith by the Joint Planning
Board
Maximum building height 3 stories or 35 feet (whichever
is less)
Minimum buffers
To adjacent single-family
lot (feet)
25 feet
To adjacent commercial
lot (feet)
10 feet
(b) (Reserved)
(c) Lot depth. The minimum lot depth shall be 200 feet.
(d) Balcony projections into required yard. Only one balcony per
unit located either in the rear yard or side yard in the T.H. Zone
shall be permitted. No balcony shall project greater than five
feet into the minimum rear yard or side yard.
(4) Amenities.
(a) The T.H. Zone may include indoor and outdoor common areas,
recreational areas and community facilities provided for the
exclusive use of its residents.
(b) Areas intended for recreational purposes shall include facilities
for active and passive recreation particularly suitable for
residents.
(c) Any multipurpose facility shall be designed and equipped to
meet the social and recreational needs of the anticipated
residents of the T.H. Zone. This may include exercise rooms,
hobby and craft rooms, lounge areas, meeting rooms, card
rooms, rooms providing support facilities for outdoor
recreational facilities or other similar facilities, all as required
to meet the needs of the residents.
§ 142-236.1 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.1
138:584
(d) Elevators shall be provided as required by the Uniform
Construction Code, although one elevator may service more
than one building where buildings are separated by fire walls
but are otherwise interconnected.
(5) Roadways and parking standards.
(a) The requirements of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS) shall apply to the development of the T.H.
Zone.
(b) Private streets and roadways shall be permitted within the T.H.
Zone and shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with the River Vale Development Ordinance and the RSIS
standards, where applicable.
(c) All requirements of the River Vale Land Development
Ordinance relating to parking lot design, except as otherwise
regulated herein or superseded by the RSIS, shall be
applicable to the T.H. Zone. All driveways for each unit shall be
a minimum in length to accommodate an oversized vehicle
(i.e., a van or SUV), while leaving at least two feet between the
front of the vehicle and the garage for such unit.
(d) No overnight parking of recreational or commercially
registered vehicles and no parking of used vehicles, mobile
homes, trailers or boats shall be permitted on the site.
(e) Garaged parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet wide
and 18 feet long.
(f) Parking spaces or driveways serving individual dwelling units
shall not be entered directly from any street not created by the
development plan. This shall not preclude driveways and
parking spaces being accessed from interior development
streets within the T.H. Zone tract. Parallel parking along
interior development streets within the T.H. Zone tract shall be
permitted consistent with the RSIS and local emergency
services recommendations.
(g) There shall be a minimum of 1.75 parking spaces for each
residential unit containing one bedroom, a minimum of two
parking spaces for each residential unit containing two or
three bedrooms and a minimum of the greater of RSIS
standards or 0.3 guest parking space for each residential unit.
(6) Buffer and landscaping.
(a) Tree restitution and reforestation shall be in accordance with
Part 6, Article XXXVII, of the Township of River Vale Land Use
Ordinance. Shade trees and other landscaping shall be
provided in all site plans where deemed appropriate by the
§ 142-236.1 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.1
138:585
Joint Planning Board. All shade trees shall have a minimum
diameter of three inches measured three feet above the ground
and all landscaped plants shall be of various species approved
by the approving authority. Trees shall be planted not less than
30 feet to 50 feet apart and parallel to, but no more than
10 feet from, the curbline and shall be balled and burlapped,
nursery grown, free from insects and disease and true species
and variety. Stripping trees from a lot or filling around tree
driplines on a lot shall not be permitted unless it can be shown
that grading requirements necessitate removal of trees, in
which case those lots shall be replanted with trees to
reestablish the character of the area and to conform to
adjacent lots. Dead or dying trees shall be replaced by the
developer during the next recommended planting season.
Parking lots shall be planted as required below.
(b) With respect to any subject site in the T.H. Zone which has a
property line bordering a county road, a soil berm of at least
four feet high and 10 feet wide (or such reasonable alternative
as determined by the Joint Planning Board) shall be installed
within the setback area along the length of the property line
bordering such county road and parallel to but no more than 10
feet from the curbline or such reasonable alternatives as
determined by the Joint Planning Board. A staggered row of
coniferous trees (or reasonable alternatives as determined by
the Joint Planning Board) having a height of at least 10 feet
(measured from the base of each tree) shall be installed on
such berm. Such trees shall be located to create an unbroken
visual screen and to otherwise maximize the visual screening
of the development on the subject site from any county road.
(c) A landscape plan prepared by a certified landscape architect,
certified by the New Jersey Board of Landscape Architects, or
other qualified individual, shall be submitted with each site
plan application for approval by the Joint Planning Board, in its
reasonable discretion. Landscaping shall be provided to
promote a desirable visual environment, screen parking and
loading areas, provide windbreaks for winter winds and
summer cooling for buildings, streets and parking, and to
mitigate adverse visual impacts. Landscaping shall include a
year-round visual screening landscape buffer.
(d) Minimum landscaping standards in parking areas shall be
provided as follows:
[1] Landscaped strips of a minimum four feet in width shall be
provided between all parking lots and property lines, and a
minimum ten-foot landscaped strip shall be provided
between all buildings and property lines.
§ 142-236.1 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.1
138:586
[2] Landscaped areas should be located in protected areas
such as along walkways, in center islands, or at the end of
parking bays and shall be distributed throughout the
parking area to mitigate the view of the parked vehicles
without interfering with adequate sight distance for
vehicles or pedestrians. The landscaping shall consist of
hardy, low-maintenance varieties of trees, and shrub
plantings, as well as trees of a minimum eight feet in
height.
[3] One shade tree, with a minimum diameter of three inches
measured three feet above the ground, shall be provided
for every five parking spaces. Trees shall be staggered
and/or spaced so as not to interfere with driver vision and
shall have branches no lower than six feet.
[4] All landscaping and plantings shall be maintained
continually in accordance with provisions of the site plan
approval for the development. Plantings which do not live
shall be replaced within six months, but no longer than the
next growing season. Notwithstanding this provision, all
applicants must continually meet the provisions of site
plan approval with respect to the maintenance of
landscape plans.
(7) Utilities. All utilities within the development shall be placed
underground from the service point locations surrounding the site.
(8) Other improvements and design standards. The development plan
for the site, its developed facilities and the interior of residential
units in the T.H. Zone must be specifically designed in accordance
with all applicable building codes of the State of New Jersey.
(a) Each development in the T.H. Zone shall have an architectural
theme with variations in design to provide harmonious, themerelated
earthtone colors in the style and architectural
character commonly referred to as Early Colonial, New
England Colonial Georgian, Federal, Queen Anne or
Jeffersonian. Landscape plantings, building orientation on the
lot, topography, natural features and building design shall all
be considered for the total T.H. Zone development. Staggering
unit setbacks, utilizing different exterior materials, changing
rooflines and roof designs, altering building heights and types
of windows, shutters, doors and facade orientation, and other
creative design techniques are encouraged and will be
considered by the Joint Planning Board during its review
process. The applicant shall provide building elevation
renderings to show that a minimum of 30% of the exterior of
each building is comprised of a brick, stone material, or a
differential material composition than the balance of the
building.
§ 142-236.1 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.1
138:587
(b) Each dwelling unit shall be equipped with central-heating and
air-conditioning systems with independent controls for each.
(c) Each dwelling unit shall contain plumbing and gas or electric
connections for a clothes washer and dryer.
(d) Each dwelling unit shall contain sprinkler systems for fire
prevention and risk reduction. Smoke alarms shall be installed
in each dwelling unit in the T.H. Zone in accordance with the
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119).
(e) Each occupant shall be responsible for the disposal of
household garbage, recyclable materials and refuse as
required in other residential districts; provided, however, that
a homeowners' association may assume the responsibility to
arrange for the disposal of the solid waste and recyclables
produced within the T.H. Zone in accordance with applicable
municipal codes.
(f) A safe and convenient system of walkways accessible to all
occupants shall be provided within the development, and along
all public roadways and publicly owned driveways. The site
plan shall show the locations of all pedestrian walkways and
sidewalks (which shall be continuous throughout the
development per the RSIS), and be in accordance with the
RSIS.
(g) Lighting.
[1] Lighting plans for the entire development shall be
submitted with the site application. Artificial lighting shall
be provided along all walks and interior roads and
driveways and in all off-street parking areas, depending
upon anticipated nighttime use, with sufficient
illumination for the safety and convenience of the
residents. The source of lighting shall be directed
downward, away from buildings and adjoining streets and
property lines. Lighting fixtures shall be so arranged that
the direct source of light is not visible from any adjacent
residential area.
[2] Light fixtures shall not be greater in height than 20 feet
and shall be aimed and shielded in a manner that shall not
direct illumination on adjacent lands. Fixtures should be of
the cut-off type to prevent glare from normal viewing
angles and represent an architectural "period" or theme
consistent with building exteriors. Illumination levels shall
average not more than one footcandle over the site, and at
no point shall they exceed 3.5 footcandles. Lighting shall
provide a minimum uniformity ratio of 20:1
§ 142-236.1 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.1
138:588
(maximum:minimum) on all paved surfaces used for motor
vehicles.
[3] Lighting plans shall include photometric data, color
rendering index (CRI) of all lamps (bulbs), and other
descriptive information on the fixtures, and if applicable or
required, designation as Illuminating Engineering Society
of North America (IESNA) "cut-off” fixtures.
[4] Computer-generated photometric grid showing footcandle
readings every 10 feet within the property or site, and 10
feet beyond the property lines at a scale consistent with
site plans. Iso-footcandle contour-line-style plans are also
acceptable.
[5] Fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials,
colors, style of buildings, or art shall be located, aimed and
shielded so that light is directed only on those features.
Such fixtures shall be aimed or shielded so as to minimize
light spill into the dark night sky. The maximum
illumination of any vertical surface or angular roof surface
in dark surroundings shall not exceed three footcandles.
[6] Flags of the United States or New Jersey State may be
illuminated from below provided such lighting is focused
primarily on the individual flag or flags so as to limit light
trespass and spill into the dark night sky.
(h) On-site security and maintenance service systems may be
provided in the T.H. Zone.
(9) Ownership and management of common areas, elements and open
space.
(a) A homeowners' association or condominium association shall
be established to provide and maintain all common areas,
elements and open space for the benefit of residents of the
development. Such organization shall not be dissolved and
shall not dispose of any open space, by sale or otherwise
(except to an organization conceived and established to own
and maintain the open spaces for the benefit of such
development), without first offering to dedicate the same to the
Township of River Vale or other government agency.
(b) The regulations of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43b and c shall be
applicable to the maintenance of the open space.
(c) If any open space, easements or common areas on the tract are
dedicated to and accepted by the Township, the area of such
portions of the tract shall nonetheless be included in
calculating the permitted density of the development.
§ 142-236.1 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.1
138:589
§ 142-236.2. Affordable Housing Zone (AH-1). [Added 5-23-2011 by
Ord. No. 249-2011]
(d) As a condition of the approval of a proposed development, the
Joint Planning Board shall require of the organization
established or to be established to own and/or maintain
common open space, any other common areas or elements, or
the structures located within the development, that it adopt
certain binding rules and regulations or bylaws with respect to
ensuring the objectives and purposes of reasonable
maintenance. If, as a condition of Joint Planning Board
approval, certain provisions are required to be included within
the rules and regulations or bylaws, such provisions shall not
be changed without the prior approval of the Joint Planning
Board.
(e) A homeowners' association or condominium association shall
be established to provide and maintain the continual operation
of all stormwater management devices and systems within the
development.
(10) Conditions of preliminary approval. As a condition of preliminary
approval of the development, the Board may provide for final
approval of the plan and construction of the project in whole or in
one or more sections or stages.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for the production of
rental age-restricted low- and moderate-income housing in
conformance with the latest procedural and substantive rules of the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) and as part of a
comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan will permit the affordable
housing development in conjunction with the subdivision of an
additional residential lot, which will facilitate the development of the
affordable housing. The rental age-restricted affordable housing
development will be located on the northern area of the property. The
residential lot to be subdivided will be located on the southern section
of the total tract. [Amended 9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 263-2012]
B. Permitted principal uses. Within the AH-1 Zone, the following uses are
permitted:
(1) Age-restricted multifamily affordable housing development: one/
more building(s) containing rental residential apartment units that
are affordable pursuant to the rules and regulations of the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH). The building(s) shall
contain a one-bedroom apartment and office space for a Building
Supervisor. The Building Supervisor's apartment shall neither be
affordable nor age-restricted. Except for the Building Supervisor's
apartment, all units shall be affordable and age-restricted dwelling
units for households aged 62 and under as defined herein. Also
known as an "affordable housing development."
§ 142-236.1 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.2
138:590
(2) Single-family detached dwellings: for future lot(s) to be subdivided.
[Amended 9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 263-2012]
C. Permitted accessory uses for age-restricted multifamily affordable
housing development in the AH-1 Affordable Housing Zone:
(1) Attached common garage structures and indoor and/or outdoor
areas devoted to off-street parking.
(2) One double-faced ground-type sign identifying the development
may be located at each entrance to said development, provided
such sign meets all the requirements of Article LIII of this Code,
with the following exception:
(a) Any such sign located within the AH-1 is limited to 18 square
feet in area on each side and is mounted no greater than four
feet above finished grade on a freestanding wall or a structure
not exceeding six feet in height above the ground level. The
design, location and landscaping of such sign shall be as
approved by the Joint Planning Board.
(b) The sign shall only be externally illuminated, but illumination
shall not spill onto, or the light source be visible from, adjacent
dwellings.
D. Requirements for age-restricted multifamily affordable housing
development in the AH-1 Affordable Housing Zone.
(1) Use and occupancy restrictions:
(a) All units within the age-restricted multifamily affordable
housing development located in the AH-1 shall be agerestricted
units as defined in § 142-3 and affordable pursuant
to New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) rules.
(b) Federal Fair Housing Act. The age-restricted multifamily
affordable housing development in the AH-1 Zone shall comply
with all applicable requirements of the Federal Fair Housing
Act and all amendments thereto, except as noted above, and all
applicable rules and regulations of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
regarding such use, ownership and occupancy and shall
further comply with all applicable HUD rules and regulations
for self-certification of compliance with the Act and with HUD's
rules and regulations.
(c) Affordable Housing Official. The Township may appoint an
Affordable Housing Official who will be responsible for
monitoring and implementing the provisions of this section and
assuring that the affordable units remain affordable to
affordable households. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for an affordable unit without the written approval of
§ 142-236.2 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.2
138:591
the Township or the Affordable Housing Official. Such approval
shall be denied unless the unit is subject to an individual
or master deed containing a covenant running with the land
which assures that the unit will remain affordable to affordable
households for a period of at least the minimum required by
COAH.
(d) Rentals and sales.
[1] No affordable unit shall be rented or rerented without the
written approval of the Township or the Affordable
Housing Official. In order to obtain such approval, the
seller or lessor shall be required to demonstrate that the
proposed sale or lease complies in all respects with the
provisions of this article and COAH obligations.
[2] Rents or sale prices of affordable units shall be established
in accordance with the Uniform Affordability Controls set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.
[3] In establishing prices and rents, the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls rely on the regional income limits
determined as follows:
[a] Median income by household size shall be established
by a regional weighted average of the uncapped
Section 8 income limits published by HUD. To
compute this regional income limit, the HUD
determination of median county income for a family of
four is multiplied by the estimated households within
the county. The resulting product for each county
within the housing region is summed. The sum is
divided by the estimated total households in each
housing region. This quotient represents the regional
weighted average of median income for a household of
four. This regional weighted average is adjusted by
household size based on multipliers used by HUD to
adjust median income by household size.
[b] The price and rent of low- and moderate-income units
may be increased annually based on the percentage
increase in the Housing Consumer Price Index for the
United States. This increase shall not exceed 9% in
any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to
low-income tax credit regulations shall be indexed
pursuant to the regulations governing low-income tax
credits.
(e) Affirmative marketing program. Every approved age-restricted
multifamily affordable housing development subject to the
requirements of this article shall be affirmatively marketed in
conformance with the Township of River Vale's Affirmative
§ 142-236.2 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.2
138:592
Marketing Plan approved by COAH. Every approved agerestricted
multifamily affordable housing development subject
to the requirements of this article shall submit an affirmative
marketing program designed to disseminate information
regarding the availability of affordable income units. The
affirmative marketing process for available affordable units
shall begin at least four months prior to expected occupancy.
Advertising and outreach shall take place during the first week
of the marketing program and each month thereafter until all
available units have been leased or sold. The program shall
include at least the following:
[1] One advertisement will be published in at least the
following newspapers, and any other newspapers, deemed
necessary by the Township, of general circulation at or
within the housing region:
[a] The Record.
[b] Community Life.
[2] The advertisement will include the following:
[a] The location of the units;
[b] Directions to the housing units;
[c] A range of prices for the housing units;
[d] The size, as measured in bedrooms, of the housing
units;
[e] The maximum income permitted to qualify for the
housing units;
[f] The business hours when interested households may
obtain an application for a housing unit; and
[g] Application fees, if any.
[3] One advertisement will be broadcasted on the following
regional radio and/or cable television station and any other
such station deemed necessary by the Township:
[a] Cablevision of New Jersey.
[4] Additionally, all newspaper articles, announcements and
requests for applications for low- and moderate-income
housing will appear in at least the following and any other
such newspapers deemed necessary by the Township:
[a] The Record.
[b] Community Life.
§ 142-236.2 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.2
138:593
[5] Applications will be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
[6] The following is the location of applications, brochure(s),
sign(s), and/or poster(s) currently used as part of the
affirmative marketing program:
[a] The county administrative building and/or the county
library for each county within the housing region;
[b] The municipal administrative building(s) and the
municipal library;
[c] The developer's sales/rental office.
[7] The following is a current list of community and regional
organizations that will aid in soliciting low- and moderateincome
applicants:
[a] Religious groups.
[b] Tenant organizations.
[c] Civic organizations.
[8] The following is a description of the random selection
method that will be used to select occupants of low- and
moderate-income housing:
[a] Each applicant upon submission of an application will
be designated a number. Two categories will be
created: one for low-income households and one for
moderate-income households. A blind drawing will be
undertaken: one each for low- and moderate-income
households who are eligible for the specific affordable
units.
[b] A waiting list of all eligible candidates will be
maintained in accordance with the provisions
contained in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq.
[c] Households who live or work in Housing Region 1
shall be given preference for sales and rental units
constructed within this housing region. Applicants
living outside this housing region will have an equal
opportunity for units after regional applicants have
been initially serviced.
(2) Age-restricted multifamily affordable housing development use and
occupancy restrictions.
(a) All age-restricted multifamily affordable residential units
within the AH-1 Zone shall be specifically designed and
intended for and limited to occupancy by households composed
§ 142-236.2 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.2
138:594
of at least one permanent resident 62 years of age or older and
with children under the age of 19 being expressly prohibited.
(b) Through its corporation, association or owners, the land and
buildings for the affordable housing development shall be
restricted, by bylaws, rules, regulations and restrictions of
record, to permanent use and occupancy by persons of 62
years of age or older, subject to the following exceptions,
consistent with the requirements of the Federal Fair Housing
Act, as amended; all units shall meet the age requirements
herein.
(c) A spouse or other person under the age of 62 years who is
residing with a person who is 62 years of age or over and
qualified to reside in the unit may reside in the age-restricted
housing unit.
(d) An adult under 62 years of age may reside in a unit in the agerestricted
housing if it is established that the presence of such
person is essential to the physical care of one or more of the
occupants of the same unit who are qualified to reside in the
unit. A certified letter from a licensed medical doctor must be
provided indicating the necessity of such care.
(e) Children over the age of 19 shall be permitted to reside in the
same unit with a parent if the parent is 62 years of age or over
and qualified to reside in the age-restricted housing unit.
(f) The age-restricted housing shall comply with all applicable
requirements of the Federal Fair Housing Act and all
amendments thereto, except as noted above, and all applicable
rules and regulations of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) regarding such use,
ownership and occupancy and shall further comply with all
applicable HUD rules and regulations for self-certification of
compliance with the Act and with HUD's rules and regulations.
The residency restriction applicable to the development may
be reviewed by the Township Attorney for compliance with the
Federal Fair Housing Act.
E. Age-restricted multifamily affordable housing development area and
density requirements. The following requirements shall apply to any
affordable housing development proposed for the AH-1 Zone:
(1) Minimum tract area. There shall be a minimum tract area of three
acres.
(2) Maximum density and number of units. There shall be no more than
15 dwelling units per gross lot acre within the AH-1 Zone.
[Amended 9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 263-2012]
§ 142-236.2 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.2
138:595
(3) Maximum building coverage: 10% of gross lot area, including any
road widening or utility easements.
(4) Maximum impervious coverage: 30% of gross lot area, including
any road widening or utility easements.
F. Age-restricted multifamily affordable housing development setback and
height requirements. The following setback and height requirements
shall apply to any affordable housing development proposed for the
AH-1 Zone:
(1) Limiting schedule.
(a) Minimum front setback: 60 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard setback: 40 feet.
(d) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet within 150
feet of front lot line; 3 1/2 stories or 45 feet for balance of lot.
[Amended 9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 263-2012]
(2) Lot depth. The minimum lot depth shall be 200 feet taken parallel
to the side lot lines.
(3) Lot width and frontage: 100 feet.
G. Single-family dwelling. Area, bulk, setback and yard requirements:
same as the A Residential Zone, except that a minimum lot width and
frontage of 100 feet shall be permitted.
H. Age-restricted multifamily affordable housing development amenities.
(1) Age-restricted multifamily affordable housing development in the
AH-1 Zone may include indoor and outdoor common areas,
recreational areas and community facilities provided for the
exclusive use of its residents.
(2) Areas intended for recreational purposes shall include facilities for
active and passive recreation particularly suitable for residents.
(3) Any multipurpose facility shall be designed and equipped to meet
the social and recreational needs of the anticipated residents of the
AH-1 Zone. This may include exercise rooms, hobby and craft
rooms, lounge areas, meeting rooms, card rooms, rooms providing
support facilities for outdoor recreational facilities or other similar
facilities, all as required meeting the needs of the residents.
(4) Elevators shall be provided as required by the Uniform
Construction Code.
I. Age-restricted multifamily affordable housing development roadways
and parking standards.
§ 142-236.2 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.2
138:596
(1) All requirements of the River Vale Land Development Ordinance
relating to parking lot design shall be applicable to an agerestricted
multifamily affordable housing development in the AH-1
Zone.
(2) No parking of recreational or commercially registered or used
vehicles, mobile homes, trailers or boats shall be permitted on the
site.
(3) There shall be a minimum of one parking space for every two
residential units for the entire affordable housing development.
[Amended 9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 263-2012]
(4) Landscaping in parking areas shall be provided as follows:
(a) Landscaped strips of a minimum four feet in width shall be
provided between all parking lots and property lines, and a
minimum ten-foot landscaped strip shall be provided between
all buildings and property lines.
(b) Landscaped areas should be located in protected areas, such
as along walkways, in center islands, or at the end of parking
bays, and shall be distributed throughout the parking area to
mitigate the view of the parked vehicles without interfering
with adequate sight distance for vehicles or pedestrians. The
landscaping shall consist of hardy, low maintenance varieties
of trees, and shrub plantings, as well as trees of a minimum
eight feet in height.
(c) One shade tree with a minimum diameter of three inches
measured three feet above the ground shall be provided for
every five parking spaces. Trees shall be staggered and/or
spaced so as not to interfere with driver vision and shall have
branches no lower than six feet.
(d) All landscaping and plantings shall be maintained continually
in accordance with provisions of the site plan approval for the
development. Plantings which do not live shall be replaced
within six months, but no longer than the next growing season.
Notwithstanding this provision, all applicants must continually
meet the provisions of site plan approval with respect to the
maintenance of landscape plans.
J. Age-restricted multifamily affordable housing development utilities. All
utilities within the affordable housing development shall be placed
underground from the service point locations surrounding the site.
K. Age-restricted multifamily affordable housing development other
improvements and design standards.
(1) The development plan for the site, its developed facilities and the
interior of residential units in the AH-1 Zone must be specifically
§ 142-236.2 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.2
138:597
designed in accordance with all applicable building codes of the
State of New Jersey.
(2) Lighting plans for the entire development shall be submitted with
the site application. Artificial lighting shall be provided along all
walks and interior roads and driveways and in all off-street parking
areas, depending upon anticipated nighttime use, with sufficient
illumination for the safety and convenience of the residents. The
source of lighting shall be directed downward, away from buildings
and adjoining streets and property lines. Lighting fixtures shall be
so arranged that the direct source of light is not visible from any
adjacent residential area.
(3) Light fixtures shall not be greater in height than 15 feet and shall
be aimed and shielded in a manner that shall not direct illumination
on adjacent lands. Fixtures should be of the cut-off type to prevent
glare from normal viewing angles and represent an architectural
"period" or theme consistent with building exteriors. Maintained
illumination levels shall average not more than one footcandle over
the site, and at no point shall they exceed 3 1/2 footcandles.
Lighting shall provide a minimum uniformity ratio of 20:1
(maximum:minimum) on all paved surfaces used for motor vehicles.
(4) Lighting plans shall include photometric data, color rendering
index (CRI) of all lamps, and other descriptive information on the
fixtures, and, if applicable or required, designation as Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) "cut-off" fixtures.
(5) Computer-generated photometric grid showing footcandle
readings every 10 feet within the property or site, and 10 feet
beyond the property lines at a scale consistent with site plans. Isofootcandle
contour line style plans are also acceptable.
(6) Fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials, colors,
style of buildings, or art shall be located, aimed and shielded so
that light is directed only on those features. Such fixtures shall be
aimed or shielded so as to minimize light spill into the dark night
sky. The maximum illumination of any vertical surface or angular
roof surface in dark surroundings shall not exceed three
footcandles.
(7) Flags of the United States or New Jersey State may be illuminated
from below, provided such lighting is focused primarily on the
individual flag or flags so as to limit light trespass and spill into the
dark night sky.
L. Age-restricted multifamily affordable housing development ownership
and management of common areas, elements and open space. If any
open space, easements or common areas on the tract are dedicated to
and accepted by the Township, the area of such portions of the tract
shall nonetheless be included in calculating the permitted density of the
development.
§ 142-236.2 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.2
138:598
§ 142-236.3. Downtown Inclusionary "Four Corners" Overlay Zone
(OL). [Added 12-9-2019 by Ord. No. 362-2019]
M. Age-restricted multifamily affordable housing development conditions
of preliminary approval. As a condition of preliminary approval of the
plan, the Board may provide for final approval of the plan and
construction of the project in whole or in one or more sections or
stages.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Downtown Inclusionary Overlay Zone is to
create an opportunity for the construction of low- and moderate-income
housing in the Township of River Vale and thereby address the unmet
need portion of the fair share housing obligation, in conformance with
the latest fair share obligation promulgated by the courts and under the
New Jersey Fair Housing Act.
B. Zone boundary. The boundary of this district is hereby established by
the appended map65 and shall be established at § 142-221 of the
Township Code. The Downtown Inclusionary Overlay Zone is comprised
of two subzones shown on the map in the appendix to this code.
Subzone Overlay 1 (OL-1) includes generally the corner blocks and lots
at the intersection of Westwood Avenue and River Vale Road. Subzone
Overlay 2 (OL-2) includes the remainder block and lots.
C. Permitted principal uses. The following principal permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted:
(1) All permitted uses in the underlying zone.
(2) Mixed use building - residential/retail.
(a) Residential uses restricted to the upper stories of a mixed-use
building and where the ground-story use shall be a
nonresidential use.
(b) Nonresidential uses - first floor only.
[1] Retail stores, markets and shops, excluding drive-ins.
[2] Personal service establishments.
[3] Restaurants, bar/tavern.
[4] Business, professional, and governmental offices.
[5] Banks, without drive-in facilities.
(3) Parks and plazas.
D. Permitted accessory uses. Accessory buildings, structures and uses
shall be permitted when used in conjunction with a principal permitted
use.
65.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 142-236.2 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.3
138:599
(1) Parking and loading in accordance with Article LIX, Off-Street
Parking, and with the parking standards required within this Part
9.
(2) Signs in accordance with Article LIII, Signs.
(3) Fences in accordance with Article LIV, Fences.
(4) Outdoor seating.
E. Prohibited uses. All uses not explicitly permitted are prohibited,
including, but not limited to:
(1) Check cashing businesses.
(2) Massage parlors.
(3) Kennels.
(4) Uses requiring storage or display of goods outside a fully enclosed
building.
(5) Lumber yards.
(6) Sexually oriented businesses.
(7) Tattoo, body piercing or branding establishments.
(8) Manufacturing and other commercial uses deemed to be hazardous
in the building code.
(9) Auto-oriented businesses.
(10) Restaurants with exterior drive-up window service or drive-thrus.
(11) Pawn shops.
(12) Funeral homes.
(13) Self-storage facility.
F. Affordable housing; low- and moderate-income housing requirements.
(1) All developments constructed in the OL - Downtown Overlay Zone
shall be required to set aside a minimum percentage of units for
affordable housing. Where units will be for sale, the minimum set
aside shall be 20%. Where units will be for rent, the minimum set
aside shall be 15%. When calculating the required number of
affordable units, any computation resulting in a fraction of a unit
shall be rounded upwards to the next whole number.
(2) All affordable units to be produced pursuant to this section shall
comply with the Township's Affordable Housing Ordinance in
Chapter 43 of the Township Code, as may be amended and
supplemented; the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
("UHAC") (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.), or any successor regulation;
§ 142-236.3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.3
138:600
and the Township's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, as may
be amended from time to time. This includes, but is not limited to,
the following requirements for all affordable units:
(a) Low-moderate-income split. A maximum of 50% of the
affordable units shall be moderate-income units and a
minimum of 50% of the affordable units shall be low-income
units. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be verylow-
income units, which shall be counted as part of the
required number of low-income units within the development.
(b) Bedroom mix. If the development is not age restricted, the
following bedroom mix shall apply:
[1] The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
[2] At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
[3] At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
[4] The remaining units may be allocated among two- and
three-bedroom units at the discretion of the developer.
(3) Deed restriction period. All affordable units shall be deed restricted
for a period of 30 years from the date of the initial occupancy of
each affordable unit (the "deed-restriction period") and continue
thereafter until the municipality in its sole discretion chooses to
release the restriction in accordance with UHAC.
(4) Administrative agent. All affordable units shall be administered by
a qualified administrative agent paid for by the developer.
(5) Other affordable housing unit requirements. Developers shall also
comply with all of the other requirements of the Township's
Affordable Housing Ordinance, including, but not limited to,
affirmative marketing requirements; candidate qualification and
screening requirements; integrating the affordable units amongst
the market rate units; and unit phasing requirements. Developers
shall ensure that the affordable units are dispersed between all of
the buildings on its site and shall identify the exact location of each
affordable unit at the time of site plan application.
G. Bulk standards. The applicable bulk standards are as follows and also
appear on the Township of River Vale's bulk requirements schedule
located at § 142-222:
(1) Maximum height of buildings shall be as follows:
(a) OL-1: three stories, 38 feet.
§ 142-236.3 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.3
138:601
(b) OL-2: two stories, 35 feet.
(2) Minimum size of lots:
(a) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage of lots shall be 60%.
(4) Maximum impervious coverage shall be 85%.
(5) Setbacks shall be as follows:
(a) Front yard.
[1] Where there is a corner lot, there shall be two front yards.
[2] Minimum setback distance: 10 feet.
(b) Side yards.
[1] Minimum width: zero feet when attached to adjacent
structure.
[2] Where the property abuts a residential zone, in which case
the minimum setback required shall be 15 feet or the same
as the residential setbacks on the abutting residential
zone, whichever is greater.
(c) Rear yard.
[1] Minimum: 50 feet.
H. Building and site requirements.
(1) Location of building. Buildings and their front facades shall be
oriented towards the public and/or private roadway. Where the
building does not front a public and/or private roadway, buildings
shall be oriented towards interior open spaces. All units and
buildings shall be oriented away from parking lots.
(2) Surface parking lots and garages are not permitted in the front
yard setback of any property; any proposed side yard shall be
masked with architectural or landscape features.
(3) Common open space. Public and/or semipublic open space, such as
courtyards, plazas, alleys and pedestrian walkways, shall be
designed to promote use and enjoyment by all.
(4) Cable television utility. All dwelling units shall be provided with
such facilities for potential linkage to the Township's cable
television utility.
§ 142-236.3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.3
138:602
(5) Facades. In order to provide attractiveness, identity and
individuality to buildings and complexes of buildings within the
entire development and to avoid the monotonous repetition of
design elements and its undesirable visual effects, the following
design standards shall be utilized:
(a) Facades shall be expressed as building nodes to reduce the
apparent size of larger buildings and to set up a rhythm in the
facade that expresses the traditional scale of buildings.
Architectural variety in building material, massing, cornice
height, and window style/height/arrangement is encouraged.
(b) All buildings shall provide scale-defining architectural
elements or details, such as windows, spandrels, awnings,
porticos, pediments, cornices, pilasters, columns and
balconies.
(c) All entrances to a building, except service and emergency
egress doors, shall be defined and articulated by architectural
elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters, columns,
porticoes, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades and other
elements, where appropriate. Any such element utilized shall
be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors
and details of the building as a whole, as shall the doors.
(d) Building exteriors shall have vertical and/or horizontal offsets
to create visual breaks on the exterior. Monotonous,
uninterrupted walls or roof planes shall be avoided. Building
wall offsets, including projections such as balconies, canopies,
awnings, and signs, recesses, and changes in floor level, shall
be used in order to add architectural interest and variety and
to relieve the visual effect of a simple, long wall. Similarly,
roofline offsets, dormers, or gables shall be provided in order
to provide architectural interest and variety to the massing of a
building and to relieve the effect of a single, long roof.
(e) The architectural treatment of the front facade shall be
continued in its major features around all visibly exposed sides
of a building. All sides of a building shall be architecturally
designed to be consistent with regard to style, materials,
colors and details.
(f) There shall be no blank facades and shall adhere to the
standards listed above and in this document.
(g) Articulate the building entrance in the facade to make it easily
identifiable by pedestrians and motorists and to provide
architectural interest.
(h) Ground-floor facades of retail, restaurant, and related uses
facing a street shall comprise a minimum of 50% clear window
area, with windows providing views of display areas or the
§ 142-236.3 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.3
138:603
inside of the building. These ground-floor windows shall begin
between 12 inches to 24 inches above ground level and shall
end above 86 inches above ground level.
(i) Smoked, reflective, or black glass in windows in prohibited.
(6) Residential dwelling unit requirements.
(a) Dwelling unit size. Each dwelling unit shall meet the following
criteria:
[1] One-bedroom: minimum 800 square feet; affordable units:
minimum 650 square feet.
[2] Two-bedroom: minimum 1,200 square feet; affordable
units: minimum 875 square feet.
[3] Three-bedroom: minimum 1,250 square feet; affordable
units: minimum 1,100 square feet.
[4] As it relates to any units with dens:
[a] Dens must adjoin a living space.
[b] Dens must be built without closets and at all times
postconstruction have no closets.
[c] Dens must be accessed through a wider-than-usual
opening.
[d] The addition of a door, wall and a closet are at all
times prohibited.
(b) No rooms intended for human habitation shall be located in a
cellar, basement or attic, except that a cellar or basement may
contain a family room or recreation room.
(c) Each dwelling unit shall have at least two exterior exposures
with at least one window in each exposure.
(d) Buildings with residential uses shall provide laundry facilities
and central air conditioning for each dwelling unit. No central
or common laundry or similar facilities intended for two or
more dwelling units shall be permitted. Window airconditioning
units are not permitted. Outside clothes drying is
prohibited.
(7) Commercial space requirements.
(a) All commercial floor space provided on the ground floor of a
mixed-use building shall have the following:
[1] A minimum floor-to-ceiling height of 11 feet.
[2] At least 800 square feet of leasable retail space.
§ 142-236.3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.3
138:604
(b) Outdoor dining areas shall not impede pedestrian traffic flow.
Advertising or promotional features shall be limited to
umbrellas, a menu board, and canopies.
(8) Landscaping and open space.
(a) There shall be a comprehensive landscape plan prepared by a
certified landscape architect which shall detail the location,
type, size and any planting note for the proposed landscape
materials. This plan shall be subject to the approval of the Joint
Planning Board.
(b) Screening and buffering. Where properties in the OL Zone abut
a residential zone, properties in the OL Zone shall at least
partially obscure the view of parking areas, loading platforms
and loading activities by screening such areas with fencing or
landscaping or any combination thereof. Landscaping shall
measure a minimum of eight feet in height at planting. Fencing
shall not be less than six feet in height and shall conform to the
fencing requirements at § 142-247, Requirements. Said
screening shall be subject to review and approval by the
Planning Board/Zoning Board, pursuant to site plan review.
(9) Lighting.
(a) Adequate lighting shall be provided for all common areas and
pedestrian walkways.
(b) All outdoor lighting, including streetlamps and accent lighting,
should comply with "dark sky" standards intended to reduce
light pollution. Dark sky standards require that lighting is
downcast, illuminates only the intended areas, and does not
cause disabling glare that affects driver safety and reduces the
visibility of starry night skies.
(c) Lighting shall be shielded to meet the following requirements:
[1] No light shall shine directly from a light source onto the
ground, into the windows, or onto improvements of an
abutting property, although incidental light may be
permitted to fall on abutting property. Such incidental
lighting shall not exceed 1/2 an ISO footcandle at ground
level on the abutting property.
[2] No light, except streetlights, shall shine directly onto
public roads.
(d) Where the abutting property is residentially zoned and used,
lighting shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Light fixtures shall be directed towards the proposed
development and away from the abutting property.
§ 142-236.3 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.3
138:605
[2] The light source itself must not be visible from the
abutting residential property.
(e) No parking lot lighting standard or building fixture designed to
illuminate the ground shall exceed 18 feet in height from grade
level, and no pedestrian lighting standard shall exceed 14 feet
in height from grade level.
(10) Miscellaneous.
(a) Through-wall air-conditioning units that project beyond the
building wall are not permitted.
(b) Refuse area design standards. The storage of refuse shall be
provided inside the building(s) or within an outdoor area
enclosed by either walls or opaque fencing at least six feet in
height. Any refuse area outside of the building shall be
designed to be architecturally compatible with the building(s)
and shall not be located in the front of the building.
(c) Buildings containing dwelling units located above the second
story and requiring a second means of egress pursuant to the
Uniform Construction Code shall not utilize an attached
external fire escape as one of the required means of egress.
(d) Fences shall be permitted at a maximum height of six feet and
shall be situated and designed in accordance with Article LIV,
Fences, of this chapter of the municipal Code.
(11) Bicycle parking requirements.
(a) A designated area within the development shall be provided for
bicycle parking. The area can be permitted inside the buildings
or outside in a protected area. Parking shall be provided in
such a way that allows for a bicycle to be properly secured, via
a bicycle rack or locker.
(b) A minimum of two bike parking space per eight units shall be
required.
(12) Parking standards.
(a) All parking areas shall conform with § 142-274, Parking area
design standards, of this chapter of the Township Code.
(b) Off-street parking is prohibited in any required front yard
setback.
(c) Parking may not be located closer than 10 feet to any rear
property line.
(d) Parking may not be located closer than five feet to any side
property line. Where there is a shared parking arrangement in
place between two or more adjacent properties, shared
§ 142-236.3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.3
138:606
property lines need not comply with the required five-foot
parking setback.
(e) The minimum setback from a building to a parking area or
paved area shall be 10 feet.
(f) The minimum parking for:
[1] Residential units shall adhere to the standards in the
Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS), as:
[a] Studio/efficiency and one-bedrooms: 1.8 spaces.
[b] Two-bedroom: 2.0 spaces.
[c] Three-bedroom: 2.1 spaces.
[2] Commercial parking shall conform to the requirements set
forth in § 142-273, Minimum requirements, of this chapter
of the Township Code.
(g) An applicant may participate in a shared parking arrangement,
provided the following:
[1] Parking shall not be considered the principal use of the lot.
In a shared parking arrangement, parking shall be
considered an accessory use, in all instances.
[2] An applicant requesting use of an off-site shared parking
arrangement must submit a study demonstrating:
[a] That the required parking cannot feasibly be provided
on site without compromising the economic value of
the proposed development.
[b] That the distance between the site and the shared
parking is reasonable and the sites must be
contiguous.
[c] That the proposed shared parking location can
reasonably accommodate peak parking and traffic for
all uses that will be sharing the parking.
[3] An applicant requesting to use shared parking must enter
into an agreement with the owner of the shared parking
site.
[a] The shared parking agreement shall be enforced
through written agreement among all owners of
record.
[b] The owner(s) of the shared parking shall enter into a
written developer's agreement with the Township,
with enforcement running to the Township, providing
§ 142-236.3 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.3
138:607
that the land comprising the shared parking area shall
never be disposed of except in conjunction with the
sale of the building(s) which the parking area serves,
so long as the parking facilities are required.
[c] The owner(s) shall agree to bear the expense of
recording the agreement and such agreement shall
bind the heirs, successors, or assigns.
[d] A copy of such agreement shall be submitted to the
administrative officer to record in a form established
by the Township Attorney.
[e] Record of the agreement must take place before
issuance of a certificate of occupancy or building
permit, for any use to be served by the shared parking
area.
[f] Such agreement may only be revoked if, at such time,
all required off-street parking spaces can be provided
on site in accordance with the off-street parking
requirements of this section.
I. Streetscape standards.
(1) Sidewalks and crosswalks.
(a) Sidewalks are required along all street frontages, alleys, and
internal driveways. Sidewalks along alleys may be waived if an
applicant can demonstrate that these areas are not anticipated
to have pedestrians. Sidewalks shall meet the following width
requirements:
[1] In areas that predominantly consist of retail, restaurant,
and related uses on the ground floor of buildings,
sidewalks shall have a minimum unimpeded width of six
feet.
(b) Sidewalks shall be constructed of durable, attractive materials
like brick, stone, or high-quality concrete accented with
pavers. Sidewalk materials shall be continued across curb cuts
when possible.
(c) Sidewalks shall be required to connect the street frontage to
all front building entrances, parking areas, plazas, other usable
open space areas, and any other destination that generates
pedestrian traffic. Sidewalks shall connect to existing
sidewalks on abutting tracts and other nearby pedestrian
destinations.
(d) All sidewalks shall have accessibility ramps and shall comply
with the regulations of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
§ 142-236.3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.3
138:608
(e) Crosswalks shall be required at all street intersections and
wherever necessary to provide safe pedestrian access and
movement.
(f) Crosswalks shall be constructed of inlaid thermal plastic,
patterned surface dressing, or stone/brick/concrete pavers
that make them easy to view and distinguish from the rest of
the roadway. Crosswalk borders shall be highlighted with
white lines at least six inches in width. This shall be approved
by the Township's Planning Board or Zoning Board.
(2) Street furniture and streetscape elements.
(a) Street furniture shall be provided and include (though not be
limited to) benches, trash and recycling receptacles, planters,
and bike racks. Street furniture shall be decorative, functional,
and properly scaled to the space.
(b) Street furniture shall be provided to the Planning Board
specifications on style and/or color, and shall be given final
approval by the Planning Board.
(c) Street furniture shall be properly maintained by the property
owner and be constructed of durable materials such as cast
iron, aluminum, stainless steel, or similar materials.
(d) All furniture and streetscape items shall be offset from the
curb by a minimum of 1.5 feet to avoid car door obstruction.
(e) Paired trash and recycling receptacles shall be placed along
each block face and identified on the site plan.
(f) Sidewalk-mounted trash receptacles shall have at least two
feet clear on all sides from any standing object including, but
not limited to, parking meters, lights, and sign posts.
(g) Freestanding planters and protective devices, such as bollards,
shall be installed between sidewalks and adjacent vehicular
traffic to help shape the pedestrian environment. Street
furniture, such as the above bike racks, adds a distinctive
element to the streetscape. Care should be taken to choose
appropriately styled furniture.
(h) Bicycle racks shall be located in highly visible, well-lit areas
near building entrances; bicycle parking areas shall not
obstruct walkways. Bicycle parking may be provided within a
building, but the location must be easily accessible for
bicyclists.
(3) Street trees.
(a) All trees shall be placed in a location that will allow for
adequate space for growth without interfering with below-
§ 142-236.3 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.3
138:609
§ 142-236.4. Mandatory set-aside. [Added 9-9-2019 by Ord. No.
357-2019]
grade utilities, roadways, sidewalks, overhead wires, or
streetlights and shall not be permitted within the sight
triangle.
(b) All trees shall be planted a minimum of 20 feet from pedestrian
or roadway lighting and should be spaced 20 feet to 30 feet on
center.
(c) All branches are to be trimmed away to a height of at least
eight feet above the curb level.
(d) Large street trees shall be planted at a minimum size of three
inches in caliper, a minimum of 12 feet in height, all branches
are to be trimmed away to a height of at least eight feet above
the curb level and shall be planted according to accepted
horticultural standards, including soil specifications.
(e) Medium street trees shall be planted at a minimum size of two
inches to 2.5 inches in caliper, a minimum of eight feet in
height, all branches are to be trimmed away to a height of at
least five feet to six feet above the curb level and shall be
planted according to accepted horticultural standards,
including soil specifications.
(f) All street tree planting sites shall be indicated on the plans.
(g) On streets where existing shade trees are consistently located
at a certain location so as to form a line parallel to the street,
shade trees may be placed to continue this pattern.
J. Site plan review. All of the foregoing shall be subject to site plan review.
A. If River Vale permits the construction of multifamily or single-family
attached residential development that is "approvable" and
"developable," as defined at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3,66 at a gross residential
density of five or more units per acre, the Township shall require that an
appropriate percentage of the residential units be set aside for low- and
moderate-income households, as defined by applicable state law or
regulations. For inclusionary projects in which the low- and moderateincome
units are to be offered for sale, the appropriate set-aside
percentage is 20%; for projects in which the low- and moderate-income
units are to be offered for rent, the appropriate set-aside percentage is
15%.
(1) All affordable housing controls and standards are subject to the
rules of the Council on Affordable Housing ("COAH") or any
subsequent state agency. The development, marketing and sale of
66.Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 142-236.3 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-236.4
138:610
the affordable units shall be pursuant to applicable state
regulations and Chapter 43, Affordable Housing, and any
subsequent amendments thereto.
(2) This requirement shall apply to any multifamily or single-family
attached residential development, including the residential portion
of a mixed-use project, in any zone within River Vale, and proposed
at a density of five units per acre or greater, whether permitted by a
zoning amendment, a variance granted by River Vale's Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment, or adoption of a redevelopment plan
or amended redevelopment plan in areas in need of redevelopment
or rehabilitation.
(3) This requirement shall not impose any obligation on a
development, or the nonresidential portion of a mixed-use
development, that is subject to the State Nonresidential
Development Fee Act, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 et seq.
B. Nothing in this section precludes River Vale from imposing an
affordable housing set-aside requirement on a development that is not
required to have an affordable housing set-aside pursuant to this
section, when such imposition is consistent with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311(h)
and other applicable law.
C. This affordable housing set-aside requirement shall not create any
entitlement to a special dispensation or approval for a property owner
or applicant for a zoning amendment, variance, or adoption of a
redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan.
§ 142-236.4 JUNKYARDS § 142-236.4
138:611

ARTICLE LIII
Signs
[Amended 2-27-1986 by Ord. No. 0-2-86; 2-23-1995 by Ord. No.
0-2-95; 2-27-1997 by Ord. No. 0-1-97(R); 8-26-2004 by Ord. No.
0-9-04;3-28-2005 by Ord. No. 105-2005]
§ 142-237. General.
The purpose of these sign regulations is to preserve the public health,
welfare and/or safety within the Township of River Vale by the following:
A. Promotion of safety on the Township's highways and roadways:
(1) Establishment of a clear and orderly pattern of signs that are
appropriately designed to be compatible and not competitive with
other signs.
(2) Reduction of obstructions, distractions and other conditions which
cause confusion or otherwise threaten to compromise pedestrian
and vehicular safety.
(3) Promotion or ready identification of governmental and institutional
sites and events.
(4) Coordination of signs with prevailing speed limits and roadway
conditions.
B. Promotion and protection of the Township's visual resources by:
(1) Creation of a pleasing streetscape.
(2) Encouragement of artistic, creative, expressive and distinctive
signage of appeal and quality appropriate to the respective
environs.
(3) Encouragement of signage compatible and reflective of desirable
architectural buildings and features.
(4) Eradication and prevention of visual clutter caused by the
competitive proliferation of signs, disorderly placement, excessive
height, size and illumination and redundancy.
C. Promotion of commerce in River Vale by:
(1) Affording each Township profession, business, industry and service
a fair and protected opportunity to communicate, identify and
safely and effectively direct traffic to its site by means which are
expressive of identity and appropriate to the nature of the
enterprise and the surroundings.
(2) Creating a distinctive commercial environment which attracts
business because of a heightened visual quality and image.
§ 142-237 JUNKYARDS § 142-238
138:613
§ 142-238. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Part 9, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section.
AWNING — A roof-like cover made of nylon, canvas or other such material
or fabric that is attached to and projects from the wall of a building, which
may also be for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the
elements.
BANNER — A temporary paper, plastic or cloth device hung to attract
attention to a business or special event.
BILLBOARD SIGN EXTENSION (a.k.a. CUT-OUT) — A billboard advertising
copy design element that protrudes beyond the confines of a billboard sign
face area.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of the Township or his/
her designee.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The Construction Official of the Township or
his/her designee or other authorized agency.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTERS — A sign whose alphabetic, graphic
or symbolic informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed
display surface, composed of electrically illuminated or mechanically driven
changeable segments either by means of preprogramming or by computerdriven
electronic impulses.
ERECT — To build, construct, reconstruct, attach, hang, rehang, alter,
place, affix, enlarge, move or relocate.
FLAG — Any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or
symbols.
FLAG, OFFICIAL. — Any flag of the United States, the State of New Jersey,
the County of Bergen, the Township of River Vale or any other governmental
unit or recognized nonprofit organization.
FLAG, TRADEMARK — Any flag that displays only a registered trademark,
logo, corporate name or any combination of the former three. No other
wording or display of any kind shall be considered a trademark flag.
FRONTAGE — The side of a lot abutting a street; the front lot line. On lots
with multiple street fronts, the frontage shall include the length of the lot
abutting all such streets.
GARAGE SALE — The offering for sale of multiple items of personal
property on property designed, used or intended as a residence.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any business that dispenses, or is
designed, used or intended to dispense, gasoline and oil for use in motor
vehicles and boats.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION CANOPY — A freestanding structure located
on the same premises as a gasoline service station affording protection from
the elements to persons or property there under.
§ 142-238 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-238
138:614
PLINTH — A monument sign base that rests directly on the ground
designed as a support unit, architectural unit or decorative design element.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images,
but excluding the American flag or other governmental flags, athletic
scoreboards on school premises or official announcements and signs of
government.
SIGN, ABANDONED — A sign that, after a period of 30 days, no longer
correctly directs or exhorts any person, advertises a bona fide business,
lessor, owner project or activity conducted or product available on the
premises where such sign is displayed.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered elsewhere
than upon the same lot on which the sign is located.
SIGN, ANIMATED — Any sign that includes action or motion, or any
changes in physical position of its whole or parts or a change in light
intensity by rotation or movement.
SIGN AREA — The total sign area shall be measured as below.
SIGN, AWNING — A sign that is painted, mounted or otherwise permanently
affixed to an awning.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered upon the
premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY — Any sign designed to allow the sign copy
to be changed or altered without undertaking a physical alteration to the
sign (such as changing sign panels or repainting the sign), i.e., through the
use of movable letters, electronic displays, interchangeable parts or other
means. Changeable copy does not include copy pertaining to the business,
occupation or tenant advertised or identified.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION INFORMATION — A temporary sign used during
the construction of new buildings or reconstruction of or additions to
existing buildings, which identifies the project or future use of a site and
provides information denoting the owner, architect, engineer, contractor,
financing institutions or similar individuals or firms having a role or interest
in the project.
SIGN COPY — The wording or graphics on a sign surface.
SIGN, DAILY ADVERTISING — A freestanding sign (e.g., A-frame, sandwich
boards) that is displayed during hours in which a business is open and
removed during hours in which a business is closed.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — A sign that is limited to directional messages
principally for vehicular or pedestrian traffic or other movement.
§ 142-238 JUNKYARDS § 142-238
138:615
SIGN, DIRECTORY — A sign listing the tenants or occupants of a building
or group of buildings that may indicate their respective professions or
business activities and containing two or more names within a single sign.
SIGN, DRIVE-THROUGH MENU BOARD — A sign displaying food,
beverages or other services, offered for sale at a business with drivethrough
service, and located adjacent to the drive-through lane on the
premises upon which such service is offered.
SIGN, EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — Any sign lighted by or exposed to
artificial lighting by lights outside such sign.
SIGN FACE — See "sign area."
SIGN, FLASHING — Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing
light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light
by means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light source.
Automatic changing signs such as public service time, temperature and
date signs or electronically controlled message centers are not defined as
"flashing signs."
SIGN, FLUTTERING — A sign which flutters or is made of flexible materials
which moves with the wind or by some other artificial means, including, but
not limited to, pennants, banners, balloons, spinning devices, streamers and
flags other than official and trademark flags.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign supported by structures or supports
that is placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that is independent from
any building or other structure, but excluding monument signs.
SIGN, GARAGE SALE — A sign posted on a residential lot on which the
garage sale is to be held.
SIGN, GASOLINE SERVICE STATION PRICE — A sign containing thereon
the price per gallon of gasoline or diesel fuel sold at said station.
SIGN, HELP WANTED — A sign advertising the employment opportunities
of a business.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign that is illuminated by light source
mounted on or in the sign or at some other location.
SIGN, INFORMATION — A sign that gives parking, building address, fire
protection, traffic flow (other than directional signs), height clearance,
pedestrian or other similar information and that does not advertise a
business or use located on the lot or parcel.
SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL — A sign that identifies or describes the services
or functions of premises or facilities used, maintained or owned by any
not-for-profit educational institution, church, religious society, fraternal
organization, public utility, hospital or any other similar organization.
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — Any sign lighted by or exposed to
artificial fighting by lights within such sign.
§ 142-238 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-238
138:616
SIGN, MEMORIAL or TABLET — The permanent part of a building that
denotes the name of the building, date of erection, historical significance,
dedication or other similar information.
SIGN, MONUMENT or GROUND SIGN — Any detached sign on the same lot
or parcel as the use it advertises which has its bottom portion attached to
a proportionate base or plinth, integrated ground planter box or structural
frame.
SIGN, NEON — An illuminated sign, typically constructed of a glass
discharge tube that has been shaped to form letters or symbols, and which
contains a gas or vapor (typically neon or mercury) that emits light when
voltage is applied across electrodes at either end of the tube.
SIGN, OCCUPATIONAL/IDENTIFICATION — A wall sign identifying the
name of a person occupying a building and mounted adjacent to the main
entrance of the building.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign advocating or opposing any political
proposition or candidate for public office.
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building or
structure, or the ground, and that may be readily moved or relocated.
SIGN, PROFESSIONAL — A sign directing attention to the office of a
recognized profession located on the same lot.
SIGN, PROJECTED LIGHTING — Any sign which is created or displayed
by the projection of lights or illuminating sources through a screen,
transparency, filter or otherwise that projects onto a surface.
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a
building for support and projects more than 14 inches from such building.
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign erected on or above a roof, excluding wall signs.
The generally vertical plane of a mansard-type roof shall be interpreted as
the same as a wall of a building.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign intended for a limited or intermittent period
of display.
SIGN, WALL — Any painted sign, letter, word, model, device or
representation that may be affixed to the front, side or rear wall of any
building and in the same plane as the face of the wall, and which does not
project more than 12 inches from that wall.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign internally or externally affixed on a window or
glass door or located inside the window which is designed or intended to be
visible from the exterior of the building.
SPECIAL DISPLAYS — Signs or an assemblage of materials used for
holidays or promotion of civil welfare or charitable purposes.
STREET FRONTAGE — See "frontage."
TOWNSHIP — The Township of River Vale.
§ 142-238 JUNKYARDS § 142-239
138:617
§ 142-239. Nonconforming signs.
§ 142-240. Sign permits required and violations.
A. Any sign which lawfully existed on the effective date of this article or an
amendment thereto which renders such sign nonconforming because it
does not conform to all of the standards and regulations of the adopted
or amended article shall be considered a legally nonconforming sign.
B. Any sign which was erected unlawfully prior to the adoption of this
article or amendment thereto, or which is erected hereafter in
contravention of the standards or regulations of this article without
obtaining the required permits or variances, shall be considered an
illegal nonconforming sign.
C. Loss of legally nonconforming status. A legally nonconforming sign
shall immediately lose its legal nonconforming status if:
(1) The sign is altered in any way in structure which tends to or makes
the sign less in compliance with the requirement of this Part 9 than
it was before the alteration.
(2) The sign structure is relocated to a position making it less in
compliance with the requirements of this Part 9, except that any
such sign which is hereafter required to be moved by a
governmental body for the purpose of construction, relocation,
widening or improvement of a street, highway or other public
purpose may be relocated once on the same lot and allowed to be
maintained and used as before. Such a sign, once relocated, is still
considered a legally nonconforming sign and bound by this section.
(3) The sign (except for copy on a changeable copy sign) is replaced.
(4) Should any nonconforming sign be damaged by any means, other
than vandalism, to the extent of over 60% of its surface area or
structure, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformance with
the requirements of this article. Nonconforming signs which are
damaged by vandalism to the extent of over 60% of their physical
value shall be restored within 60 days or removed or brought into
compliance with the provisions of this Part 9.
(5) On the occurrence of any one of Subsections C(1) through (4)
above, the sign shall be immediately brought into compliance with
this article with a new permit secured therefor, or shall be
removed.
D. If any existing sign is repainted or the sign panels are replaced for the
purpose of changing the business, occupation or tenant advertised or
identified, it shall be considered a new sign and shall be brought into
compliance with this Part 9. Ordinary maintenance or repair of an
existing sign to a safe condition shall not be cause to classify the sign as
a new sign.
§ 142-239 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-240
138:618
A. Unless specifically exempted by the provisions of this Part 9, all signs
shall obtain a permit from the Construction Official.
B. Inspections. Following the erection of a sign or signs for which a permit
was required and obtained, the Construction Official shall inspect a sign
or signs after erection is completed for compliance with this Part 9. All
other necessary permits, such as electrical permits, shall be obtained
and inspections shall be performed as applicable.
C. Sign removal.
(1) Except for signs which are legally nonconforming or which are
exempt from obtaining a permit, the Construction Official may take
the necessary steps to remove those signs which:
(a) Are determined not to be a legally nonconforming sign and do
not have the required permit or have an expired permit.
(b) Constitute a public nuisance as defined by ordinance, or are
unsafe or hazardous, and represent an immediate threat to the
health and safety of the Township.
(2) If any sign is deemed to require removal under the provisions of
this Part 9, the Construction Official shall order it removed, and the
owner or operator of the signage or of the establishment the
signage is serving shall be notified of the violation and be given 30
days in which to correct the violation. If the order is not complied
with, the Construction Official shall have it removed at the expense
of the person responsible for the erection or maintenance of the
sign, and in the event that all cost associated with the Township
having such sign removed is not recovered from the responsible
party. Said cost shall become an assessment and a lien on the
property; such lien to be certified by the Tax Assessor of the
Township of River Vale.
(3) The Construction Official is authorized to go upon any premises in
the Township for purposes of removing signs under the provisions
of this section. Signs removed by the Construction Official shall be
retained for the owner's account for a period of 60 days and shall
be returned to the owner upon payment of the expenses of removal.
If not claimed within that time, they shall become the property of
the Township and may be destroyed or sold for the payment of the
expense of removal. If sold, any excess from the proceeds of the
sale shall be returned to the owner. In addition, the Township shall
in no way be held financially responsible for any damages that may
be incurred as a result of said removal.
D. Violations; penalty. Any person violating this article or any of its
provisions shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than
$500 or imprisonment of not more than five days, or both. Each day and
instance of violation shall constitute a separate offense, and at the
§ 142-240 JUNKYARDS § 142-240
138:619
§ 142-241. Permits and fees.
discretion of the Construction Official a summons may be issued for
each separate offense.
A. Permit required. Unless otherwise provided for, it shall be unlawful for
any person to erect any sign without first obtaining a permit from the
Construction Official and making payment of the fee as herein required.
(1) Application for a permit for a permitted sign conforming to the
regulations set forth herein shall be made in writing to the
Construction Official. Such application shall be sufficient to
describe the site and location in which the sign is to be affixed and
shall include at a minimum the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the owner of the premises.
(c) A statement, including the consent of the owner, if the
applicant is other than the owner.
(2) Applications for permits shall be submitted and accompanied by
two sets of plans showing proposed copy of sign with location, sign
area, construction details, materials and illumination details, and
existing sign locations and sizes, if any. In addition, plans for
monument signs shall include the length of street frontage (and
street facings, if applicable), in linear feet, and plans for wall signs
shall include building elevation with height and width dimensions
shown for the face of the building that the sign is proposed to be
installed upon.
(3) All illuminated signs shall be subject to the provisions of the
Electric Code and permit fees required thereunder.
(4) Any permit issued will expire in six months if construction is not
completed or an extension has not been granted.
(5) Application for a permit for a sign which does not comply with the
provisions of this article shall be submitted to the Joint Planning
Board, unless the sign is part of a development for which a site plan
is required, in which case the application shall be submitted to the
Joint Planning Board. Such application shall be in writing, and
where a noticed public hearing is required by law, shall be
submitted at least 10 days before the succeeding public meeting
date of the Board, together with a filing fee required by the
Township. Such application shall be in triplicate and accompanied
by no less than 15 copies of the sign design which shall be drawn to
scale. In addition, on such drawing or separate sheet, the
information set forth herein shall be provided, as normally required
by the Board.
§ 142-240 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-241
138:620
(6) Issuance of permit.
(a) A permit shall be issued by the Construction Official upon the
favorable action of the approving authority, subject to any
other applicable governmental regulations, or as otherwise
provided herein.
(b) A permit for the replacement of an existing sign may be issued
by the Construction Official without the necessity of Board
approval only upon satisfaction of all of the following
conditions:
[1] There is no physical alteration or expansion to the existing
sign beyond the limit permitted herein and previously
approved.
[2] The sign conforms in all respects to the article provisions
specified herein or was previously the recipient of a
variance approval.
[3] No other signage is proposed to be added to the premises
beyond that which is permitted herein.
[4] The applicant shall notify the Construction Official for a
final inspection within five days of completion of the
installation of the sign.
B. Right of appeal. Anyone denied a permit for a sign under the provisions
of this Part 9, or who has been ordered by the Township to remove any
existing sign, may appeal to the Joint Planning Board. Owners or
operators of signage under appeal are not exempt from being issued
violation citations.
C. Fees. A flat fee of $50 per sign permit will be charged and collected by
the Construction Official upon filing of the application.
D. Exemptions.
(1) The following signs shall be exempt from permits and fees:
(a) Signs relative to the sale, lease or rental of property erected on
the offered property as follows:
[1] Residential zones: A maximum of one not exceeding six
square feet in outline area per facing for single-family
residences or 12 square feet in outline area per facing for
other uses and providing sign does not exceed six feet in
height from grade to the highest point on the sign.
[2] Commercial zones: A maximum of one per street frontage,
provided each sign has a maximum of 10 square feet in
outline area per facing and providing such signs do not
§ 142-241 JUNKYARDS § 142-241
138:621
exceed six feet in height from the surrounding grade to the
highest point on the sign.
(b) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of
erection when cut into any masonry surface or when
constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials.
(c) Signs erected inside a building not visible through windows.
(d) Trespassing or privacy signs. Signs which prohibit trespassing,
or indicate privacy of premises, driveways or streets, not
exceeding two feet in size per side nor a height of six feet from
grade.
(e) Help wanted signs. One sign advertising employment
opportunities, located on the lot or parcel of the business
advertising employment opportunities and not larger than one
square foot.
(f) Open/closed signs and signs indicating business hours. Such
signs shall not exceed one square foot and shall contain no
other information than that necessary to highlight business
hours and the open/closed status of a business.
(g) Customary holiday decorations displayed for a normal
duration.
(h) Residential nameplates.
(i) Traffic control signs, the face of which meets the standards of
the Department of Transportation and which contains no
commercial message.
(j) Directional and informational signs for nonresidential uses,
provided the area of such sign is not more than three square
feet, and provided the number of such signs on site is limited to
that which is reasonably necessary and appropriate for safety,
circulation, information or other noncommercial purposes.
Such directional or informational signs shall not contain
advertising, logo, symbols, business identification or other
nondirectional copy.
(k) Signs for official governmental or quasi-governmental
business, including signs or banners advertising public or
quasi-public events that are posted or displayed with the
permission of the governing body or its designee(s).
(l) Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey, the Township
of River Vale and foreign, provided that no such flag shall
exceed 60 square feet in area, nor shall any such flag be flown
from a pole in excess of 35 feet in height. The flag's area shall
be in reasonable proportion to the height of the pole from
which it is displayed. Not more than three flags may be flown
§ 142-241 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-241
138:622
from any one pole. Statutory requirements associated with
flags and the generally accepted standards of flag display
protocol shall be observed.
(m) Flags honoring and remembering military and service men and
women of the United States.
(n) Public safety signs.
(o) Identification signs displayed by houses of worship.
(p) Any public notice or warning or safety sign required by a valid
and applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or
ordinance.
(q) Pump-mounted fuel price informational signs subject to the
following:
[1] Only one fuel price informational sign shall be permitted
per fuel pump; each such sign shall be limited in size to an
area of 260 square inches; each such sign shall be affixed
directly and firmly to a fuel pump and shall be stationary.
(r) Regulation mailboxes of the United States Postal Service.
(2) The following signs shall be exempt from fees. Sign permits shall be
required.
(a) Banners or signs of the United States, the State of New Jersey,
the County of Bergen, the River Vale School District, the River
Vale Volunteer Fire Department or any other governmental
unit affixed to utility poles, provided approvals are received
from the utilities and governmental units having jurisdiction
over the poles and adjacent rights-of-way respectively.
(b) Building construction information signs, identifying the
architect, engineer, contractor or institution providing
financing, when placed upon a worksite under construction,
only after a building permit for the construction has been
issued. Each individual building will be allowed one building
construction information sign, not to exceed 24 square feet in
outline area per facing. The sign shall be set back 10 feet from
any property line. The maximum height of such signage shall
not exceed 15 feet in height above the average existing
finished grade elevation of the sign or the elevation of the
adjacent street, whichever is higher. Such signage shall be
removed within 10 days after the issuance of an occupancy
permit.
(3) Occupational/identification/professional signs. One wall sign or one
window sign not exceeding two square feet in size displaying the
name, occupation and/or service located upon the premises and the
address. Such sign shall not be internally illuminated. External
§ 142-241 JUNKYARDS § 142-241
138:623
§ 142-242. Rules and regulations.
illumination may be utilized, provided such illumination is turned
off when the office is closed for business. No other signage shall be
permitted for any home professional office or home occupation.
E. Revocation. The Construction Official may revoke any sign permit
which violates any provision of this Part 9 or which has been secured by
subterfuge, or is void, or which has been issued by mistake,
misunderstanding or error of the Township.
A. Computation of sign area and sign height. The following principles shall
control the computation of sign area and height:
(1) Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face
shall be computed by means of the smallest square, rectangle,
circle, triangle or combination thereof that will encompass the
extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, picture,
symbol, graphic illustration or other display, together with the sign
frame and any material or color forming an integral part of the
background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the
backdrop or structure against which it is placed; or by delineating
the area established by reason of distinctive variation in
background color or by borders, whichever is greater.
(2) Computation of area of multifaced signs. The sign area for a sign
with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the
area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical
sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be
viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces
are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 42 inches
apart at any point, the sign area shall be computed by the
measurement of one of the faces.
(3) Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as
the distance from the base of the sign at grade to the top of the
highest attached component of the sign. Grade shall be construed
to be the newly established grade after construction.
B. Prohibited signs generally. No person shall construct, erect, locate, use
or maintain any of the following signs within any zone district of the
Township, except as otherwise permitted elsewhere in this Part 9, or
unless the sign has been certified to be a legal nonconforming sign by
the Construction Official or has obtained a variance for such sign:
(1) Any new sign erected in violation of any section of this Part 9. Any
sign not specifically permitted is hereby prohibited.
(2) Signs emitting a sound, odor or visible matter such as smoke or
vapor. No sign erected shall contain audio equipment.
§ 142-241 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-242
138:624
(3) Exterior use of advertising devices such as banners, streamers,
pennants, flags, and balloons, lights (whether flashing, flickering,
blinking or rotating), wind-operated devices and any other type of
fluttering or flashing devices, or emitting an unsteady or glaring
light.
(4) Signs placed or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers which are parked
on a public right-of-way, public property or private property so as to
be visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is
to advertise a product or direct people to a business or activity
located on the same or nearby property. However, this is not in any
way intended to prohibit signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and
trailers, such as permanent lettering on motor vehicles, where the
sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer.
(5) Animated signs and mechanical contrivances. No sign erected shall
contain flashers, animators or mechanical movement or
contrivances of any kind, excepting clocks and time and weather
information.
(6) Paper posters and painted signs applied directly to a tree, rock or
natural feature of any kind or to a wall of a building, fence or pole
or other support.
(7) Signs painted or otherwise affixed on the inside or outside of
automobile windows except for pricing information associated with
the sale of new and used cars, and only when such vehicles are
located on the premises of an establishment which has been
approved for such use.
(8) Portable or movable signs, such as sandwich signs, except as
provided for in this Part 9.
(9) Signs advertising an article or product not manufactured,
assembled, processed, repaired, serviced or sold upon the premises
upon which the sign is located.
(10) Revolving signs of any type, including searchlights.
(11) Neon signs of any kind, whether located on the exterior or interior
of a wall or window if visible from the street upon which the
premises fronts.
(12) Signs on parking lot light standards not relating to traffic control.
(13) Signs within the public street right-of-way (other than public
notices and unless otherwise allowed in this Part 9).
(14) Signs that are in such a state of disrepair as to constitute an
immediate threat to the public health, welfare and safety.
(15) Business signs for businesses which are discontinued for a period
in excess of 30 days.
§ 142-242 JUNKYARDS § 142-242
138:625
(16) Signs or other advertising structures, as regulated by this Part 9,
erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision, or at any location where, by reason
of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the
view of, cause optical illusion or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device, or which makes use of words, phrases,
symbols or characters in such manner as to interfere with, mislead
or confuse traffic.
(17) Roof signs.
(18) Any sign not in compliance with the Township Building or Electrical
Codes, as amended, as to design, structural members and
connections.
(19) Pole signs, except as otherwise provided for in this Part 9.
(20) Electronic message centers, except as used to display time and
weather information.
(21) Billboard or billboard signs.
(22) Any sign located or displayed upon any sidewalk or street or area
between the sidewalk and curb, or projecting on or over a sidewalk
or street, except as provided in this Part 9.
(23) Signs erected or painted or composed of day-glo or phosphorescent
or similar material.
(24) Hand-lettered interior window signs.
(25) Exhibiting statements, words, pictures or images of an obscene or
pornographic nature.
(26) Signs attached to, projecting from or hanging underneath a
building eave.
(27) Signs which are internally illuminated.
(28) Signs which are created, maintained or exist as signs which are
projected by or through illumination.
C. Standards generally.
(1) No sign may be erected or maintained so as to obstruct free ingress
or egress to building openings, driveways, sidewalks or other
passageways.
(2) Illumination.
(a) No sign shall be illuminated other than by external illumination
and except as provided herein.
(b) All light shall be designated to minimize glare, and light levels
off site from sign lights shall be less than 0.1 footcandles.
§ 142-242 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-242
138:626
(c) Flashing signs, highly reflective glass or fluorescent paint (red
or green) and illuminated tubing outlining roofs, doors,
windows or wall edges of a building are prohibited.
(d) Any permitted sign may be illuminated 1/2 hour before and
after closing. No sign within 150 feet of any residential zone
shall be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. unless the business is open during these hours.
(e) The Township of River Vale encourages illumination of signs
from external sources, provided glare is minimized. Wherever
it is impractical to provide such a source of illumination, only
as specifically permitted by this article, and if a variance is
granted by the Joint Planning Board, internally illuminated
signs may be permitted. Light sources from internally
illuminated signs shall not be visible from outside the sign, and
the light from the light source shall be diffused to eliminate hot
spots. Light sources shall be protected from damage. Light
levels at property lines shall be less than 0.1 footcandles.
(f) The Township of River Vale encourages signs which are carved
wood or resembling carved wood of man-made materials, of
appropriate colors and excluding red and yellow, and are
externally illuminated.
(3) Every sign in the Township, including signs exempted from
obtaining a sign permit, shall be maintained in good repair and
good structural condition at all times, including painted or
otherwise finished surfaces, as well as all parts and supports which
must be maintained in their design condition and position. Broken
parts of signs must be replaced or repaired within 15 days of
notification by the Construction Official and in such a manner as to
maintain the appearance and structure of the sign as it was
approved for installation.
(4) The Construction Official shall have the authority to order the
painting, repair, alteration or removal of signs which have not been
properly maintained or repaired or which have become dilapidated
or are abandoned or which constitute a hazard to public safety.
(5) Signs of an obscene or pornographic nature shall be unlawful. The
Construction Official shall order the immediate removal of such
signs.
(6) No permanent signage, other than allowable temporary window
signs, shall be constructed of paper, nylon, fabric or any other type
of nondurable material.
D. Signs in residential zone districts. The following signs are allowable in
residential zoning districts:
§ 142-242 JUNKYARDS § 142-242
138:627
(1) Signs relative to the sale, lease or rental of property erected on the
offered property. A maximum of one sign, not exceeding six square
feet in outline area per facing for single- or two-family residences,
or 10 square feet in outline area per facing for other uses. No sign
shall exceed six feet in height from grade to the highest point on
the sign. Such signs shall be removed within 14 days of completion
of the sale, lease or rental of property. This includes the posting of
such property as sold, leased, or rented.
(2) Institutional signs and other signs for churches, schools, fraternal
organizations and other nonprofit organizations. Such institutions
shall be permitted one institutional monument sign and one
institutional wall sign pursuant to the following requirements:
(a) Institutional monument signs. One monument sign per lot, not
exceeding six feet in height from grade to the highest point on
the sign. The bottom of the sign face shall not exceed a height
of three feet above the surrounding grade at the base of the
sign. No monument sign shall be located any closer than 10
feet to any property line, except that no monument sign shall
be located closer than 25 feet to any residentially utilized lot.
No institutional monument sign shall exceed 18 square feet in
outline area per face.
(b) Institutional wall signs. One wall sign not exceeding one
square foot per 10 linear feet of street frontage of the total
square footage of the building face upon which it is placed
having street frontage. In no case shall the sign area exceed 24
square feet. In those cases where a parcel or lot has more than
one street frontage, one wall sign may be placed on each street
frontage. Wall signs shall be face-mounted on the building/
structure, projecting not more than 14 inches from the face of
the building. Such signs shall not project above the parapet
wall, mansard or other roofline, shall be recessed where
involving a pitched roof location and shall be located so as to
not create a safety or traffic hazard.
(3) Construction information signs. One construction information sign
not to exceed 24 square feet in outline area per facing. The
maximum height of such signage shall not exceed 15 feet in height
above the average existing finished grade elevation of the sign or
the elevation of the adjacent street, whichever is higher. Such
signage shall be removed within 30 days after the last lot or
building is sold within the development.
(4) Political signs.
(5) Residential subdivision identification signs. One permanent
subdivision identification sign not exceeding 24 square feet in size
per face inclusive of any logo shall be allowed per development.
Where the development has access on two or more streets, or has
§ 142-242 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-242
138:628
more than one entrance on one street, identification shall be
allowed at each entrance. Subdivision identification signs shall not
exceed eight feet above the adjacent ground surface.
(6) Multifamily identification signs. One sign not more than one square
foot for each 10 linear feet of street frontage, but in no case to
exceed 32 square feet in size per face shall be allowed per
multifamily development project except where the project fronts on
two or more streets. One sign shall be permitted on each frontage,
provided that the project has a major traffic entrance on the street
where the sign is to be erected. Multifamily identification signs
shall not exceed eight feet above grade.
(7) Temporary residential garage sale signs not to exceed six square
feet in area nor a height in excess of eight feet from the ground and
located upon the premises where the sale is taking place, only after
issuance of a permit allowing such garage sale. Such sign shall only
be displayed for one week prior to such sale and shall be removed
within 24 hours after the sale is closed.
(8) Special displays. Such displays shall not exceed 32 square feet and
shall be used for holidays or promotion of civil welfare or charitable
purposes.
(9) Signs for home occupations or home professional offices.
E. Signs in nonresidential zone districts.
(1) Wall signs. Wall signs are permitted for all business, office,
industrial or commercial establishments.
(a) Wall-mounted signs for establishments with a single tenant
shall comply with the following:
[1] One wall sign may be placed along the street frontage,
provided it does not exceed 10% of the total surface area
of the building face upon which it is placed or 32 square
feet, whichever is lesser.
[2] In those cases where a parcel or lot has more than one
street frontage, one wall sign may be placed on each street
frontage, provided such wall sign shall not exceed 10% of
the total surface area of the building face upon which it is
placed or 24 square feet, whichever is lesser.
[3] Wall signs shall be face-mounted on the building/structure,
projecting not more than 14 inches from the face of the
building nor above the first floor of the building. Such
signs shall not project above the parapet wall, mansard or
other roofline and shall be located so as to not create a
safety or traffic hazard.
§ 142-242 JUNKYARDS § 142-242
138:629
(b) Wall-mounted signs for buildings or establishments with
multiple tenants shall comply with the following:
[1] For buildings and property containing more than one
business or tenant, and where each business tenant
occupies a physically distinct ground floor space or has a
separate ground floor entrance, each business or tenant
may have one wall sign conforming to the requirements of
this section. For the purposes of determining the sign area
permitted, only the face of each respective lease unit to
which the respective sign will be attached shall be
counted. Each sign must be attached to the leased unit
containing the business tenant identified.
(2) Monument signs. Monument signs are permitted in commercial
districts only. Monument signs shall comply with the following:
(a) One monument sign, not exceeding four feet in height from
grade to the highest point on the sign, shall be permitted.
(b) The bottom of the sign face shall not exceed a height of 1 1/2
feet above grade at the base of the sign.
(c) No monument sign shall be located any closer than five feet to
a front property line nor 10 feet to any other property line,
except that no monument sign shall be located closer than 25
feet to any residentially utilized lot.
(d) A maximum sign area, in square feet, equal to one square foot
in size for every 10 feet of linear street frontage, shall be
permitted subject to a maximum area of 24 square feet.
(3) Window signs. Window advertising signs shall be prohibited in all
districts, with the exception of permitted ground level retail and
personal service business uses and eating and drinking
establishments, subject to the following conditions: [Amended
4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 149-2006]
(a) Information on such signs shall be limited to advertisements
for special promotions, temporary sales and other such similar
nonpermanent sales promotions related to the relevant
business. An exception shall be granted for restaurants, which
may post one menu not larger than two square feet in size.
(b) Such signs may be constructed of paper, cardboard or other
such written, numerical, graphic or photographic material or
information displayed in the window of such establishment.
(c) Such signs shall be contained entirely within the ground level
interior of the building in which the business is located.
(d) The maximum total area of such signs shall not exceed 25% of
the total area of the ground level windows, including window
§ 142-242 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-242
138:630
portions of doors, fronting on public streets. (Seventy-five
percent of the window area shall be open without merchandise
displayed so as to obstruct visibility through the glass at an
elevation of six feet above grade from inside or outside the
space.)
(e) Such signs shall be maintained in an orderly manner at all
times; no such sign shall be added, torn or improperly kept.
(4) Directory signs.
(a) Directory signs in these districts shall be permitted as follows:
For office and mixed use commercial buildings with two or
more businesses or tenants, a directory sign may be used
subject to the following provisions:
[1] Buildings containing less than 50,000 square feet and
more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area may have
one directory sign containing a maximum of 20 square feet
of sign area. Buildings containing more than 50,000
square feet but less than 150,000 square feet of gross floor
area may have one directory sign containing a maximum of
40 square feet of sign area.
[2] Directory signs shall be either a monument sign or wall
sign. The maximum height for a directory sign shall be
eight feet from the surrounding grade to the highest point
on the sign.
[3] No directory sign shall be located any closer than 10 feet
to any property line, except that no directory sign shall be
located any closer than 25 feet to any residentially utilized
lot.
(b) Directory signs for office, mixed use or commercial buildings
shall be limited to one wall-mounted directory sign not
exceeding six square feet in size and no higher than 12 feet
above surrounding grade, in addition to permitted wall.
(5) Gasoline service station signs.
(6) Signs on secondary entrances. Each building or property may have
one additional wall sign or directory sign conforming to the
requirements of this section on walls containing a main entrance
that faces customer parking areas and are not visible from either a
public or private street. The content of such sign shall be limited to
the name(s) of the business(es). Such signs shall be attached to the
same wall as their respective entrances, and both the signs and the
entrances must be upon the same plane of the building.
F. Standards for specific uses.
§ 142-242 JUNKYARDS § 142-242
138:631
(1) Gasoline service station signs. In addition to the signage allowed,
the following signs shall be allowed for gasoline service stations:
(a) Freestanding sign.
[1] A maximum of one freestanding sign, consisting of a
monument sign, is permitted.
[2] The maximum sign area of a monument sign, including the
sign frame, shall not exceed 80 square feet, inclusive of
gasoline service station price sign. Such sign shall not be
separated from the gasoline price sign but shall appear as
a single integrated sign.
[3] The maximum sign area of a monument sign, including the
frame, shall not exceed 50 square feet, inclusive of
gasoline service station price sign.
[4] A monument sign shall not exceed six feet in height and
shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any property
line.
(b) Gasoline service station canopy signs.
[1] A gasoline service station with a canopy shall be permitted
two canopy signs in total.
[2] The canopy sign or signs shall collectively not exceed 20
square feet in area.
[3] The canopy sign shall be a flat sign permanently affixed to
the vertical face of the canopy and shall not project above
or below or from any side of the vertical face of the canopy.
[4] The canopy sign may be illuminated by internal and
nonintermittent light sources.
[5] A business logo, inclusive of striping or other symbols, may
appear on this canopy sign as part of the allowable sign
area. Any striped area of the canopy shall be counted
towards the permissible area of the sign.
(c) Pump signs.
[1] Signs shall be allowed on gasoline pumps so as to provide
the required information to the public regarding octane
rating, price, type of fuel, federal and state stamps, pump
use directions and "no smoking."
[2] The trade name and any associated symbols shall be
permitted on the sides of the pumps as flat signs located
no more than three feet above the ground and not to
exceed one square foot in sign area per pump.
§ 142-242 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-242
138:632
[3] "Self-service," "full-service" or other information signs may
identify each pump island on the gasoline service station
property. The location of such signs shall be limited to the
gasoline pump or the canopy support located at each end
of the pump island or between the canopy supports as a
spandrel panel.
[4] A maximum of two such signs shall be allowed per pump
island, and each sign shall not exceed two square feet in
sign area when placed on the gasoline pump or when
located at each end of the pump island or between the
canopy supports as a spandrel panel.
(d) Gasoline service station price signs. Gasoline service station
price information may be incorporated into a monument sign
or mounted on a pole sign, provided that the total area of the
price sign not exceed 20 square feet in area.
G. Standards for other signs.
(1) Political campaign signs.
(a) At no time whatsoever may political campaign signs or stickers
of any type or size be affixed in any way to utility poles, traffic
signs, traffic signal boxes or poles, mailboxes, fire hydrants or
any public fixtures, or be placed in any way on highway
dividers, islands or overpasses or above (across) streets or
highways or on any public property.
(b) No political campaign sign shall be erected or posted on
private property without the express written consent of the
owner of the property, who shall then be responsible for
compliance with this section.
(c) Individual, freestanding billboard-type political campaign signs
shall be permitted. Such signs may not obstruct traffic or sign
lines. At no time whatsoever may political campaign signs of
any type or size be lighted or be made of any reflecting
materials.
(d) No political signs of any type or size shall be erected or posted
earlier than 90 days before any election, nor shall any such
signs remain longer than 10 days after such election.
(e) Removal of political signs.
[1] Every political campaign sign, billboard, poster or
structure erected for advertisement pertaining to any
candidate, slate of candidates or organization for a local,
county, state or national elective office or issue or issues
for public consideration in any primary, general, school
board or special election shall be removed by the person or
§ 142-242 JUNKYARDS § 142-242
138:633
persons responsible for the erection of such sign,
billboard, poster or structure within five days after the
date of the election to which such sign, billboard, poster or
structure pertains.
[2] Presumption. It shall be presumed that all persons named
on any such political campaign sign, as well as the finance
chairperson and campaign manager for the individual or
political party named in said political sign, shall be
responsible for the removal of political campaign signs.
[3] Penalties. Any person, regardless of political affiliation,
found to be a perpetrator, including any business, political
party or entity violating the provisions of this section, may
be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I, § 1-14. Violation of any of the provisions herein
shall be deemed continuing and, for each and every day or
part thereof that a violation of this subsection is found to
exist, the court may impose a separate penalty as stated
herein.
[4] Enforcement. The provisions of this subsection shall be
enforced by the Construction Official.
§ 142-242 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-242
138:634
ARTICLE LIV
Fences
[Amended 9-12-1974 by Ord. No. 0-12-74R; 10-28-1993 by Ord. No.
0-8-93R]
§ 142-243. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FENCE — A structure composed of posts and boards or other materials
designed to provide a barrier or demarcation point on real property. Fence
posts or supports shall not exceed the allowable fence height by more
than six inches. Shrubbery, bushes, hedges, trees and other landscaping
shall not be considered a fence, nor shall a retaining wall be considered a
fence.[Amended 6-25-1998 by Ord. No. 0-5-98]
§ 142-244. Permit required.
§ 142-245. Permit application.
§ 142-246. Fee.
The fee for a permit for new or replacement fences shall be $25.
§ 142-247. Requirements.
A. No person shall construct or erect a fence exceeding three feet in
height, except pursuant to a permit obtained from the Construction
Code Official.
B. As to premises involving an application for site plan approval,
subdivision approval, change of use approval, use variance approval or
approval of an extension, enlargement or alteration of a nonconforming
use, the application for a fence permit shall be made to the approving
authority as part of the land use application. The approving authority
shall certify, in writing, to the Construction Code Official its approval of
the fence and direct issuance of a fence permit.
A. All applications for permits shall state:
(1) The name of the owner of the property.
(2) The lot and block number of the property as shown on the Tax Map.
(3) The street address of the property.
(4) The type of fence to be erected, including length, height and the
materials used.
B. A sketch showing the fence type, composition, height, length and
location shall accompany the permit application.
§ 142-243 JUNKYARDS § 142-247
138:635
§ 142-248. Restrictions.
A. Construction. Fences shall be erected in such a manner as to permit the
flow of natural drainage and shall not cause surface waters to be
blocked or dammed to create ponding.
B. Maintenance; appearance. All fences shall be constructed and
maintained in a safe, sound, sturdy and upright condition. The exterior
appearance of all fences shall present the more aesthetic side to the
exterior, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer or appropriate authority.
[Amended 2-23-1995 by Ord. No. 0-2-95]
A. Fences in front yard. Fences, of any height, shall not be permitted in the
front yard (as defined in § 142-3) of the lot, except that a fence not
exceeding three feet in height and which is at least 50% open and
unobstructed (for example, split rail) shall be permitted. A zoning
permit shall be required. [Amended 6-25-1998 by Ord. No. 0-5-98]
B. Through lots. The restrictions as to fences in front yards shall apply to
all property lines adjoining a public street.
C. Height. No fence shall exceed six feet in height above the normal grade
elevation except as may be provided for fences around tennis, paddle
tennis and platform tennis courts as provided in § 142-249.
D. Right-of-way; easement. [Amended 12-21-1999 by Ord. No.
0-22-99]
(1) No fence shall be erected within a public right-of-way or public
easement; however, fences shall be permitted over public
stormwater and sanitary sewer easements, excluding trunk lines,
so long as that portion of the fence within the easement is
constructed without permanent footings and it shall be possible to
dismantle the fence by hand and without the need for machinery. If
possible, the portion of the fence within the easement shall be
comprised of a gate for ease of access to said easement. A permit is
required.
(2) Should access to the stormwater easement be required by the
Township or its agent, if possible, the property owner shall be given
notice to dismantle that portion of the fence within the easement.
In the event that access is required on an emergency basis, or the
property owner fails to remove the portion of the fence over the
easement, then, in such event, the Township or its agent shall have
such fence removed immediately and charge any cost to the
property owner as a municipal charge. Should any damage result to
said fence, whether or not located within the easement, as a result
of obtaining access to the easement, the Township shall not be
responsible for the damage or replacement or reconstruction costs.
E. Prohibited materials. The following fence materials are prohibited:
§ 142-247 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-248
138:636
§ 142-249. Tennis, paddle tennis and platform tennis courts.
[Amended 2-23-1995 by Ord. No. 0-2-95]
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, fences not exceeding 10
feet in height around a tennis, paddle tennis or a platform tennis court may
be permitted in a residential zone, provided that the Construction Code
Official and Zoning Officer shall review and approve the same, provided that
such does not impair the purpose and intent of this Part 9 and is consistent
with the character of the neighborhood. Such a fence shall be permitted
only in the rear yard and shall not be located within 10 feet of the rear or
side lot lines.
§ 142-250. Swimming pools.
Fences around swimming pools shall comply separately with the applicable
requirements of Chapter 90, Construction Codes, Uniform; and Chapter
218, Swimming Pools, of the Code of the Township of River Vale.
§ 142-251. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Construction Code
Official.
(1) Barbed wire.
(2) Pointed materials, except as used in picket or stockade fences.
(3) Cloth, except to protect shrubbery or bushes for a period not to
exceed 180 days.
(4) Electrically charged materials.
(5) Poultry netting.
F. Existing fences. A fence lawfully in existence as of the effective date of
this article which shall be made nonconforming by this article may be
continued except as otherwise provided herein. No fence which is
nonconforming shall be changed, enlarged, extended or reconstructed
except to a conforming fence, but no provision hereof shall prohibit the
repainting, staining, waterproofing, minor repair or insubstantial
alteration of an existing fence. Any nonconforming fence which is
destroyed less than 50% by fire, other casualty or act of God may be
repaired and used in the same manner as prior thereto, provided that
the fence is not enlarged, extended or otherwise materially changed. All
such repairs shall be completed within six months after the date of
partial destruction or the nonconforming fence shall be deemed to have
been abandoned. When destruction of a nonconforming fence exceeds
50%, the same shall not be rebuilt or restored except in conformity with
the requirements of this article.
§ 142-248 JUNKYARDS § 142-252
138:637
§ 142-252. Appeals.
The denial of a permit for a fence may be appealed to the Township of
River Vale Joint Planning Board and a variance therefor may be granted in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70; provided, however, that if the proposed
fence is being considered by the Joint Planning Board as part of a site
plan review or other land use application within the jurisdiction of the Joint
Planning Board, the permit denial or fence variance application may be
heard and decided by the Joint Planning Board in the exercise of its ancillary
jurisdiction.
§ 142-253. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with any of
the provisions of this article shall be fined as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14. The imposition of one fine for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue.
B. All such persons shall be required to remedy such violations or defects
within 30 days next following notice of such violation or such extended
period as may be reasonably required as determined by the
Construction Code Official and/or Zoning Officer. [Amended
2-23-1995 by Ord. No. 0-2-95]
C. Each 10 days following the expiration of the period required to remedy
the violation or defect that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
D. In addition to other remedies, the proper local authorities of the
municipality or an interested party may institute any appropriate action
or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use of a
fence or to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct or use of a fence.
§ 142-252 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-253
138:638
ARTICLE LV
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
§ 142-254. Continuation of existing uses and structures. [Amended
9-12-1974 by Ord. No. 0-12-74R]
§ 142-255. Prohibition of enlargement; repairs; destruction.
[Amended 7-23-1987 by Ord. No. 0-8-87]
§ 142-256. Transfer of areas.
If any area is hereafter transferred from one district to another district,
as by a change in district boundaries, the provisions of this Part 9 with
regard to buildings or premises existing as of the date of the final passage
A. A use, building or structure lawfully in existence at the effective date of
this Part 9, or any applicable amendment thereto, which shall thereby
be made nonconforming may be continued except as otherwise
provided in this article.
B. A nonconforming use, building or structure which is not utilized for six
months or which is made a conforming use for any period of time shall
be deemed an abandonment of the nonconforming use, building or
structure, which shall not thereafter be revived.
A. Structural alteration. [Amended 7-23-1987 by Ord. No. 0-8-87]
(1) No use, building or structure which is nonconforming shall be
changed, enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or
structurally altered except to a conforming use, building or
structure or when required by law.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A(1) above, a
nonconforming single-family residence which complies with the
use requirements of this Part 9 and is nonconforming because of
height, area, yard and/or parking requirements may be enlarged or
extended, provided that any such enlargement, extension or
alteration shall conform to the presently existing requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance and that such requirements are not further
violated.
B. Any nonconforming use, building or structure which is partially
destroyed by fire, other casualty or act of God may be repaired and used
in the same manner as prior thereto, provided that the floor and
building area thereof shall not exceed that which existed prior to such
partial destruction. All such repairs shall be completed within six
months after the date of partial destruction, or the nonconforming use,
building or structure shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
C. When destruction of a nonconforming use, building or structure
exceeds partial destruction, the same shall not be rebuilt or restored
except in conformity with all of the provisions of this Part 9.
§ 142-254 JUNKYARDS § 142-256
138:639
of this Part 9 shall apply to buildings or premises lawfully existing in such
transferred area at the time of the passage of such amendment.
§ 142-257. Exemptions.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building complying with existing law, a
permit for which had been duly granted and the construction of which shall
have been started before the date of final adoption of this Part 9, and which
entire building shall have been completed, according to such plans as have
been filed, within six months from the date of the passage of this Part 9.
§ 142-258. Conditional use of certain lots. [Added 6-27-1985 by
Ord. No. 0-6-85]
A. Definitions. In addition to those definitions set forth in Article LVII,
§ 142-262, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings for purposes of this section only:
ELIGIBLE LOT — A lot which satisfies each of the requirements set
forth in this section.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any area covered by a building, cement,
concrete or other artificial structure or substance, and includes rock,
wood and other natural substances placed on the lot by human effort,
but does not include lights or trees. This phrase also includes any
overhanging portion of the roof or similar building component.
LAND USE RESTRICTION — Any applicable restrictions imposed by
the Code of the Township of River Vale, including, without limitation,
those restrictions contained in Parts 1, 6 and 8 and this Part 9 of this
chapter.
LIVING FLOOR SPACE — An enclosed, finished area suitable for human
habitation. This phrase does not include any porch, cellar, attic or
garage or any area not fully enclosed with noncontinuous walls and
ceiling.
SMALL ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A roofed, enclosed structure
which is less than eight feet in height, occupies a ground area of less
than 36 square feet, and which is not suitable for use as a dwelling.
B. Requirements for development. No lot shall be eligible for development
under this section unless all of the following requirements are satisfied:
(1) The lot was in existence as a separate lot on the Tax Assessment
Map of the Township of River Vale at the time of enactment of this
section.
(2) The lot is incapable of development for any permitted purpose
solely by reason of the land use restrictions set forth in the Code of
the Township of River Vale resulting in the lot being
nonconforming.
§ 142-256 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-258
138:640
(3) The lot was in existence as a separate lot at the time of enactment
of the earliest land use restriction which rendered the lot
nonconforming.
(4) At the time of adoption of the earliest land use restriction rendering
the lot nonconforming, and at all times subsequent thereto, no legal
or equitable owner of the lot has simultaneously held legal or
equitable title to any contiguous land.
(5) Neither the owner of the lot nor any of said owner's predecessors in
title created the nonconforming condition of the lot or caused selfinflicted
hardship on the lot, however evidenced.
(6) The owner shall have transmitted by certified mail, return receipt
requested, no more than 90 days nor less than 30 days before filing
an application for development under this section with the Joint
Planning Board, a good faith written offer to sell the lot for a fair
and reasonable price to each owner of contiguous land.
(7) The owner shall have transmitted by certified mail, return receipt
requested, no more than 90 days nor less than 30 days before filing
an application for development under this section with the Joint
Planning Board, a good faith written offer to purchase any
additional vacant contiguous land which, if purchased by the owner
and combined with the lot, would reduce the lot's nonconformity to
any land use restriction of the Township of River Vale governing
said lot; provided, however, that such purchase would not result in
rendering the contiguous land nonconforming with any land use
restriction of the Township of River Vale governing such land.
C. Application to Joint Planning Board.
(1) The owner of an eligible lot who wishes to develop same shall cause
an application for a conditional use under this section to be filed
with the Joint Planning Board of the Township in such form as may
be fixed by the Joint Planning Board, such application to include
renderings and architectural plans for the proposed development
which shall form part of any approval by the Joint Planning Board.
In addition to providing data as to the eligibility of the lot under this
section, such application shall also comply with any ordinance of
the Township governing minor site plan review, as well as being
subject to notice and a hearing as described in §§ 142-38 and
142-39 of Part 1 of this chapter.
(2) The Joint Planning Board shall review all applications under this
section in accordance with applicable law. Only in the event that
the Joint Planning Board finds that the lot is an eligible lot under
Subsection B shall it grant the application for development as a
conditional use according to the specifications and standards set
forth in Subsection D. The Joint Planning Board shall have the
authority to relax any of the specifications and standards set forth
in this Part 9 in appropriate circumstances.
§ 142-258 JUNKYARDS § 142-258
138:641
D. Specifications and standards.
(1) Maximum coverage. The proposed building, including any
overhanging or projecting roof, may not cover more than 20% of
the total area of the lot.
(2) Impervious surface coverage. No more than the 30% of the lot may
be covered by an impervious surface.
(3) Maximum height. [Amended 5-22-1986 by Ord. No. 0-9-86]
(a) The maximum height of any building proposed under § 84-33.1
shall be a height calculated as follows:
Actual street frontage
Height = Permitted zone
height x
Minimum required lot width at
building line
(b) Notwithstanding the preceding provision of Subsection
D(3)(a), the maximum height of the proposed building shall not
exceed the maximum permitted height in the zone, and in no
event shall the height of the proposed building be less than 20
feet.
(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of Subsection
D(3)(a) and (b), the elevation of the highest point of the roof of
the proposed building shall not exceed the elevation of the
highest point of the roof of any existing principal residential
structure on any contiguous lot.
(4) Minimum requirements.
(a) Minimum front yard. The foregoing notwithstanding, no front
yard shall be less than the front yard required in the zone in
which the eligible lot is located.
(b) Distance between buildings. The foregoing notwithstanding,
no building on an eligible lot shall be closer to an existing
dwelling or primary building on an adjoining lot than 20 feet.
(c) Minimum side yard. The foregoing notwithstanding, no side
yard shall be less than 10 feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard. The foregoing notwithstanding, no rear
yard shall be less than 20 feet.
(e) Preservation of environment and aesthetics. If the construction
of any building or other structure causes the destruction of one
or more trees of over six feet in height, the owner shall plant
and maintain no fewer than one tree for every three such trees
so destroyed. The type and height of the trees so planted and
§ 142-258 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-258
138:642
maintained need not be the same as those destroyed. Further,
any building or other structure shall conform, to the extent
permitted by law, to the physical character and architectural
style of the area in which the same is located.
(f) Accessory buildings.
[1] The owner may erect one detached small accessory
structure on the lot, in addition to the building containing
the dwelling unit or units. The owner shall not erect any
other detached building or structure on the lot.
[2] This restriction does not apply to an attached garage. This
restriction does not apply to a pool, deck area or other
similar area which is not covered by a roof.
(g) Minimum living floor space. The dwelling shall contain not less
than 600 square feet of living floor space if a one-story
structure or not less than 800 square feet of living floor space if
a two-story structure.
(h) Other conditions. Such other conditions as may be prescribed
by law shall also be considered minimum requirements.
(5) Roof type. The roof of the proposed building shall have a center
ridge line. The minimum pitch of each face of the roof shall be 5:12.
[Added 8-28-1986 by Ord. No. 0-14-86]
§ 142-258 JUNKYARDS § 142-258
138:643

ARTICLE LVI
Parking of Commercial Vehicles
[Amended 2-18-1982 by Ord. No. 0-4-82; 4-26-2010 by Ord. No.
229-2010]
§ 142-259. Vehicle parking.
§ 142-260. Parking or storing of machinery or equipment.
No machinery or equipment, such as is commonly used in connection with
construction, excavating and filling of land, shall be parked or stored on
any property or premises within the residential zones except while in use
thereon.
§ 142-261. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
A. No business or commercial vehicle having a gross vehicle weight in
excess of 10 tons (20,000 pounds) shall be parked out of doors on any
property or premises or on any street in any residential or office zone,
except for pickup, delivery or services to or for the residents on said
street and then only for such time as may be necessary to make such
pickup or delivery or to render such services in accordance with the
hours stated in the Noise Ordinance section of the Township of River
Vale.67
B. Not more than one business or commercial vehicle, including taxicabs,
having a gross vehicle weight of 10 tons (20,000 pounds) or less, which
vehicle is used by the owner or lessee of the property for the
transportation of people, goods, wares, merchandise, tools and/or
equipment, and which is the principal vehicle used by said owner or
lessee of the property in connection with said property owner's or
lessee's business, shall be parked on the property or premises.
C. Off-street, driveway parking and garages in any zoning district except
for the Commercial Zone. Any permitted business, commercial vehicle,
vehicle, trailer, machinery, and/or construction equipment may not be
stored, parked or maintained on any residential property, except in an
enclosed garage or on an approved driveway. Driveways must be
constructed of macadam, concrete, pavers, asphalt, or decorative
stone. Driveways constructed of dirt, grass, crushed stones, or other
materials not described herein are prohibited. Existing driveways of
crushed stone may not be expanded. Notwithstanding anything herein,
to the contrary, a resident may be permitted to store, park, or maintain
a trailer for a period not to exceed 60 days in the discretion of the
Construction Official, or his designee, for purposes due to unforeseen
circumstances.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 159, Noise.
§ 142-259 JUNKYARDS § 142-261
138:645
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Includes every type of motor driven vehicle
used for commercial purposes on the highways, such as the transportation
of goods, wares and merchandise, excepting such vehicles as are run only
upon rails or tracks and vehicles of the passenger-car type used for touring
purposes or the carrying of farm products and milk, as the case may be.
PROPERTY or PREMISES — Any parcel or contiguous parcels of land in
single ownership, whether or not divided into two or more lots as shown on
the Official Assessment Map.
TRAILER — Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks or motorized
bicycles.
§ 142-261 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-261
138:646
ARTICLE LVII
Definitions
§ 142-262. Word usage; terms defined.
A. Word usage. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
Words used in the singular include the plural number, and in the plural
include the singular. The word "person" includes a partnership or a
corporation. The word "lot" includes the word "plot." The word
"building" includes the word "structure." The word "zone" includes the
word "district." The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
The word "occupied" or "used" shall be considered as though followed
by the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be used or
occupied."
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this Part 9, the terms used herein are
defined as follows:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the main building
on a lot and used for the purpose customarily incidental to that of the
main building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental to the principal use
of a building or land, such as the office of a professional person,
customary home occupations, a driveway, a swimming pool and a
tennis, paddle and platform tennis court.[Amended 10-28-1993 by
Ord. No. 0-8-93R]
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets or by streets and streams or
borough boundary lines.
BUILDING — The measurements of a building or from a building shall
be as follows: the width and depth shall be the maximum of the main
parts of the building.[Amended 2-4-1972 by Ord. No. 0-2-72]
BUILDING AREA — The maximum horizontal projected area of the
building and its accessories. Roofed-over porches or similar extensions
of a building shall be considered parts of the building. Any eave or
similar projection in excess of four inches shall be considered as part of
the building for the computation of side yards and land coverage.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The total vertical dimension from the corner
point of the curbline to the highest point of the building, excluding
chimneys, antennas, mechanical equipment and parapet walls not
exceeding four feet in height. For corner properties, the lower elevation
curb center point shall govern. For sites whose existing
(preconstruction) grade at the building footprint is lower than the
governing curbline elevation, the former shall replace the latter in the
calculation. Building height to be measured from the average elevation
of the existing grade measured at ten-foot intervals around the outer
perimeter of the proposed building footprint, beginning at the low
point.[Added 2-4-1972 by Ord. No. 0-2-72; 7-22-2004 by Ord. No.
0-6-04; 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 0-18-04]
§ 142-262 JUNKYARDS § 142-262
138:647
CORNER LOT — A parcel of land at the junction of, and fronting on,
two intersecting streets. In the case of a corner lot, the shorter street
frontage shall equal 60% or more of the longer frontage, and the rear
lot line may be elected by the lot owner provided that it be indicated
on any plans filed with the Construction or Zoning Official, or Land Use
Board.[Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
CURB LEVEL — The existing grade of the street in front of the midpoint
of the lot. Where a lot level is higher than the curb level, the average
elevation of the former along the building line may be taken as a base
for measuring the height of a building. Where a lot fronts on two or
more streets of different levels, the curb level of the higher street
may be taken as the base for measuring the height of a building, to a
distance of 100 feet back from the street with the higher curb level.
DEPTH OF LOT OR SITE — The distance between the front and rear lot
lines measured perpendicularly to the front building line along the axis
of the plot.[Amended 2-4-1972 by Ord. No. 0-2-72]
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A building designed and used
exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other.[Added 2-4-1972 by Ord. No. 0-2-72]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building designed exclusively for
occupancy by two families living independently of each other.[Added
2-4-1972 by Ord. No. 0-2-72]
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living privately together as a
single housekeeping unit and using certain rooms and cooking facilities
in common. However, in the event of guests, it shall not include more
than two paying guests.
FLOOR AREA OF DWELLING UNIT — The total horizontal area used
for general living purposes, excluding open porches, terraces,
breezeways, patios or public halls and stairways. All dimensions shall
be measured between the exterior faces of walls.[Added 2-4-1972 by
Ord. No. 0-2-72]
FRONT YARD — The open unoccupied space on the same lot with
a main building, situated between any street line of the lot and the
nearest projection of the main building, and extending to the side lines
of the lot.[Amended 3-12-1970; 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
INTERIOR LOT — A lot fronting on one street only.
LOT — A parcel of land the location, dimensions and boundaries of
which are determined by the latest official record of the Township
Assessment Map, and occupied or intended to be occupied by one
building or one unit group of buildings and its accessory buildings and
uses, and including such open spaces as are required by this Part 9.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR USE — One that does not comply
with the regulations of this Part 9 for the zone in which it is located.
§ 142-262 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-262
138:648
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE — An area provided for the loading
or unloading of trucks, being not less than 12 feet wide and 25 feet
long, exclusive of maneuvering space or access drives thereto.[Added
2-4-1972 by Ord. No. 0-2-72]
PREMISES — Land or buildings, or both.
PRIVATE GARAGE — A compartment in or a structure appurtenant to
the principal building on the same lot, designed to house not more than
three motor vehicles for purposes of storage only. All vehicles stored
in such garage must be the property of the owner or lessee of the
same premises, except that space for the storage of not more than one
noncommercial vehicle may be rented.
PUBLIC GARAGE — Any garage other than a private garage.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line opposite to the street line.[Amended
8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
REAR YARD — An open space, except for permitted accessory
buildings, on the same lot with the main building and situated between
the rear wall of the building extended to the side lines of the lot and the
rear line of the lot.
SIDE YARD — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main
building, situated between the side line of the lot and the parts of any
building nearest thereto and extending through from the front yard to
the rear yard.
SITE — The total area included within the boundary lines of a
development. This shall include lands dedicated for streets or other
public purposes.[Added 2-4-1972 by Ord. No. 0-2-72]
STORY — That part of a building between a floor and the floor above
or, in its absence, the ceiling or roof above. A story extending less than
three feet above the curb level shall not be counted in determining the
number of stories. A story, the floor of which is below the curb level and
which extends to more than three feet above the curb level, shall be
counted as that fraction of a story that the section above the curb level
bears to the height of the entire story. Any story under a pitched roof, at
the top of a building, the floor of which is not more than two feet below
the plate, shall be counted as a half-story when not more than 60% of
the floor area is used for rooms; otherwise, it shall be counted as that
fraction of a story which its floor area in rooms bears to the entire floor
area of that floor.
STREET — Any road, avenue, street, lane or other way set aside for
common street purposes.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between the street and the lot.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the size or height of a
building or a change in its position on the lot, or any change in the
supporting members of a building such as exterior walls, bearing walls
or partitions, columns, beams or girders.
§ 142-262 JUNKYARDS § 142-262
138:649
THROUGH LOT — [Repealed 10-28-1993 by Ord. No. 0-8-93R]
WIDTH OF LOT — The distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles to the axis of the lot across the rear of the required front
yard.[Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 0-16-89]
§ 142-262 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-262
138:650
ARTICLE LVIII
Limiting Schedule
§ 142-263. A Residence District. [Amended 9-11-1969; 11-12-1970;
11-26-1985 by Ord. No. 0-11-85]
A. The maximum height of buildings shall be 32 feet and 2 1/2 stories.
[Amended 7-22-2004 by Ord. No. 0-5-04; 7-23-2007 by Ord. No.
185-2007]
B. The minimum size of lots shall be as follows:
(1) Area, square feet: 18,000.
(2) Width of lot: 120 feet.
(3) Lot frontage. Front yard: 120 feet. Lots with frontage completely
within the curved portions of a bulb-end of a cul-de-sac right-of-way
may reduce the required lot frontage to 75 feet. [Added
8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
C. The maximum number of families per lot shall be one.
D. Maximum coverage. [Amended 7-24-2003 by Ord. No. 0-7-03R]
(1) Maximum impervious coverage. The maximum coverage of the lot
by the principal and accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including walkways, patios, garages and any other impermeable
material, shall not exceed 40% of the gross lot area.
(2) Maximum building coverage. The maximum coverage of the lot by
the principal and any accessory buildings shall not exceed 25% of
the gross lot area.
E. Mandatory open spaces shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard.
(a) Minimum depth of setback: the average setback line of existing
buildings on the same side of the street between intersecting
streets. Where no buildings exist in the same block, the
minimum depth of the front yard shall be 45 feet. On corner
lots, the setback shall be not less than 45 feet from each of the
intersecting streets.
(2) Side yards.
(a) Minimum width of interior lots: the sum of both side yards shall
be 40 feet; each side yard shall be not less than 15 feet.
(b) Minimum width of corner lots: the sum of both shall be 60 feet;
the side yard on the street side shall be 45 feet.
(c) The side yard on the interior lot side: not less than 15 feet.
§ 142-263 JUNKYARDS § 142-263
138:651
§ 142-264. A-1 Residence District. [Added 11-26-1985 by Ord. No.
0-11-85]
(3) Rear yard.
(a) Minimum depth: 30 feet.
F. Decks which are no higher than four feet above the highest point of the
adjoining ground shall be located not less than 20 feet from the rear
property line. Decks higher than four feet shall be located a distance of
not less than 30 feet from the real property line. [Added 7-24-2003 by
Ord. No. 0-7-03R]
A. The maximum height of buildings shall be 35 feet and 2 1/2 stories.
[Amended 7-22-2004 by Ord. No. 0-5-04; 7-23-2007 by Ord. No.
185-2007]
B. The minimum size of lots shall be as follows:
(1) Area, square feet: 40,000.
(2) Width of lot: 150 feet.
(3) Lot frontage. Front yard: 150 feet. Lots with frontage completely
within the curved portions of a bulb-end of a cul-de-sac right-of-way
may reduce the required lot frontage to 75 feet. [Added
8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
C. The maximum number of families per lot shall be one.
D. Maximum coverage. [Amended 7-24-2003 by Ord. No. 0-7-03R]
(1) Maximum impervious coverage. The maximum coverage of the lot
by the principal and accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including walkways, patios, garages and any other impermeable
material, shall not exceed 40% of the gross lot area.
(2) Maximum building coverage. The maximum coverage of the lot by
the principal and any accessory buildings shall not exceed 25% of
the gross lot area.
E. Mandatory open spaces shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard.
(a) Minimum depth of setback: the average setback line of existing
buildings on the same side of the street between intersecting
streets. Where no buildings exist in the same block, the
minimum depth of the front yard shall be 45 feet.
(2) Side yards.
(a) Minimum width, aggregate of two sides: 50 feet.
§ 142-263 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-264
138:652
§ 142-265. B and B-1 Residence Districts. [Amended 4-22-1986 by
Ord. No. 0-7-86; 8-28-1986 by Ord. No. 0-13-86; 7-24-2003 by Ord.
No. 0-7-03R; 7-22-2004 by Ord. No. 0-5-04; 7-23-2007 by Ord. No.
185-2007; 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009; 11-27-2017 by Ord. No.
328-2017]
(b) Minimum width, one side: 20 feet.
(3) Rear yard.
(a) Minimum depth: 50 feet.
F. Decks which are no higher than four feet above the highest point of the
underlying ground surface shall be located not less than 20 feet from
the rear property line. Decks higher than four feet above the ground
surface shall be located a distance of not less than 30 feet from the rear
property line. [Added 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
A. The maximum height of buildings shall be 30 feet and 2 1/2 stories.
B. Minimum size of lots shall be as follows:
(1) Area: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Width of lot: 75 feet.
(3) Lot frontage. Front yard: 75 feet.
C. Maximum number of families per lot shall be one.
D. Maximum coverage.
(1) Maximum impervious coverage. The maximum coverage of the lot
by the principal and accessory buildings, structures and uses,
including walkways, patios, garages and any other impermeable
material, shall not exceed 40% of the gross lot area.
(2) Maximum building coverage. The maximum coverage of the lot by
the principal and any accessory buildings shall not exceed 25% of
the gross lot area.
E. Mandatory open spaces shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard.
(a) Minimum depth of setback: the average setback line of existing
buildings on the same side of the street between intersecting
streets. Where no buildings exist in the same block, the
minimum depth of front yard shall be 25 feet. On corner lots,
the setback shall be not less than 25 feet from each of the
intersecting streets.
(2) Side yards.
(a) Minimum width, aggregate of two sides: 20 feet.
§ 142-264 JUNKYARDS § 142-265
138:653
§ 142-266. C Commercial District. [Amended 4-22-1986 by Ord. No.
0-7-86; 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
(b) Minimum width, one side: 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard.
(a) Minimum depth: 30 feet.
F. Minimum floor area of buildings shall be as follows:
(1) One story: 1,000 square feet.
(2) One and one-half stories.
(a) First floor: 700 square feet.
(b) Second floor: 350 square feet.
(3) Two stories.
(a) First floor: 600 square feet.
(b) Second floor: 600 square feet.
G. Minimum number of rooms. All two-story dwellings must contain not
less than five rooms, exclusive of cellar, bath and utility, furnace or
boiler room, and a minimum first-floor area, exclusive of the area of any
garage, porch or breezeway, of 700 square feet.
H. Decks which are no higher than four feet above the highest point of the
underlying ground shall be located not less than 20 feet from the rear
property line. Decks higher than four feet above the ground surface
shall be located a distance of not less than 30 feet from the rear
property line.
A. Maximum height of buildings shall be as follows:
(1) Stories: two.
(2) Feet: 35.
B. Minimum size of lots:
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot width: none.
(3) Minimum lot frontage: none.
C. Maximum building coverage of lots shall be 40%.
D. Mandatory open spaces shall be as follows:
(1) Front yard.
§ 142-265 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-266
138:654
§ 142-267. Swimming pools, tennis, paddle tennis and platform
tennis courts. [Added 6-24-1993 by Ord. No. 0-13-93]
Swimming pools, tennis, paddle tennis and platform tennis courts shall only
be permitted in the rear yard. Such swimming pools, tennis, paddle tennis
or platform tennis courts shall not be constructed, installed, located or
otherwise placed within 10 feet of any side lot line or rear lot line. In the
case of a through lot, swimming pools, tennis, paddle tennis or platform
tennis courts shall not be constructed, installed, located or otherwise placed
within the front setback required for the adjoining main buildings on the
same side of the street within the block.68
(a) Minimum depth of setback: zero feet on streets 80 feet or more
in width. On streets less than 80 feet in width, buildings shall
be set back at least 40 feet from the center line of the street.
(2) Side yards.
(a) Minimum width, aggregate of two sides: 12 feet.
(b) Minimum width, one side: zero feet.
(3) Rear yard.
(a) Minimum depth: 50 feet.
E. Minimum floor area of buildings shall be optional.
68.Editor's Note: Former § 175-246, D Light Industrial District, was repealed 8-23-1990 by
Ord. No. 0-9-90.
§ 142-266 JUNKYARDS § 142-267
138:655

ARTICLE LIX
Off-Street Parking
[Added 3-12-1970]
§ 142-268. Provision for off-street parking required.
No new building shall hereafter be erected, and no existing building shall
hereafter be altered to increase its floor area, unless and until off-street
parking facilities as hereinafter set forth shall be provided for the storage
or parking of passenger motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees
or patrons of buildings erected.
§ 142-269. Size of spaces and accessways.
All parking spaces shall conform to the requirements of § 142-272 and
shall have sufficient depth and aisle space for ease of entry and exit.
Unobstructed access shall consist of at least one lane not less than 10 feet
wide for parking areas for less than 10 spaces and at least two lanes not
less than 10 feet wide for parking areas for 10 spaces or more. No access to
a lot in a C Commercial District or D Light Industry District shall be located
within a residence district.
§ 142-270. Location of off-street parking.
All parking spaces provided pursuant to this Part 9 shall be on the same
lot with the building, except that the Joint Planning Board may permit the
parking spaces to be on a lot within 500 feet of the building, if it determines
that it is impractical to provide parking on the same lot with the building,
and provided that the lot to be used for parking is in the same ownership
and zone as that of the building.
§ 142-271. Drainage; paving; lining of spaces.
All parking spaces, areas and driveways shall be properly drained and shall
be paved with bituminous concrete, asphalt, concrete or other approved
permanent hard-surface material, and all parking spaces shall be lined and
designated on said pavement, except for parking spaces accessory to a
single-family residence.
§ 142-272. Definition. [Amended 8-27-1987 by Ord. No. 0-7-87]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING SPACE — An open or enclosed, paved or surfaced space which is
accessible and available at all hours when the building to which it may be
accessory is in use, for the parking of one passenger car. Spaces at an angle
to the drive from 30° to 90° shall be at least nine feet wide by 19 feet long
for full-sized and mid-sized cars and at least seven feet by 19 feet long for
compact cars; spaces parallel to the drive shall be at least seven feet wide
§ 142-268 JUNKYARDS § 142-272
138:657
by 22 feet long for full-and mid-sized cars and at least seven feet wide by 17
feet long for compact cars, exclusive of driveways and turning areas.
§ 142-273. Minimum requirements. [Amended 12-23-1986 by Ord.
No. 0-20-86]
A. Minimum requirements for off-street parking shall be as follows:
(1) Single-family dwelling: two parking spaces.
(2) Two-family dwelling: two parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(3) Multifamily dwellings, in excess of two units:
(a) Two parking spaces per dwelling unit; and
(b) One visitor parking space for every five dwelling units or part
thereof.
(4) Retail store, shop, bank or similar establishment: one parking
space per 150 square feet of gross floor area.
(5) Offices, other than medical/dental offices or clinics: one parking
space per 200 square feet of gross floor area.
(6) Restaurants, taverns, bars, lounges and similar establishments, the
greater of: [Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
(a) One parking space per 2.5 seats and one parking space per
employee; or
(b) One parking space per 50 square feet of gross floor area and
one parking space per employee.
(7) Nursing home, hospital or sanitarium: one parking space for two
patients (maximum capacity) and one parking space for each staff
doctor and one parking space for each employee on the largest
shift. [Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
(8) Places of public assembly, public buildings, including churches and
theaters: one parking space for each three seats for fixed seats; if
seats not fixed: one parking space per 100 square feet of the floor
area utilized for public assembly. [Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 217-2009]
(9) Hotels, motels, tourist homes and rooming houses: one parking
space per unit and one parking space per employee.
(10) Schools, public and private: one parking space per employee/
teacher, plus 10% of this number.
(11) Funeral parlor, etc.: one parking space for each 50 square feet of
assembly area, but not less than seven spaces.
§ 142-272 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-273
138:658
(12) Industrial or manufacturing establishment, laboratory or
warehouse: one parking space for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area or one for each two employees on the major shift,
whichever is greater. [Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord. No.
217-2009]
(13) Any use not otherwise herein provided for: one parking space for
each 150 square feet of gross floor area.
(14) Medical/dental offices, clinics or similar facilities, the total of the
following: [Amended 8-24-2009 by Ord. No. 217-2009]
(a) One parking space per 150 square feet of gross floor area;
(b) Seven parking spaces per each doctor;
(c) One parking space per employee; and
(d) Any other parking spaces required for residential space.
(15) In addition to the above requirements of Subsection A(3) through
(14), there shall be at least one handicapped person parking space
for each 50 required spaces or part thereof. Each handicapped
person parking space shall be at least 12 feet wide.
(16) Housing District for the Disabled: [Added 8-23-1990 by Ord. No.
0-9-90]
(a) One parking space per dwelling unit.
(b) One handicapped person parking space for each four required
spaces or part thereof.
B. A maximum of 1/3 of the total spaces at the site may be reserved and
used for compact car parking spaces. [Added 8-27-1987 by Ord. No.
0-7-87]
C. If the appropriate board determines that, by reason of the proposed use
of the particular premises, the number of parking spaces which will be
required to meet the parking needs of the premises is less than the
number of spaces which would otherwise be required as set forth
hereinabove, the appropriate board may permit the applicant to
construct and pave only such number of parking spaces as the
appropriate Board determines to be necessary to meet such
requirements and may permit the remaining area, which would
otherwise be required to be constructed and paved for parking
purposes, to remain unpaved, in a landscaped condition; provided,
however, that the site plan or subdivision plat shall delineate the full
number of parking spaces which, but for such finding of the appropriate
board, would be required, and any certificate of occupancy issued for
such premises shall note the decision of the appropriate board as
designated herein. The resolution approving the site plan or subdivision
plat shall recite the reasons for the waiver granted to the applicant as
§ 142-273 JUNKYARDS § 142-273
138:659
§ 142-274. Parking area design standards. [Added 4-22-1993 by
Ord. No. 0-1-93]
§ 142-275. Grade.
Each parking space shall consist of a suitable graded, drained and
unobstructed rectangular area in the plan, of which no straight line shall
have a grade in excess of 6%.
§ 142-276. Lot-line restrictions.
No parking space or garage shall be located within 10 feet of any lot line
in side or rear yards adjoining a residence district, nor nearer than 10
feet to any rear lot line or portion thereof which represents the lot line
of an adjoining residence district. In lots opposite (across the street from)
to such parking spaces and shall impose, as a condition of such waiver,
that the applicant shall agree in writing to construct and pave such
parking spaces should the conditions giving rise to such waiver change.
Further, in the event that there is a change of use of the premises, the
appropriate board shall at such time review the parking requirements
in connection with site plan application for such changed use. [Added
8-7-1987 by Ord. No. 0-7-87]
A. Access. There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all
parking spaces. Access drives or driveways shall be no less than 12 feet
wide for either ingress or egress, except that for residential structures
for fewer than three families, access drives or driveways shall be no less
than 12 feet wide for both ingress and egress. No driveway or access
driveway shall be closer than 50 feet to the street lot lines of any two
intersecting streets.
B. Size of aisles and driveways. The width of all aisles or driveways
providing direct access to individual parking stalls shall be in
accordance with the requirements as established in Table 1. Only oneway
traffic shall be permitted in aisles serving parking spaces placed at
an angle other than 0° or 90°.
Table 1
Minimum Permitted
Aisle Width Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
0 (parallel) 12
30 12
45 13
60 18
90 (perpendicular) 25
§ 142-273 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-276
138:660
residence districts, parking areas provided for the parking of four or more
vehicles in the open shall be screened from the street by landscaping a
minimum of five feet high or capable of growing to such height within one
year, and such as to provide a screen within all seasons of the year.
§ 142-277. Loading and delivery operations.
No loading door, loading platform or loading dock shall be located on any
street frontage of a building unless a yard space is provided for efficient
width and are so as to permit all loading and delivery operations to be
conducted entirely on the lot and off the public street.
§ 142-278. Driveway grades.
The grade of any driveway which intersects with or connects to the street
line shall not exceed 6% within 20 feet of such line.
§ 142-279. Exceptions to applicability of article.
This article shall not apply to off-street parking areas and parking spaces
shown on subdivision or site plans filed with or approved by the Joint
Planning Board of the Township of River Vale prior to the effective date of
this article.
§ 142-276 JUNKYARDS § 142-279
138:661

ARTICLE LX
Communications Facilities on River Vale Property
[Added 4-24-1997 by Ord. No. 0-7-97; amended 8-26-2001 by Ord.
No. 0-9-01; 9-26-2002 by Ord. No. 0-14-02; 6-24-2004 by Ord. No.
0-4-04; 7-24-2006 by Ord. No. 160-2006]
§ 142-280. Purpose; goals.
§ 142-280.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless communications towers and antennas.
B. The goals of this article are to:
(1) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
(2) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas;
(3) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
(4) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as
a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use
towers;
(5) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
(6) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and
innovative camouflaging techniques;
(7) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently;
(8) Consider the public health and safety of communication towers;
and
(9) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
C. In furtherance of these goals, the Joint Planning Board shall give due
consideration to the Township of River Vale's Master Plan, zoning map,
existing land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in approving
sites for the location of towers and antennas.
§ 142-280 JUNKYARDS § 142-280.1
138:663
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals
or other communications signals. Exempted herefrom are towers or the
installation of any antenna that is under 40 feet in height and is owned and
operated for the exclusive use of a federally licensed amateur radio station
operator or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna.
COMMUNICATION TOWER — Includes any and all antennas and towers
as defined in this section, together with other accessory structures and
equipment associated therewith.
PREEXISTING TOWER AND PREEXISTING ANTENNA — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit has been properly issued and the
structure has been completed. However, no such tower or antenna shall
be expanded, replaced, restored or repaired other than in compliance and
conformance with this article.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The term shall
include the structure and any support thereof.
§ 142-281. Application and locations permitted.
A. Communications towers are and will be permitted on property owned,
controlled or leased by the Township of River Vale. Said leases shall be
created by the applicable statutory procedures in accordance with the
Local Public Contracts Law. Any other placement shall be considered a
conditional use if so zoned or a use variance anywhere else.
B. The Township of River Vale must consent to its property being used for
communications facilities. No communications tower shall be erected
or operated within the Township on its property except pursuant to an
approval, lease and license issued by the Township and entered into
between the operator of the facility and the Township.
C. Communications towers may be permitted as conditional uses in the
following building zones and districts, provided the criteria set forth in
§ 142-281D are complied with: Open Space and Recreation Zone,
Multifamily Affordable Housing (MFAH) and Conservation District
(CN). [Amended 6-22-2009 by Ord. No. 213-2009]
D. Municipal and conditional use communications towers must meet the
following criteria to be considered for approval:
(1) No such antenna or tower shall be located within a distance of 200
feet (or 1.25 times the height of the tower, whichever is greater) of
§ 142-280.1 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-281
138:664
§ 142-282. Additional requirements and maintenance.
a residential property, recognized historic property, hospital or
health care facility, school or public recreation facility, except as
provided for below.
(2) At the discretion of the applicable Township board, the restrictions
on location may be relaxed if the applicant can demonstrate that
the entire facility would not be visible because it would be enclosed
within an existing structure such as a steeple.
A. All facilities shall be suitably secured. Decorative or visually
unobtrusive security fencing shall be required.
B. Site plan and escrows approved by the River Vale Joint Planning Board
shall be required.
C. In the event such communications towers are abandoned or not
operated for a period of one year, the same shall be considered
abandoned and removed, at the option of the Township, at the sole
expense of the operator.
D. Noise levels at any property line shall be not more than 50 decibels.
E. Site lighting shall be oriented inward to ward off side impact.
Necessary warning lights shall be in accordance with federal law and
regulations.
F. Any access to a communications facility shall conform to the driveway
provisions of the Township of River Vale Code.
G. Any generator located on the site shall be within a completely enclosed
soundproof equipment structure. All fuel shall be contained in
accordance with NJDEP requirements.
H. Site clearing shall be minimized to preclude the removal of vegetation
beyond that necessary to install and maintain the facility, as approved in
the site plan.
I. The maximum permissible height of a tower may be permitted up to 150
feet.
J. Owners are encouraged to paint, camouflage and/or obscure their
tower to resemble vegetation or trees, and such treatment may become
a condition of approval at the discretion of the applicable Township
board.
K. Towers should be freestanding monopole structures without significant
cross braces or other visible supporting devices. Lattice structure
towers shall not be permitted. Towers not obscured to resemble
vegetation or trees as is encouraged above shall be painted a color that
the applicant can demonstrate blends in obscurely with its background.
§ 142-281 JUNKYARDS § 142-282
138:665
L. No signs or other like devices shall be displayed or appended to the
facility or tower.
M. No offices or other commercial operations may be physically conducted
on site.
N. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of
the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Communications
Commission and any other agency of the state or federal government
with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards
and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and
antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas
into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six
months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a
direct compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or
federal agency. Failure to bring towers or antennas into compliance
with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds
for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. To
ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall
ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in
applicable federal, state or local building codes, and if, upon inspection,
the Township concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes
and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then
upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall
have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards.
Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense or forfeiture of all rights, privileges and ownership of
the tower, antenna, facility or leased property and improvements.
O. Owners of existing towers must agree to share (rent) space on their
towers with other antenna users seeking to erect such a facility within
River Vale, irrespective of whether or not they are competitors. Such
users shall be subject to a co-user approval by the Joint Planning Board.
Reasonable fair-market lease agreements are required. The objectives
of this provision are to minimize the number of towers required within
the Township and avoid a proliferation of towers when multiple
antennas on one tower are possible.
P. At the discretion of the Joint Planning Board, visual screening
landscaping shall be required whenever the tower is not already
screened by adequate natural woodland vegetation.
Q. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the Joint
Planning Board an inventory of all existing towers, antennas or sites
approved for towers or antennas that are either within the jurisdiction
of the governing authority and within a 1/4 mile of the border thereof,
including specific information about the location, height and design of
each tower. The Joint Planning Board may disseminate information
pursuant to the Right-to-Know Law or any other law or regulation
pertaining to the dissemination of public records to any organization
§ 142-282 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-282
138:666
seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing
authority; provided, however, that the Joint Planning Board is not by
disseminating such information in any way representing or warranting
that such sites are available or suitable.
R. Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new
tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the
reasonable satisfaction of the governing authority that no existing
tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the use
of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or
structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may
consist of any of the following:
(1) No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements.
(2) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
(3) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
(4) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antennas on the existing towers or structures
or the antennas on the existing towers or structures would cause
interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(5) The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing
tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding
new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
(6) The applicant demonstrates that there are significant other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(7) Applicant shall have the affirmative obligation of proving that it has
attempted to enter into a contact with the owners of the existing
tower and structure:
(a) This obligation shall include copies of all correspondence as to
rates, cost of contributions, etc.
(b) Copies of rejection of the offers propounded on the applicant
by the owners of the existing structure and/or tower.
(c) Written cost proposals indicating actual quoted figures
required by the owner of the existing structures and/or tower.
(d) A detailed cost analysis indicating the cost to the applicant to
construct new tower and/or structure.
§ 142-282 JUNKYARDS § 142-282
138:667
§ 142-283. Other requirements.
§ 142-284. through § 142-288. (Reserved)
(8) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable
microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/
receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of
alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna
development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
A. In the event the restrictions contained herein prevent reasonable
communications or federal communications, statutes and regulations,
then, in such event, the Joint Planning Board may modify or waive the
restrictions contained herein during a site plan review.
§ 142-282 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-284
138:668
Part 10
Mu[Altdifoapmteildy 7D-e1v4e-1lo9p9m4eBnyt ORredc.y cNloin. g0 -F1a2c-i9li4t]ies
ARTICLE LXI
General Provisions
§ 142-289. Definitions.
As used in this Part 10, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A building containing three or
more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by persons living
independently of each other, or a group of such buildings.
RECYCLING AREA — Space allocated for collection and storage of sourceseparated
recyclable materials.
§ 142-290. Recycling area for multifamily housing development
required.
There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development that
requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor recycling
area for the collection and storage of residentially generated recyclable
materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be sufficient to
accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of adequate size and
number and which are consistent with anticipated usage and with current
methods of collection in the area in which the project is located. The
dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or containers shall be
determined in consultation with the Municipal Recycling Coordinator and
shall be consistent with the district recycling plan adopted pursuant to § 3
of P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13), and any applicable requirements
of the Municipal Master Plan, adopted pursuant to § 26 of P.L. 1987, c. 102.
§ 142-291. Location.
The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source-separated recyclable materials, preferably near, but
clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
§ 142-292. Lighting; access; protection.
A. The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall
be able to access the recycling area without interference from parked
cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect
the recycling area and the bins or containers placed therein against
theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers.
B. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable.
§ 142-289 JUNKYARDS § 142-292
138:669
§ 142-293. Signs.
Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted
therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling area.
Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs indicating the
materials to be placed therein.
§ 142-294. Landscaping.
Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor recycling
area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
Any bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable
paper or cardboard and which are located in an outdoor recycling area
shall be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, so as to keep the
paper or cardboard dry.
§ 142-292 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-294
138:670
Part 11
[AdopAtepdpl8ic-2a2ti-o1n9s9 F1oBr yDOevrdel. oNpom. e0n-1t6-91]
ARTICLE LXII
General Provisions
§ 142-295. Application requirements.
A. Schedule A herein69 is applicable to applications to the Joint Planning
Board.
B. Schedule B70 is applicable to minor subdivisions, preliminary and final
site plans, preliminary and final major subdivisions, applications under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and d and applications for conditional uses and is
applicable regardless of which board the application is made to. An "X"
mark means that that particular item is required to be submitted with
the application specified.
69.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
70.Editor's Note: Schedule B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 142-295 JUNKYARDS § 142-295
138:671

Part 12
[AdopteEdn9v-i2r4o-n1m99en8tBaly IOmrpda. cNt oS. t0u-d1y0-98(R)]
ARTICLE LXIII
Approval Process; Violations
§ 142-296. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Environmental Impact Study Ordinance
of the Township of River Vale."
§ 142-297. Purpose.
In order that the Township of River Vale may assess the impact of proposed
land use changes or developments on the environment of the municipality,
particularly with respect to potable water, pollution of all kinds, drainage,
waste disposal, landscape and other pertinent environmental factors, the
Township Council has determined that it is in the public interest that all
persons who shall propose such changes or developments shall submit an
environmental impact study in accordance with the provisions of this article
when required.
§ 142-298. Approvals and exemptions.
A. An environmental impact study relative to the proposed project
prepared in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be
submitted for approval to the Joint Planning Board and all other
appropriate authorities, including the Advisory Shade Tree Committee
of the Township, in the following instances:
(1) In connection with all applications for a major land subdivision.
(2) In connection with all applications for site plan approval which
involve a land disturbance in excess of four acres.
(3) Prior to the disturbance of earth by power-driven equipment which
would substantially recontour the land in an area of more than
5,000 square feet.
B. Township Engineer approval. An environmental impact study relative to
the proposed project in accordance with the provisions of this article
when complete and certified as acceptable by the Joint Planning Board
or other appropriate board shall be submitted to the Township Clerk for
approval by the Township Engineer in connection with all relevant
applications for a construction permit or a certificate of occupancy.
C. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirements of
submitting an environmental impact study: agricultural uses conducted
in accordance with a farm conservation plan approved by the state soil
conservation service; any activity relating to the maintenance of or
alteration to the physical characteristics of a golf course, so long as
those changes do not otherwise trigger a change in land use; and
§ 142-296 JUNKYARDS § 142-298
138:673
§ 142-299. Matters to be included in study.
Every environmental impact study shall include the following:
single-family residential uses or structures accessory thereto in a
residential zone whenever such residential uses or structures involve
no more than 5,000 square feet of land disturbance.
A. Inventory of existing environmental conditions. An inventory of existing
environmental conditions at the project site and in the surrounding
region which is affected by the project shall include, but shall not be
limited to, a description of air quality, water quality, water supply,
stream quality hydrology, aquatic organisms, zoology wildlife habitat,
soils and properties thereof (including capabilities and limitations),
slope, light characteristics and levels, noise characteristics and levels,
demography, topography, aesthetics, historical sites and archaeological
features. Air and water quality shall be described with reference to
standards promulgated by the Department of Environmental Protection
of the State of New Jersey and in accordance with the River Vale
Township Natural Resources Inventory Checklist attached.71 Soils shall
be described with reference to the Bergen County Soil Conservation
District Standards and Specifications and the River Vale Township
Natural Resources Inventory.
B. Plan and description of development. A project description shall specify
the purpose of the project, the proposed construction and the use of the
buildings and structures involved. The project description shall specify
what is to be done and how it is to be done during the construction and
operation of the project. Alternatives to project concept designed to be
adverse environmental impacts as well as remedial actions to be
implemented during construction and operation both at the project site
and in the surrounding regions are to be submitted as a part of the
environmental impact study. The description shall be accompanied by
maps and drawings which shall include, but shall not be limited to,
contours, buildings, roads, paved areas, grading and regrading,
adjacent natural streams, stream encroachment boundaries, the
relation of the project to surrounding property and existing utilities and
buffer zones for noise and light control.
C. Assessment of the anticipated impact of the project. An assessment,
supported by the environmental data, of the probable impact of the
project upon all of the elements and topics set forth in Subsection A.
This assessment shall contain a listing and evaluation of adverse
primary and secondary environmental impacts which cannot be
avoided, with particular emphasis upon air or water pollution, increase
in noise, damage to plant, tree and wildfire systems, damage to natural
resources, displacement of people and businesses, displacement of
existing farms, increase in sedimentation and siltation, stormwater
71.Editor's Note: The Natural Resources Inventory Checklist is available in the Township
offices.
§ 142-298 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-299
138:674
runoff, increase in municipal services and consequences to municipal
tax structure. The assessment shall specifically contain the following
reports:
(1) Sewage disposal facilities. The report shall contain information
demonstrating that sewage can be disposed of through facilities to
preclude air and water pollution, and:
(a) A plan for disposal with a detailed description of expected
quantity and classification of sewage effluent and acceptance
approval in writing by the receiving facility; and
(b) Compliance with all state and local sewage and health
regulations.
(2) Solid waste disposal. A plan for disposal by means of a facility
operating in compliance with the State Sanitary Code, including
suitable temporary on-site storage.
(3) Hazardous waste disposal. Identification and satisfactory
provisions for disposal of hazardous materials as defined by the
State of New Jersey.
(4) Water supply and water quality. Evidence that an adequate potable
water supply is available and the ratio of total anticipated demand
to available supply, with source, shall be indicated. By reference to
any study of water quality in the Township, the degradation of
water quality shall be analyzed and reported.
(5) Surface water runoff (drainage). A plan to comply with municipal
ordinances.
(6) Air quality. A statement of anticipated effects on air quality due to
on-site activities such as heating, incineration, any processing of
materials and traffic. Compliance with federal and New Jersey
standards is required.
(7) Traffic (pedestrian and vehicular). An inventory of existing traffic
and a statement of the projected effect of anticipated traffic on all
proposed or existing roads within the Township which have a
rational nexus to the project.
(8) Noise. A statement of anticipated effects on noise levels, magnitude
and characteristics related to on-site activities and proposed
methods of control.
(9) Artificial light. A statement of the anticipated effects on light levels,
magnitude and characteristics related to on-site activities and
proposed methods of control with particular attention to the
control of sky glow.
(10) Demography. A statement of the on-site and off-site effect on the
utilization of public facilities due to changes in population density.
§ 142-299 JUNKYARDS § 142-299
138:675
§ 142-300. Filing requirements; fees.
(11)Wetlands. A letter of interpretation from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection indicating the absence of
freshwater wetlands or indicating the presence and verifying
delineation of the boundaries of freshwater wetlands.
D. Statement of alternatives. A statement of considered alternatives in
project concept, construction and operation shall include a description
of steps to be taken to achieve minimal environmental damage and shall
be accompanied by necessary maps, schedules and other explanatory
data as may be needed to clarify and explain the action to be taken.
E. Statement of impact on resources. A statement concerning any
irreversible or irretrievable commitment of resources which would be
involved in the proposed project, should it be implemented, shall be
included.
F. Statement of permits required. All municipal, county, state and federal
permits required for the project shall be listed together with a
statement of the status of the applicant's efforts to comply with all such
requirements and a project timetable for completion of compliance with
all permit requirements.
A. Filing. For those applications requiring Joint Planning Board or other
appropriate board review, an original and 20 copies of the
environmental impact study, including all maps and plans and other
supporting documents and a reverse line sepia, shall be filed with the
Joint Planning Board or other appropriate board. For those applications
certified as acceptable by the Joint Planning Board or other appropriate
board and requiring Township Engineer review, an original and five
copies of the environmental impact study, including all maps and plans
and other supporting documents, shall be filed with the Township Clerk,
who shall distribute two copies to the Township Engineer and one copy
each to the Construction Official and the appropriate board engineer
for their information.
B. Fees. Each applicant shall pay a filing fee to the Township based on the
following schedule. [Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
(1) A minimum fee of $250 shall be paid for each application.
(2) Whenever a site plan is involved, the filing fee shall be the
minimum fee of $500 plus a sum equal to $100 for each acre or part
thereof contained in the affected portion of the site.
(3) Whenever a subdivision is involved, the filing fee shall be the
minimum fee of $1,500 plus $100 for each lot proposed to be
created by the application.
(4) Whenever both a site plan and subdivision are involved, the filing
fee shall be the amounts quoted in Subsection B(2) and (3) above.
§ 142-299 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-301
138:676
§ 142-301. Action by Joint Planning Board or other appropriate
board.
A. Review and approval.
(1) The Joint Planning Board or other appropriate board shall have a
period of 60 days after the filing of a complete environmental
impact study, as determined by the Township Engineer, to review
the study and act thereon, provided that, whenever land
subdivision or site plan approval is applied for, the Joint Planning
Board or other appropriate board shall complete its review and
action on the environmental impact study within the same period of
time within which the Joint Planning Board or other appropriate
board is required to act upon the application for subdivision or site
plan approval. The time within which the Joint Planning Board or
other appropriate board may act may be extended with the consent
of the applicant.
(2) In reviewing an environmental impact study, the Joint Planning
Board or other appropriate board shall take into consideration the
effect of the applicant's proposal upon all aspects of the
environment, including, but not limited to, water quality, water
supply, protection of watercourses, protection of aquifers, sewage
disposal, soil erosion, protection of trees and vegetation, protection
of farmland and open space, protection of air, protection of wildlife
and wildlife habitats, protection of aesthetics, historical sites and
archaeological features and the minimization of any nuisances or
adverse effects upon noise and light levels and characteristics. At
the applicant's expense, the Joint Planning Board or other
appropriate board shall submit the environmental impact study for
review and comment to all governmental bodies and experts as it
may deem appropriate. The Joint Planning Board or other
appropriate board shall take into consideration the effect of the
applicant's proposed project upon all aspects of the environment as
outlined above as well as the sufficiency of the applicant's
proposals for dealing with any immediate or projected primary or
secondary adverse environmental effects. In particular, the Joint
Planning Board or other appropriate board must be satisfied that
point and nonpoint pollution of streams and groundwater can be
avoided and stormwater runoff from the site so controlled as to
preclude on-site and off-site erosion and that there is no increase of
potential for downstream flooding. Additionally, the Joint Planning
Board or other appropriate board must conclude that the
applicant's project will not result in harmful effects to the local or
regional environment. The Joint Planning Board or other
appropriate board shall not approve any submission under this
article unless it determines and finds that the proposed
development:
(a) Will not result in harmful effects to the environment.
§ 142-301 JUNKYARDS § 142-301
138:677
§ 142-302. Action by Township Engineer.
(b) Has been designed and conceived with a view toward the
protection of regional resources.
(c) Will not place a disproportionate or excessive demand upon the
total resources available for such proposal or for any future
proposals.
B. Conditions. The steps to be taken to minimize adverse environmental
impacts during construction and operation which may be approved by
the Joint Planning Board or other appropriate board shall constitute
conditions of the approval of the environmental study, together with
such other conditions as the Joint Planning Board or other appropriate
board may impose. All work may be stopped by either the Township or
appropriate board engineer if specified construction restraints are not
followed. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until compliance
shall have been made with all conditions.
A. Review and approval by the Township Engineer.
(1) The Township Engineer shall have a period of 45 days after the
filing of a complete environmental impact study filed pursuant to
§ 142-298B to review the study and act thereon. The time within
which the Township Engineer may act may be extended with the
consent of the applicant.
(2) In reviewing an environmental impact study, the Township
Engineer shall take into consideration the effect of the applicant's
proposed project upon all aspects of the environment as outlined
above as well as the sufficiency of the applicant's proposal for
dealing with any immediate or projected primary or secondary
adverse environmental effects. In particular, he must be satisfied
that point and nonpoint pollution of streams and groundwater can
be avoided and stormwater runoff from the site so controlled as to
preclude on-site and off-site erosion and that there is no increase of
potential for downstream flooding. Additionally, the Township
Engineer must conclude that the applicant's project will not result
in harmful effects to the local or regional environment. The
Township Engineer shall not approve any submission under this
article unless he determines and finds that the proposed
development:
(a) Will not result in harmful effects to the environment.
(b) Has been designed and conceived with a view toward the
protection of regional resources.
(c) Will not place a disproportionate or excessive demand upon the
total resources available for such proposal or for any future
proposals.
§ 142-301 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-302
138:678
§ 142-303. Public and quasi-public projects.
An environmental impact study as required by this article shall also be
submitted as to all public or quasi-public projects unless they are exempt
from the requirements of local law by supervening county, state or federal
laws; provided, however, that the provisions of this article shall not apply
to road and road shoulder maintenance work performed by the Township
Department of Public Works or the Bergen County Department of Roads.
§ 142-304. Persons preparing environmental impact studies.
Every environmental impact study required by this article shall be prepared
by a licensed professional engineer of the State of New Jersey, a licensed
professional planner of the State of New Jersey or by such other person as
shall satisfy the appropriate board or the Township Engineer, as the case
may be, that he possesses expertise in the environmental field by virtue of
training, experience or education.
§ 142-305. Waiver.
The Joint Planning Board or other appropriate board may waive the
requirement for an environmental impact study, in whole or in part, if
sufficient evidence is submitted to support a conclusion that the proposed
project will have a negligible environmental impact or that a complete
environmental impact study need not be prepared in order to evaluate
adequately the environmental impact of a project.
§ 142-306. Violations and penalties; abatement of violations.
B. Conditions. The steps to be taken to minimize adverse environmental
impacts during construction and operation which may be approved by
the Township or appropriate board engineer shall constitute conditions
of the approval of the environmental impact study, together with such
other conditions as the Township Engineer may impose. All work may
be stopped by the Township Engineer if specified construction
restraints are not followed.
C. Approved study to accompany applications. An environmental impact
study approved by the appropriate authority shall accompany each
application for a construction permit for a building or structure to
which the provisions of this article apply, and no such construction
permit shall be issued in the absence thereof. An application for a
certificate of occupancy following the completion of any such
construction shall be accompanied by a certificate issued by the
Township Engineer stating that there has been compliance with the
approved study and all conditions thereof, and no certificate of
occupancy shall be issued in the absence of such certification. Upon the
request of an applicant, the Township Engineer shall furnish to the
applicant a written statement of action to be taken by the applicant to
affect compliance.
§ 142-302 JUNKYARDS § 142-306
138:679
A. Any person who shall be in noncompliance with the requirement to
obtain approval of an environmental impact study in accordance with
the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this article
and shall be subject to the penalty set forth below; provided, however,
that the foregoing shall not apply to any person engaged in an activity
which is exempt under § 142-298C or 142-303 or in an activity as to
which the Joint Planning Board or other appropriate board has waived
the requirement for an environmental impact statement.
B. Any person who shall perform any work on any development or other
project, with respect to which an environmental impact study has been
approved in accordance with this article, in a manner which is contrary
to the provisions or conditions thereof designed to minimize adverse
environmental impacts during construction and who shall not, within
five days after receiving written notice from the Township Engineer, or
his designee, of deviation from the aforesaid provisions and conditions,
undertake to affect compliance with such provisions or conditions shall
be guilty of a violation of this article.
C. The Township Engineer, or his designee, shall be the enforcing official
and shall determine the time required to abate the violation.
D. Any person who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
§ 1-14. Each day that a violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 142-306 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-306
138:680
Part 13
[Adopted 3-13-2006 By OrdS. tNeoe.p 1 S4l4o-p2e0s06; Amended In Its Entirety
4-9-2007 By Ord. No. 178-2007]
ARTICLE LXIV
Regulating Intensity of Use in Steep Slope Areas
§ 142-307. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the intensity of use in areas
of steeply sloping terrain in order to limit soil loss, erosion, excessive
stormwater runoff, the degradation of surface water and to maintain the
natural topography and drainage patterns of land.
§ 142-308. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to any subdivision, site plan or land
disturbance application located in the Township, as defined in the Township
Land Use Law, or any project defined by the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act. Land disturbance for the purpose of this article shall mean any
activity involving the clearing, cutting, excavation, grading, filling, storing,
transporting or the covering by artificial or natural materials of land or any
other activity which causes land to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
§ 142-309. Slope class requirements.
A. Except as set forth in Subsection F, on slopes of 25% or greater, no land
disturbance, regrading or stripping of vegetation shall be permitted.
Land disturbance for roadway crossings, utility, or storm or sanitary
sewer construction in areas of twenty-five-percent slopes or greater are
considered variance conditions, and the applicant must affirmatively
demonstrate that the roadway or utility improvements are necessary in
the sloped area and that alternate means are not available to applicant.
The sloped area to be developed, regraded or stripped of vegetation
shall be drawn on the development plans for each individual lot.
B. The maximum disturbance allowed in slope areas between 20.0% to
24.9% shall be 15%.
C. The maximum disturbance allowed in slope areas between 15.0% and
19.9% shall be 30%.
D. The maximum disturbance allowed in slope areas between 0 to 14.9%
may be 100%, provided that other coverage limitations are in
compliance with all applicable ordinances.
E. Site design and grading on slopes greater than 15% shall provide the
minimum disruption of view corridors and scenic vistas and shell
preserve significant natural topographic features and vegetation to the
greatest extent possible.
§ 142-307 JUNKYARDS § 142-309
138:681
§ 142-310. Site plan submission requirements.
All earthmoving or disturbance activities on existing predevelopment slopes
of 10% or greater shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared by a
licensed professional engineer and shall be submitted with all site plan
and subdivision applications and all other land development applications.
For land disturbances not part of land development applications, a site
plan shall be submitted to the Construction Official, who shall refer it to
the Township Engineer for review and determination of completeness. The
Township Engineer shall recommend, within 45 days receipt of a complete
application, either acceptance, rejection, and/or provide recommendations
for compliance with the slope ordinances. Site plans will include at a
minimum the following:
F. Steep slope disturbance of an area less than 400 square feet shall be
permitted on any parcel.
A. Slopes in classes of 0 to 14.9%, 15% to 24.9%, and greater than 25%,
based on two-foot contours analyzed on ten-foot vertical intervals.
B. Location of all existing natural and topographic features [including any
live, woody perennial tree having a diameter of six inches or greater
measured at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground (diameter breast
height)]; water bodies, including but not limited to streams, lakes, and
wetlands and their respective transition areas as affirmed by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
C. Location of all proposed and existing buildings, impervious surfaces
and streets.
D. Location of all existing vegetation, including meadow, forest and scrub
lands, broken down by those areas of vegetation which will be removed
as well as vegetation to be preserved; specifications for revegetation
shall also be included.
E. Soil erosion and sedimentation controls shall be in accordance with the
current edition of the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
in New Jersey by the New Jersey Soil Conservation Committee.
F. A statement and description of the stability of the soils on site and the
appropriateness of the construction method proposed. If it is
determined that vegetative means will be proposed to stabilize the
disturbed slopes (which is a preferred methodology), then the
revegetation plans shall be certified by a certified landscape architect.
G. Hydrology, drainage and flooding analysis to include a statement on the
effect of the proposed development upon water bodies or wetlands in
the vicinity of the project.
H. A statement describing the underlying geology attesting to the stability
of the site.
§ 142-309 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-310
138:682
§ 142-311. Performance standards.
All development proposals which propose development on steep slopes shall
conform to the following performance standards:
§ 142-312. Exemptions.
Land development plans which were granted and perfected final approval
prior to the adoption date of this article shall be exempt from these
requirements.
§ 142-313. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance
requirements.
Development approvals issued pursuant to this article are to be considered
an integral part of development approvals under the subdivision and site
plan review process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility
to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by other
applicable codes, rules, acts or ordinances. In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, general welfare
and the protection of water quality.
I. Calculations of the area of proposed disturbance of each slope class on
each proposed lot as well as within any proposed road right-of-way.
J. Grading plan for the construction site and all access routes.
K. The Township Engineer shall render a report to the Construction
Official to accept or reject the plan as submitted and/or require specific
conditions be complied with in order for the plan to meet approval. No
construction or soil movement permits shall be issued and no grading
or site clearing shall occur until a site plan including all of the above
items has been reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer.
A. Lands to be preserved in one-hundred-percent open space due to the
presence of steep slopes may be offered for dedication to the Township,
a private land trust, or a nonprofit agency in order to preserve and
maintain the area in its natural state; or
B. Shall be preserved in perpetuity through the preparation of deed
restrictions filed with the County Recording Officer in the form and
description approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 142-310 JUNKYARDS § 142-313
138:683

Part 14
[AdopteTdem1p0o-1r3a-r2y0 S1t5orBaygeO Crdo.n Ntaoi.n 3e0rs5-2015]
ARTICLE LXV
Use of Temporary Storage Containers
§ 142-314. Definition.
A "temporary storage container" also referred to as a "portable storage
container (PSC)," shall mean a container designed for the outdoor storage
of personal property for temporary or permanent use, which is to be
delivered and removed by vehicle.
§ 142-315. Permit required.
No temporary storage container shall be allowed on any private property in
the Township of River Vale unless a storage container permit is issued prior
to the placement of such unit for the length of time as provided herein:
§ 142-316. Regulations.
A. The owner or occupant of the site where the unit is to be placed shall
apply for a storage container permit to the Construction Code Official
or his designee. The applicant shall pay, upon issuance of the storage
container permit, a required fee of $50.
B. The storage container permit shall be valid for 60 days. Upon the
request of the owner or occupant of the site to renew the permit, the
Construction Code Official or his designee shall inspect the site where
the PSC is located to determine whether such permit should be
extended. Such permit may be extended up to four additional thirty-day
period(s) upon the approval of the Construction Code Official or his
designee. An additional fee of $30 shall be paid for the extension of
such permit for a thirty-day additional period. In no event shall a
container be placed on any site in the Township of River Vale for more
than 180 days within a twelve-month period without approval of the
Joint Planning Board, said approval to be in the form of a duly adopted
and memorialized resolution authorizing said container for a period in
excess of the one-hundred-eighty-day aggregate limit set forth herein.
C. No such permit shall be issued to any user who is in violation of any
zoning or property maintenance ordinance of the Township of River
Vale unless approved by the zoning official. Furthermore, the owner or
occupant of any property upon which a PSC is in place upon the
effective date of this section shall be required to obtain a permit under
this section within 30 days of the effective date hereof.
A. Location. A temporary storage container shall be placed only in the
driveway, allotted off-street parking spaces, or upon an asphalt,
concrete or other improved surface on the property. The following
provisions shall also apply:
§ 142-314 JUNKYARDS § 142-316
138:685
(1) No more than one temporary storage container shall be permitted
on any single Tax Map lot.
(2) No temporary storage container shall be placed in the public
easements or rights-of-way, nor shall it obstruct the sidewalk.
(3) No temporary storage container shall be placed within five feet of a
neighboring property line.
(4) A temporary storage container shall be set back at least 15 feet
from the principal building on the lot.
(5) No temporary storage container shall occupy an area greater than
5% of the total lot area at which it is located.
(6) The owner or occupant of the site where the unit is to be placed
shall utilize existing buffers when determining the location for a
temporary storage container to screen the container from adjoining
properties.
(7) A temporary storage container shall not obstruct circulation for
vehicles, particularly emergency vehicles.
(8) A temporary storage container shall not be placed in an area where
its placement may reduce parking to a level inconsistent with the
Code of the Township of River Vale and the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
B. Size. No temporary storage container shall exceed eight feet in height,
eight feet in width and 16 feet in length.
C. Use. A temporary storage container shall be utilized on private property
only for the limited purpose of temporarily storing common household
items such as furniture, clothing or other household belongings, coming
from or to a structure on the property that is being renovated or sold.
(1) The following items are expressly prohibited from being stored or
kept within a temporary storage container: hazardous substances,
including chemical, flammable or explosive materials, firearms,
ammunition, prescription drugs or narcotics, any material or
contraband the possession of which is unlawful, food, other than as
packaged for sale in cans, jars or bottles and for use by the
occupant of the dwelling upon the lot where the unit is permitted,
and solid waste, recyclables, construction or demolition debris,
commercial items or property for use other than at the premises
where the unit is located.
(2) In no event shall a temporary storage container be used for
temporary habitation of humans or animals.
D. Signage. A temporary storage container shall have no signage other
than the name, address and telephone number of the person or entity
engaged in the business of renting or otherwise placing the unit.
§ 142-316 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-316
138:686
§ 142-317. Violations and penalties.
E. Lighting. There shall be no lighting fixtures attached to a temporary
storage container, nor shall any lighting fixture be solely utilized to light
a container.
F. Maintenance. A temporary storage container shall be in good condition,
free from evidence of deterioration, weathering, discoloration, rust,
ripping, tearing, or other holes or breaks. When not in use, the
container shall be locked at all times. All temporary storage containers
used in the Township of River Vale shall be equipped with floors that
prevent the intrusion of rats or other vermin into the unit.
A. Any person who allows, keeps, places and/or maintains a temporary
storage container on a site within the Township of River Vale without
obtaining a storage container permit shall be in violation of this article.
B. A violation of any provision of this article is punishable by a fine of not
less than $500 per day for the first such violation, and up to $1,000 per
day for the second or subsequent violation. Upon and after a third
violation, the penalty that may be imposed, in addition to the fine set
forth above, may be imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days,
or both.
C. Any violation issued and fine imposed as a result of a violation of this
article shall be imposed against the property owner even if a tenant of
the property owner obtained the storage container which resulted in
the issuance of a violation or imposition of a fine.
§ 142-316 JUNKYARDS § 142-317
138:687

Part 15
[Adopted 11-2S3t-o2r0a1g5e BOyf BOorda.t sNo. 308-2015]
ARTICLE LXVI
Outdoor Storage of Boats
§ 142-318. Outdoor storage regulations.
The outdoor storage of boats shall be permitted on single-family zoned
properties, provided that:
A. Such storage shall not be located in any required front yard.
B. All boats shall, along with any trailers used in conjunction therewith, be
currently registered in accordance with applicable motor vehicle
requirements and which registration must apply to some person
residing in the residential structure wherein the boat is stored and
which structure shall be such person's domicile.
C. Any such boat stored in accordance with this section shall not be
occupied and shall not be provided with utility connections other than
for the maintenance of such vehicle.
D. The storage of all boats shall be in an area of the side or rear yard and
in a manner so as to not constitute a nuisance or obstruction to any
adjacent property owner.
E. Landscaping shall be installed, on either a temporary or permanent
basis, which shall diminish the extent to which the boat is observable
from any adjacent lot and in direct relationship to the size and height of
such vehicle.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a boat may be parked
anywhere on private residential property temporarily for the purpose of
loading and unloading purposes.
G. In any residential district, the parking or standing of boats of any type
or design in excess of 26 feet in length is prohibited.
§ 142-318 JUNKYARDS § 142-318
138:689

Part 16
Dump[Astdeorps tAednd7 -O2t4h-e2r0 1G7arBbyagOer dO.r N Roe. f3u2s6e -C20on17ta]iners
ARTICLE LXVII
Construction Dumpsters
§ 142-319. Definitions
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CONSTRUCTION DUMPSTER — A roll-off waste container transported to
and from the place of use by trucks or trailers and positioned at a
construction site for the collection and eventual disposal of construction
waste.
§ 142-320. Rules and regulations.
A. Single-family residential zones. No construction dumpster shall be
located within 10 feet of an abutting structure, unless the owner of the
abutting structure has agreed to such and has signed the authorization
form which shall be submitted with the permit application for the
dumpster. No dumpster shall be placed so that it blocks any public
sidewalk or street. The authorization form shall be made available upon
request by the Construction Code Official.
B. Multifamily, commercial and industrial zones. No construction
dumpster shall be located within 10 feet of an abutting residential
property unless the occupant of the abutting dwelling agreed to such
and signs the authorization form which shall be submitted with the
permit application for the dumpster. The authorization form shall be
made available upon request by the Construction Code Official.
C. Dumpsters shall not be placed on any public street, public easements or
rights-of-way or obstruct public sidewalks.
D. Time limitations.
(1) Single-family residential zones. A construction dumpster and any
replacement dumpster placed under this Part may be placed for not
more than a total of 30 days in any six-month period.
(2) Multifamily and commercial. A construction dumpster and any
replacement dumpster placed under this Part may remain in the
site as long as required, but not to exceed a total of six months.
(3) Industrial. A dumpster or any replacement dumpster placed under
this Part may remain on the site as long as needed, but not to
exceed a total of 18 months.
(4) Provided that there is an open construction permit for work on the
property in question, the time limitations set forth in this section
may be liberally extended at the discretion of the Construction
Code Official.
§ 142-319 JUNKYARDS § 142-320
138:691
§ 142-321. Saving clause.
Nothing in this Part shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed pursuant to this Part, nor shall any just or legal right or
remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this Part.
§ 142-322. Violations and penalties.
E. Sanitation. The following requirements shall be maintained while the
construction dumpster is on or at the site:
(1) The area around the dumpster shall be kept free of debris and
litter;
(2) Any dumpster into which animal or vegetable waste or material has
been dumped or deposited shall be removed or emptied within 24
hours;
(3) Any dumpster producing or causing noxious, foul or offensive odors
shall be immediately removed or cleaned to eliminate the odor; and
(4) A full dumpster shall be removed from the site and emptied within
two days.
F. Usage. A dumpster shall only be used to contain and remove debris and
material generated at the location where the dumpster is placed.
G. Identification. The name and telephone number of the owner of the
dumpster and/or the company that is responsible for the dumpster shall
be displayed in a weatherproof manner on the dumpster.
H. Permit required. A permit shall be required for a dumpster. The permit
shall be obtained from the Construction Code Official after paying the
required fee of $25. The permit shall be displayed in a weatherproof
manner on the dumpster.
I. Abatement. Any dumpster not in compliance with this Part is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the Township at
the owner's or responsible person's expense. Abatement shall, at the
Township's option, include the removal and/or the emptying of the
dumpster.
A. Any person who allows, keeps, places and/or maintains a dumpster on a
site within the Township of River Vale without obtaining a dumpster
permit shall be in violation this Part.
B. A violation of any provision of this Part is punishable by a fine of not less
than $500 per day for the first such violation, and up to $1,000 per day
for the second or subsequent violation. Upon and after a third violation,
the penalty that may be imposed, in addition to the fine set forth above,
may be imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 142-320 RIVER VALE CODE § 142-322
138:692
C. Any violation issued and fine imposed as a result of a violation of this
Part shall be imposed against the property owner even if a tenant of the
property owner obtained the storage container which resulted in the
issuance of a violation or imposition of a fine.
§ 142-322 JUNKYARDS § 142-322
138:693
Chapter 146
LIBRARY MATERIALS AND PROPERTY
§ 146-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIBRARY MATERIAL — Any book, periodical, pamphlet, compact disc,
audiovisual material or any other article.
§ 146-2. Unlawful acts.
§ 146-3. Complaints.
The Library Director is authorized to file a complaint in the Municipal Court
for any violation of this chapter.
A. No person shall detain or fail to return any library material, properly on
loan from the Free Public Library of the Township of River Vale, after its
return date. The Library Director shall file a complaint for a violation of
this section, pursuant to the following conditions:
(1) The Library Administration shall send a certified letter, return
receipt requested to the last known address of a person, when that
person has detained library material for a period of six weeks past
the date said library material was due to be returned. The letter
shall inform the person that the library material is overdue and that
he or she may be subject to prosecution for failure to return said
library material. After 30 days have elapsed from the date of
posting by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the letter
demanding return of said library material, the Library Director
shall file a complaint for a violation of this section.
(2) In the case of a minor, the letter shall be sent to the parent or
guardian of the minor involved.
B. No person shall cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage or destroy any
library material or property which is borrowed from, owned by or is in
the custody of such library.
C. No person shall remove any material or any other item or article from
the Free Public Library Building without complying with the rules,
regulations and procedures of the library for the borrowing of such
library material.
D. No person with intent to fraud shall register or furnish a false name or
address or use any card other than the one issued to said person for the
purpose of borrowing any book or other article from such library.
§ 142-322 RIVER VALE CODE § 146-4
146:694
§ 146-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties provided for in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, for each subsequent offense. Said fine is in
addition to any late fees or replacement costs established by the library.
Chapter 149
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 146-4 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 146-4
149:695

ARTICLE I
Payment of Taxes and Assessments
[Adopted 10-27-1988 by Ord. No. 0-16-88 (Ch. 44B, Art. I, of the
1967 Code)]
§ 149-1. Payment required prior to issuance of license or permit.
No license or permit shall be issued with respect to any business or activity,
or to any property where is situated the business or activity for which
the license or permit is sought, unless there shall have first been paid all
delinquent property taxes and assessments for which said property is liable.
§ 149-2. Suspension for nonpayment.
The Township shall suspend any previously issued license or permit at
such time as a tax or an assessment levied upon the property whereon the
licensee or permittee conducts its business or activity shall have remained
unpaid for more than three consecutive quarters.
§ 149-3. Restoration.
The said license or permit shall be restored upon payment of the delinquent
tax or assessment, together with interest accrued and penalties imposed
thereon.
§ 149-4. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to alcoholic beverage licenses or permits issued
pursuant to Title 33 of the New Jersey statutes.72
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 49, Alcoholic Beverages, Art. I, Licensing.
§ 149-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS § 149-4
149:697
Chapter 152
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Litter in parks — See Ch. 166, Art. II. Solid waste collection — See Ch. 210, Art. I.
§ 152-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall
include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle as required and authorized in the ordinance regulating the
disposal of garbage and waste matter in the Township of River Vale. 73
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature:
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing; or
A.
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
B.
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission
fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms
of this subsection shall not apply where an admission fee is charged
or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses
incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event
of any kind when either of the same is held, given or takes place in
connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted
under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety
and good order; provided that nothing contained in this subsection
shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of
any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind,
C.
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Solid Waste, Art. I, Collection.
§ 149-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 152-1
152:698
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 110-2005]
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of
litter.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 110-2005]
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal
Service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical
or current magazine regularly published with no less than four issues per
year, and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter or literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of
a commercial handbill or newspaper.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the Township, owned or used by the Township and
devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 110-2005]
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule
or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
other structure.
without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law
of this state, or under any ordinance of this Township; or
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
§ 152-1 LITTERING § 152-1
152:699
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, malls
and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of River Vale.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 152-2. Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, mall
or other public place within the Township except in public receptacles, in
authorized private receptacles for collection or in official Township dumps.
This shall not, however, exclude the dumping of garden debris in the public
dump, as specified and at times specified by the Township Council.
§ 152-3. Placing litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon street, sidewalk or other public place or
upon private property.
§ 152-4. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, mall or other
public place within the Township the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their
business premises free of litter.
§ 152-5. Duty to maintain commercial places free of litter.
[Amended 9-15-1977 by Ord. No. 0-11-77]
No person owning, occupying or in control of any commercial place,
including parking and delivery areas or areas of common use in a shopping
center, shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, mall or other public
place within the Township the accumulation of litter from any building or lot
or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. In addition, the owner or
occupant of any commercial place shall keep said premises, parking areas,
delivery areas and other adjacent areas which are a part of such commercial
place free from litter.
§ 152-1 RIVER VALE CODE § 152-6
152:700
§ 152-6. Litter thrown from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Township, or upon
private property.
§ 152-7. Truck loads causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Township unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley,
mall or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or
truck within the Township, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit
in any street, alley, mall or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances,
litter or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 152-8. Litter in parks, playgrounds and recreation areas.
[Amended 10-27-1994 by Ord. No. 0-14-94]
§ 152-9. Commercial handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street, mall or other public place within
the Township, nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place within the Township; provided,
however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, mall or other
public place within the Township for any person to hand out or distribute,
without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any
person willing to accept it.
§ 152-10. Placing handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
A. No person shall throw, deposit, carry or cause to be carried any glass
receptacles, glass bottles, glass containers or other such item in any
park, playground or recreation area within the Township.
B. No person shall throw or deposit glass receptacles, glass bottles, glass
containers or other such items in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or
other body in any park, playground, recreation area or elsewhere
within the Township.
C. Persons transporting glass receptacles, glass bottles, glass containers
or other such items to any park, playground or recreation area within
the Township shall first place said items in public receptacles or in
authorized containers in such a manner as to prevent it from being
carried, thrown or deposited by the elements or any person upon the
aforementioned areas.
§ 152-6 LITTERING § 152-10
152:701
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 152-11. Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 152-12. Distribution of handbills on posted property prohibited.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous
position, near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No
Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar
notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not
desire to be molested or have the right of privacy disturbed, or to have any
such handbills left upon such premises.
§ 152-13. Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises;
exception.
§ 152-14. Dropping litter from aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the
Township any litter, handbill, or any other object.
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such
private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted as provided in this chapter, such person,
unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place
or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises
if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such
handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks,
streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so
used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulation.
B. Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to
newspapers (as defined herein), except that newspapers shall be placed
on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place or upon private property.
§ 152-10 RIVER VALE CODE § 152-15
152:702
§ 152-15. Posting notices prohibited.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except
as may be authorized or required by law.
§ 152-16. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Township, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 152-17. Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized receptacles for
collection.
§ 152-18. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Township, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 152-19. Clearing of litter from open private property by Township.
A. Notice to remove. The Township Health Officer or his designated agent
is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or
vacant private property within the Township, or the agent of such
owner, to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property
which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall
be by certified mail, addressed to said owner at his last known address
or may be by personal service upon the owner or his agent.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare within 10 days after receipt of written
notice provided for in Subsection A above or within 10 days after the
date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the United
States Postal Service because of its inability to make delivery thereof,
provided that the same was properly addressed to the last known
address of such owner or agent, the Township Health Officer or his
designated agent is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the
disposing of such litter or to order its disposal by the Township.
C. Charge included in tax bill. When the Township has effected the
removal of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual
§ 152-15 LITTERING § 152-19
152:703
§ 152-19.1. Enforcement. [Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 110-2005]
The Police Department and Division of Building and Code Enforcement of
the Township of River Vale shall enforce this chapter.
§ 152-20. Violations and penalties. [Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No.
110-2005]
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 152-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14. Each day
such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 20% per annum from
the date of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior
thereto, shall be due and payable by said owner at the time of payment
of such bill. [Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 106-2005]
D. Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the
Township is not paid by such owner within 10 days after the disposal of
such litter, as provided for in Subsections A and B, above, then, and in
that case, the Health Officer shall cause to be recorded in the Tax
Collector's office of the Township a sworn statement showing the cost
and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done, and the
location of the property on which said work was done. The recordation
of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the
property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in
principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection until final
payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be collected in
the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and, further, shall be
subject to a delinquent penalty of 20% in the event same is not paid in
full on or before the date the tax bill upon which said charge appears
becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with
the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal
formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done
properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person
concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a
charge against the property designated or described in the statement
and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. [Amended
4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 106-2005]
§ 152-19 RIVER VALE CODE § 152-21
152:704
Chapter 159
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loud and boisterous conduct at garage
sales — See Ch. 123, § 123-5.
§ 152-21 NOISE § 152-21
159:705

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 12-11-1950 (Ch. 48 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 159-1. Unnecessary noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to make, create, cause, suffer, encourage or permit to be
made any unnecessary, loud, prolonged or disturbing noise within the limits
of the Township of River Vale.
§ 159-2. Enumeration of unnecessary noises.
The following are declared to be unnecessary and disturbing noises and
a violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive:
A. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any premises, within any
building or on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except
as a necessary warning or danger signal.
B. The playing of any radio, phonograph, musical or other instrument or
device, or the using of a loudspeaker or similar device, in such manner
and of such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose
of persons in any dwelling, residence, tavern, store or other building or
upon other properties. [Amended 4-9-1970]
C. The use of any drum, band, loudspeaker or other instrument or device
for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any rally,
performance, show, carnival, fair, or the sale of either real or personal
property, except when permission has been granted by the Township
Council or some authorized person or committee acting under its
authority. This shall not be construed to prevent or limit religious,
nonsubversive political or patriotic activities, if conducted between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., except insofar as the same may be
limited by Subdivision G hereof.
D. The use, operation or running of any automobile, motorcycle,
mechanical equipment or vehicle so out of repair or in such manner as
to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise,
whether upon the streets or highways or adjacent thereto.
E. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any boiler, except to give
notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning or danger
signal.
F. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any motor vehicle or
engine, except through a muffler which effectively prevents loud,
explosive noises therefrom, or discharging any pistol, gun, firearm,
weapon or explosive. This subsection shall not prohibit persons duly
licensed from hunting during the open seasons upon unposted lands,
where permitted by the owners of posted lands, or elsewhere within the
§ 159-1 NOISE § 159-2
159:707
§ 159-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, in the discretion of the
Judge or Municipal Court before whom or which such conviction shall be
had.
Township of River Vale not limited or restricted against hunting during
hunting seasons; nor shall it prevent patriotic observances under
proper municipal control.74
G. The creation of any excessive or unnecessary noise on any street, or
grounds adjacent thereto, within 200 feet of any school, place of
worship, public meeting or court while the same is in session or any
hospital, rest home or sanatorium at any time, which interferes with the
orderly, quiet and effective conduct and operation of the same.
H. Construction activities shall be prohibited during certain hours in
accordance with § 90-5 of the Code. [Amended 12-21-1993 by Ord.
No. 0-21-93]
I. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which
disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.75
J. The keeping or having in possession of any animal or bird which emits
or issues any noise, bark, bray, bellow, cry or sound that disturbs the
quiet, comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity.76
K. The idling or standing of any motor vehicle, refrigeration trailer or
other mobile compressor for the purpose of picking up or delivering
goods for resale within the Township of River Vale between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. [Added 12-20-1979 by Ord. No. 0-29-79]
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Firearms.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 174, Peddling and Soliciting.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Animals.
§ 159-2 RIVER VALE CODE § 159-3
159:708
ARTICLE II
Commercial Activities
[Adopted 5-9-2005 by Ord. No. 114-2005]
§ 159-4. Hours of operation.
§ 159-5. Emergencies.
In case of urgent necessity or in the interest of public health or safety, the
Superintendent of Pubic works or the Chief of Police may grant a permit for
excavation, demolition, construction, repair or alteration work for a period
not to exceed three days, by the terms of which permit such work may be
carried on during otherwise prohibited hours.
§ 159-6. Prohibited noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made
or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others or to create any unreasonably loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noise of such character, intensity or duration as is detrimental
to the life or health of any individual or persons within the limits of the
Township of River Vale.
§ 159-7. Exception for emergencies.
Noise caused in the performance of emergency work for the immediate
safety, health or welfare of the community to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity shall not be subject to the provisions
of this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit law
enforcement, ambulance, fire or other emergency personnel to make
excessive noise in the performance of their duties when such noise is clearly
unnecessary.
A. Commercial use of power tools or landscaping and yard maintenance
and motorized construction equipment is permitted in the Township of
River Vale in all residential and commercial zones during the following
times only:
(1) From Monday to Friday, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.;
(2) On Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.; and
(3) Such operation is prohibited entirely on Sundays and state and
federal designated holidays.
B. This article shall not apply to power machinery used for ice or snow
removal or residential trash removal.
§ 159-4 NOISE § 159-8
159:709
§ 159-8. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Police Department of the
Township of River Vale to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 159-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, as defined in this article, who shall be found guilty of violating
any provision of this article shall, for each offense, be fined a sum of not
more than $500 or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the court hearing the complaint. Each day of such
violation's continuance shall be considered a separate offense and shall be
separately punishable.
§ 159-10. Other remedies; abatement.
The operation or maintenance of any source in violation of any provision
of this article shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and
may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction or in any manner available for
the abatement of public nuisances.
§ 159-8 RIVER VALE CODE § 159-10
159:710
Chapter 166
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Athletics — See Ch. 3, Art. IX.
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in
public — See Ch. 49, Art. II.
Operation of all-terrain vehicles on public
lands — See Ch. 53.
Littering — See Ch. 152.
Noise — See Ch. 159.
§ 159-10 NOISE § 159-10
159:711

ARTICLE I
Certification of Coaches
[Adopted 11-20-1990 by Ord. No. 0-16-90 (Ch. 57D of the 1967
Code)]
§ 166-1. Certification course required. [Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 106-2005]
All coaches and managers participating in programs sponsored and
supervised by the Department of Athletics, as well as programs
administered by privately organized athletic associations wherein the
Township provides insurance coverage, shall enroll in and complete an
authorized certification course.
§ 166-2. Approval of Director.
Such certification course shall be a recognized program and shall have the
prior approval of the Director of Athletics and the Director shall promulgate
rules and regulations for administration of the certification process and the
requirement for periodic renewals.
§ 166-3. Time limits.
All persons covered by the terms of this article shall complete the required
course within the time limits set by the Director of Athletics.
§ 166-1 NOISE § 166-3
159:713

ARTICLE II
Recreation Facilities
[Adopted 4-26-2001 by Ord. No. 0-3-01R.(Ch. 58 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 166-4. Facilities designated.
For the purposes of this article, the Township's recreation facilities shall
include all premises utilized for recreational purposes, which are owned or
controlled by the Township, as well as the grounds surrounding same, the
structures and buildings thereon, and the areas adjacent thereto which are
set aside for the parking of vehicles and bicycles.
§ 166-5. Hours of operation.
§ 166-6. Use of facilities. [Amended 4-25-2002 by Ord. No. 0-08-02;
7-10-2003 by Ord. No. 0-10-03; 7-25-2005 by Ord. No. 126-2005;
5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 300-2015]
A. Hours for use of recreation facilities are as follows: [Amended
4-25-2002 by Ord. No. 0-08-02; 10-31-2002 by Ord. No. 0-21-02;
7-25-2005 by Ord. No. 126-2005]
(1) The Mark Lane Complex shall be open for use between the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. every day of the week, with the exception of
the walking path which shall be accessible to the public from
sunrise to 10:00 p.m. and with the exception of Saturday nights,
when two banks of lights may remain on until 11:00 p.m. solely for
cleanup. The Mayor may waive these requirements in emergency
situations.
(2) Ranges Soccer Field shall be open for use between the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 9:30 p.m.
(3) All other recreation facilities shall be open for use between 8:00
a.m. to 9:30 p.m.
B. Any person utilizing a recreation facility at a time other than provided
herein shall be in violation of this article. The hours of operation shall
be posted at each facility. The facilities shall be subject to further
closure as provided for in this article.
A. A permit from the Department of Athletics shall be required for use of
all facilities except tennis courts, basketball courts, and walking paths.
Applicants must have the permit in their possession at the facility
during use. The permit application shall be on a form established by the
Department of Athletics.
B. The use of basketball courts and tennis courts is hereby restricted to
the residents of the Township and their guests and to programs
sanctioned by the Township.
§ 166-4 NOISE § 166-6
159:715
§ 166-7. Fees.77 [Added 5-23-2002 by Ord. No. 0-10-02; amended
3-14-2005 by Ord. No. 101-2005; 3-13-2006 by Ord. No. 145-2006;
3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 247-2011; 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 300-2015]
C. Township-sponsored groups have priority use of all facilities.
Thereafter, permits shall be issued on a first-come-first-granted basis.
D. Each organization that wishes to use any recreational facility must
provide the Township Business Administrator with a certificate of
insurance and sign a hold-harmless form provided by the Township. The
certificate of insurance must show evidence of $1,000,000 general
liability coverage, and the Township must be named as an additional
insured. Township-sponsored groups are exempt from this requirement.
E. The Director of Athletics shall have the discretion to reasonably
schedule seasons and events.
F. Fees for the use of any recreational facilities will be determined in
accordance with § 166-7 (Fees).
A. Summer program. Fees for the summer program shall be as follows:
(1) Swimming: $20 per child.
(2) Camp Have Some Fun (There will be a multi-child discount for
Camp Have Some Fun campers.):
(a) Monday to Friday: $260 per camper.
(b) Monday, Wednesday and Friday only: $230 per camper.
(c) Tuesday and Thursday only: $200 per camper.
B. Recreational facilities. Subject to the exclusions provided in Subsection
B(5) and (6), fees for the use of recreational facilities shall be as follows:
(1) Per time slot for field use by a resident team or resident
corporation: $75.
(2) Per time slot for field use by a nonresident team or nonresident
corporation: $150.
(3) Definitions. As used herein the following terms will have the
meanings set forth below:
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Any organization that is not
organized or and does not exist for the purpose of making a profit
and which does not pay its coaches or directors a fee or salary.
NONRESIDENT CORPORATION — Any company that does not own
or lease commercial property within the Township of River Vale.
77.Editor’s Note: See also § 105-5.
§ 166-6 RIVER VALE CODE § 166-7
159:716
NONRESIDENT TEAM — Any athletic team that does not have at
least 75% of its roster filled with River Vale residents.
RESIDENT CORPORATION — Any company that owns or leases
commercial property within the Township of River Vale.
RESIDENT TEAM — Any athletic team comprised of at least 75%
of its roster with River Vale residents.
TIME SLOT — An uninterrupted two-hour time period, or any part
thereof, that a field is being used by an approved team.
(4) Any field use requiring use of lights will require an additional fee of
10% of the total applicable fee.
(5) There will be no credit provided for any unused field time slots.
(6) Notwithstanding the foregoing, any athletic team that is part of the
following organizations shall be excluded from the provisions
hereof:
(a) River Vale All Star Basketball (RVAB);
(b) River Vale Basketball Association (RVBA);
(c) River Vale Rascals Preschool Soccer;
(d) River Vale T-Ball;
(e) River Vale Baseball/Softball (RVBSA);
(f) River Vale Junior Football and Cheerleading (RVJFA);
(g) River Vale Youth Soccer Association (RVYSA);
(h) Pascack Valley Youth Soccer;
(i) Pascack Valley Junior Wrestling;
(j) Pascack Lacrosse;
(k) River Vale Board of Education; and
(l) Pascack Valley High School.
(7) Also notwithstanding the foregoing, any athletic team comprised of
at least 75% of its roster with River Vale residents and which
operates as a nonprofit organization shall be excluded from the
provisions hereof.
(8) Fees for special events (including charity events, tournaments,
fundraisers, etc.) will be determined at the discretion of the
Department of Athletics on an event-by-event basis.
(9) Any person (including any team, corporation, or other
organization) found in violation of the provisions hereof will be
subject to a fine not to exceed twice the amount of fees that would
§ 166-7 NOISE § 166-7
159:717
§ 166-8. (Reserved)78
§ 166-9. Emergency regulations. [Amended 7-25-2005 by Ord. No.
126-2005]
The Director of Athletics and, in the Director's absence, the Mayor or
a person designated by the Mayor, is hereby authorized to close any
recreation facility in order to maintain and/or prevent harm to the facility.
Notice of any emergency closing shall be posted at the facility and shall
negate any permit previously provided.
§ 166-9.1. Posting of signs. [Added 7-25-2005 by Ord. No.
126-2005]
All recreational facilities shall be posted with signs depicting the hours of
operation.
§ 166-10. Unauthorized use of parking facilities.
It shall be unlawful for any resident or nonresident to park or operate a
motor vehicle in any recreation facility area, other than in a designated
area.
§ 166-11. Miscellaneous provisions. [Amended 4-25-2002 by Ord.
No. 0-08-02]
have otherwise been imposed upon such person pursuant to the
provisions of this section. In addition to any fines imposed hereof,
violations of this section may result in the loss of future field use
privileges.
A. Alcohol/drugs prohibited. No person under the influence of alcohol or
drugs shall be permitted within a Township recreation facility area. No
person shall possess or consume alcoholic beverages within any
recreation facility without authorization of the governing body in
accordance with law.
B. Littering prohibited. No person shall leave bottles, broken glass, ashes,
wastepaper or other rubbish within a recreational facility except in a
properly provided receptacle designated for that purpose.
C. Property damage prohibited. No person shall cut, break, dig up or in
any way mutilate any railing, seat, fence, structure or any other object
within a recreational facility.
D. Fires and fireworks. No person shall build, light or maintain a fire
within a recreation facility except in receptacles provided for that
purpose and only with permission from the Department of Athletics. No
78.Editor's Note: Former § 166-8, Use of premier fields, was repealed 7-25-2005 by Ord. No.
126-2005.
§ 166-7 RIVER VALE CODE § 166-11
159:718
§ 166-12. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of any of the provisions of this article, the
person and/or organization convicted of the violation shall be subject to
the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14.
The fine shall be doubled for conviction of a second offense. Any person or
organization convicted of a second offense shall be placed on probation for
a period of six months. Any person or organization convicted of violating
this article while on probation shall be prohibited from obtaining a permit
for two years.
person shall discharge or set off any fireworks within any recreation
facility without permission from the governing body.
E. Firearms and hunting prohibited. No person shall discharge any
weapon or firearm within the boundaries of a recreation facility or
possess any weapons. No person shall hunt, trap, molest, remove,
injure or kill any animal or disturb its habitat within the area of a
recreation facility.
F. Maintenance. Each using group shall police the recreation facility after
each event to rid the facility of any litter. Failure to clean such facility
shall be a violation of this article.
G. Dogs are prohibited.
H. Golf is prohibited.
§ 166-11 NOISE § 166-12
159:719

ARTICLE III
Use of Tobacco Products
[Adopted 7-24-2003 by Ord. No. 0-12-03]
§ 166-13. Prohibition against smoking of cigarettes and use of
tobacco products.
Smoking of cigarettes, pipes, cigars and other tobacco products within
public parks, playgrounds, ball fields, publicly owned or leased swimming
pools and all other recreational areas leased or owned by the Township of
River Vale shall be prohibited within the Township of River Vale.
§ 166-14. Definitions.
Public parks, playgrounds, ball fields, publicly owned or leased swimming
pools and all other recreational areas leased or owned by the Township
shall mean any place or area within the Township upon which the public is
invited or upon which the public is permitted and where children gather for
recreational activities.
§ 166-15. Violations and penalties.
Any minor or adult person who has been found to be in violation of this
article shall be subject to the following:
§ 166-16. Signage.
The Township will attach permanent signage indication "Smoke-Free Zone"
at all municipal park and recreation areas.
§ 166-17. Enforcement.
A. For a first offense by an adult, the penalties provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14; and for a first offense by a minor, a
warning will be issued.
B. At the Judge's discretion, the requirement that the offender participate
at his or her own expense in an educational/cessation program
determined by the Health Officer of the Township of River Vale
concerning the dangers of smoking and tobacco use.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Chief and his/her designee
and/or Health Officer and his/her designee of the Township of River
Vale.
B. Any citizen may initiate enforcement by registering a complaint with
the Police Department of Health Department.
C. Any citizen may inform any person perceived to be violating this article
of the provisions of this ordinance.
§ 166-13 NOISE § 166-17
159:721

ARTICLE IV
Poplar Road Sanctuary Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 0-19-04]
§ 166-18. Purpose.
This area of land shall be known as the Poplar Road Nature Sanctuary and is
located and described as approximately 18 acres, located at the south side
of Poplar Road, Block 1002, Lots 1.01 and 1.02, as shown and designated on
the Township Tax Assessment Map. This article shall regulate activity and
conduct in the Poplar Road Nature Sanctuary for the following purposes:
§ 166-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
ADULT — Any person 18 years of age or older.
ANIMAL LITTER — All fecal matter and excrement issuing from dogs or
other domestic animals.
DITCH — A linear topographic depression with bed and banks of human
construction which conveys water to and from a site.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any tamed animal, such as a dog or cat, which
normally depends on humans for food, shelter and care.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITAT — Any natural area that provides food, shelter, breeding or
nesting for wild animal species.
A. The preservation and protection of natural open space, including
woodlands and wetlands.
B. The protection of the Township's water supply, through the reduction of
litter and non-point-source pollution.
C. The preservation of native and wild plant species, including trees,
shrubs and wildflowers, and the protection of native and wild animal
species.
D. The maintenance of the property for passive recreation and the health,
safety and enjoyments of visitors, and for nature education programs.
E. The protection of Township property, such as structures, utilities and
signs.
F. To help maintain the peace and privacy of adjacent property owners and
the value of their properties.
G. To meet all the standards and requirements set forth by the New Jersey
Green Acres Program and its Bureau of Compliance and Stewardship.
§ 166-18 NOISE § 166-19
159:723
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has
been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper or
other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof.
MOTORIZED VEHICLE — Any motor-powered conveyance, including, but
not limited to cars, trucks, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorized carts,
scooters and snowmobiles.
NATIVE — Describing a plant or animal species having originated, growing
or living naturally in a particular region.
NATURALIZED — Describing a plant or animal species which has
successfully adapted to an area in which it did not originally occur.
OPEN SPACE — Any undeveloped parcel of land, including farms, ball fields,
watersheds and forests, generally used for the purposes of conservation,
recreation or agriculture.
PASSIVE RECREATION — Any nonactive and generally noncompetitive
activity, such as walking, hiking, jogging and bird watching, which does not
involve the use of thrown or propelled objects, like balls, disks or darts.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, tin cans,
yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
STREAM — A natural watercourse through which water flows for at least
some part of the year.
STRUCTURE — Any combination of materials forming any construction.
TAMED ANIMAL — Any animal typically found living in wild areas, but
which has been fed and cared for by humans.
WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and, under
normal circumstances, does support a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including but not limited to
streams, ditches, ponds, swamps and swales.
WHEELED VEHICLE — Any conveyance with wheels, motorized or
nonmotorized, including bicycles, scooters and skateboards.
WILD ANIMAL — Any animal found living in natural areas which is not
sustained by the care and feeding of humans.
WOODLAND — A natural area characterized by a dense growth of trees and
underbrush and which usually provides animal habitat.
§ 166-20. Prohibited activities.
A. No person shall or permit another to:
§ 166-19 RIVER VALE CODE § 166-20
159:724
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or remove any
bridge, pubic utility or part or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice or
placard, whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post
or other boundary marker or other structure or equipment, facility
or appurtenance whatsoever, either real or personal.
(2) Dig in, regrade or damage in any way any path, trail or access road.
(3) Dig or remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, bushes or plants, downtimber
or other wood or material or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
(4) Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any
pubic service utility into, upon or across the property.
(5) Damage, cut, carve, treat with chemicals, transplant or remove any
tree or plant or willfully injure the bark or roots or pick the stems,
flowers, fruit or leaves of any tree or plant; nor attach any rope,
wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant; nor dig in or
otherwise disturb any stream, stream bank, ditch, swamp,
woodland or grassy area; nor impair the natural beauty or
usefulness of any area.
(6) Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon signs, railings, fences,
monuments, markers or upon any other property not designated or
customarily used for such purposes.
(7) Plant any tree, bush or plant or disperse or plant any seeds.
(8) Hunt, trap, fish or molest, harm, frighten, kill, chase, tease, shoot
or throw any objects at any animal, fish, reptile or bird, or remove
or possess the young of any wild animal or the eggs or nest or
young of any reptile or bird.
B. No person shall throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in any pond, swamp, stream, ditch or storm sewer or drain, or
along the banks of such waters, any substances, matter or thing, liquid
or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
C. No person shall have brought in or dump, deposit or leave on the
property any bottles, cans, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, dirt, dead
animals, leaves, clippings, wood, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or
trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or
contiguous to the property but shall be carried away from the park by
the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere.
D. No person shall use any part of the property for the purpose of
eliminating bodily waste.
§ 166-20 NOISE § 166-21
159:725
§ 166-21. Use of wheeled and motorized or nonmotorized vehicles
prohibited.
No person shall drive, park, stop or stand any motorized, nonmotorized
or wheeled vehicles, including bicycles, scooters or skateboards or
wheelchairs operated by the handicapped, on any area of the property,
including paths and trails, with the exception of those individuals exempt.
§ 166-22. Recreational activities restricted.
All activities shall be limited to passive recreation only. No person shall fly
kites or model airplanes or take part in the playing of any games involving
thrown or otherwise propelled objects, such as balls, Frisbees, horseshoes,
darts or arrows, or any gun-propelled objects, such as BB's, disks or paint
balls.
§ 166-23. Conduct prohibited.
§ 166-24. Presence of dogs and domestic animals. [Amended
2-14-2005 by Ord. No. 100-2005]
No person shall bring, be present, walk or allow any dog, cat or other animal
within the Poplar Road Sanctuary area.
§ 166-25. Protection, feeding and introduction of wild animals.
§ 166-26. Fires and fireworks.
A. No person shall light or smoke any cigar, cigarette or pipe or strike a
match or use a lighter at any time on the property.
B. No person shall have brought alcoholic beverages; nor shall any person
consume alcoholic beverages at any time on the property.
C. No person shall enter the property under the influence of intoxicating
liquor.
A. No person shall willfully kill, injure, harm, disturb, handle or remove
any wild animal, including birds, fish, reptiles, amphibians, crustaceans
or butterflies, nor willfully destroy or disturb any nest, nesting area,
shelter or habitat, including ponds, swamps and streams.
B. No person shall feed in any form, including fruit, bread or birdseed, to
any wild animal, including but not limited to birds, squirrels, chipmunks
and deer.
C. No person shall introduce any nonindigenous animal species to the
property that is not native or naturalized to the wildlands and
watersheds.
A. No person shall build or attempt to build a fire or barbecue anywhere
on the property.
§ 166-21 RIVER VALE CODE § 166-26
159:726
§ 166-27. Conduct and behavior.
§ 166-28. Hours of operation and permits.
B. No person shall bring or have in his possession or set off or otherwise
cause to explode or discharge or burn any firecrackers or other
fireworks or explosives or flammable materials or discharge them or
throw them into any such area of the property from land or highway
adjacent thereto.
C. No person shall burn any materials whatsoever, including but not
limited to matches, flares, candles and paper.
A. No person shall sleep or protractedly lounge on benches or other areas
or engage in threatening, abusive or insulting or indecent language or
engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior that would deprive any
other person of legitimate and peaceful use of the property.
B. No person shall engage in the playing of radios, CD players or other
electronic audio devices, not including cell phones or walkie-talkies,
without the proper use of headphones or earphones.
C. No child or children under the age of 12 shall be permitted entry to the
property unless accompanied by an adult, who shall be responsible for
his, her or their behavior while on the property.
D. No person shall:
(1) Expose or offer for sale any food, article or things, nor shall he/she
station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation,
sale or display of any such article or thing.
(2) Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any
article or service for sale or hire.
(3) Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement
or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be
erected any sign whatever on the property.
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, such as fires, floods
and storms, the Poplar Road Nature Sanctuary shall be open to the
public, resident or nonresident, from Sunday through Saturday, sunup
to sundown, after which no person shall remain on the property.
Municipal, county and state officials, public utility workers or
individuals hired by the state, county or Township of River Vale may
remain on the property in the execution of their duties to work.
B. A permit shall be required to be obtained from the Township Clerk or
Township Administrator for any organized activities, not sponsored by
the Township's Division of Cultural and Social Affairs or other municipal
department, to be held on the property by more than six people.
§ 166-26 NOISE § 166-28
159:727
C. A person seeking issuance of permit hereunder shall file an application
with the Township Clerk or Township Administrator. The application
shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(3) A description of the activity.
(4) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(5) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(6) Any other information which the Township Clerk or Township
Administrator shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair
determination as to whether a permit should be issued hereunder.
D. The Township Administrator or the Township Clerk shall notify the
Police Department and the Division of Cultural Affairs when an
application has been filed for use of the property and thereafter issue a
permit hereunder when he/she finds that:
(1) The proposed activity will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the general enjoyment of the property by other
visitors.
(2) The personal activity will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the promotion of public health, safety and welfare.
(3) The proposed activity will not harm or unreasonably disturb natural
areas, wildlife habitat or wild animals.
(4) The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the Township.
(5) The property has not been reserved for other use at the day and
hour requested in the application.
(6) The proposed activity will not violate any of the provisions of this
article.
E. A permittee shall be bound by all property rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said
permit(s).
F. The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any
loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of
the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have
been issued.
§ 166-28 RIVER VALE CODE § 166-28
159:728
§ 166-29. Enforcement.
Officers of the Township of River Vale Police Department or any other
authorized municipal official shall have the authority to reject from the
Poplar Road Nature Sanctuary any person acting in violation of this article.
§ 166-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be liable to the
penalties provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14.
G. The Township Administrator or Township Clerk shall have the authority
to revoke a permit upon finding a violation of any rule or regulation or
ordinance or upon good cause.
H. There shall be no fee for the application or permit.
§ 166-28 NOISE § 166-30
159:729
Chapter 170
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 159.
§ 170-1. Tumultuous conduct.
No person or persons shall disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of others
by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, and no person
shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned or
possessed by him or under his control.
§ 170-2. False alarms.
No person or persons shall intentionally make, turn in or give a false alarm
of fire or need for police or ambulance assistance or aid or abet in the
commission of such act.
§ 170-3. Interference with public officials.
No person or persons shall forcibly interfere with any member of the Police
Department or Fire Department or any officer of the municipality or Board
of Health in the performance of his duty or prevent or attempt to prevent
any member of the Police Department or Fire Department or any officer
aforesaid from performing his duty.
§ 170-4. Interference with fire-fighting operations.79
No person or persons shall drive any vehicle over any hose or other
apparatus nor willfully handle and do violence to any member of the Fire
Department or any official of the Township in the performance of his duty at
a fire or in going to or returning from a fire or alarm of fire or in charge of
any apparatus; nor shall any person or persons raise, create or continue a
false alarm of fire.
§ 170-5. Disorders in Court.
No person or persons shall interfere with the proper transaction of business
in any Municipal Court by any unruly, boisterous or otherwise disorderly
conduct in the courtroom where such Court is in session or by any offensive
or abusive remarks to the presiding Judge when he is engaged in the
discharge of his duties.
§ 170-6. Loitering.
79.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 166-30 RIVER VALE CODE § 170-6
170:730
§ 170-7. Curfew on Cabbage Night and Halloween. [Added
3-28-1991 by Ord. No. 0-7-91; amended 1-22-2004 by Ord. No.
0-28-03]
There is hereby established a curfew from 8:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. for
Cabbage Night, October 30-31, and Halloween, October 31 to November 1.
The curfew shall apply to each minor unaccompanied by his or her parent or
guardian. Any such unaccompanied minor shall first be requested to return
to his or her home, and, in the event of noncompliance, the police shall
telephone the parent or guardian and request that he or she pick up the
minor at police headquarters. For the purposes of this section, "minor" shall
be defined as any person under the age of 18.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the terms used herein are
defined as follows:
LOITER — To remain idle in essentially one location, and includes the
concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place or area open to the public, and includes
the quasi-public area in front of or adjacent to any store, shop,
luncheonette, restaurant or other place of business, as well as any
parking lot or other vacant private property not owned or under the
dominion of the person charged with a violation of this section.
B. Types of loitering prohibited. No person shall loiter in a public place in
such a manner as to:
(1) Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
(2) Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public
place.
(3) Create or cause to be created a danger or a breach of the peace.
(4) Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort or repose of any person which causes or is likely to cause a
breach of peace.
(5) Beg or receive alms for himself.
C. Discretion of police officer. Whenever any police officer shall, in the
exercise of reasonable judgment, decide that the presence of any
person in any public place is causing or is likely to cause any of the
conditions enumerated under Subsection B, he may, if it is necessary for
the preservation of the public peace and safety, order that person to
leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave that place after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be in violation of the
provisions of this section.
§ 170-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 170-8
170:731
§ 170-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-28-1991 by Ord. No.
0-7-91]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of §§ 170-1 through
170-6 shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, § 1-14.
Chapter 174
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 170-8 RIVER VALE CODE § 170-8
170:732
ARTICLE I
Peddling and Soliciting
§ 174-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who goes from house to house distributing
printed or advertising matter of any kind or who hands to any person in a
public place any printed or advertising matter.
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares, food, fruit, vegetables, ice cream,
candy, farm products, magazines, periodicals, clothing and all kinds of
articles of personal property for domestic use, and orders or contracts for
services, including but not limited to home improvements or alterations.
PEDDLER — Any person who goes from place to place by traveling on
streets and roads or from house to house carrying, conveying or
transporting merchandise for the purpose of selling and delivering the
same to consumers; the term also includes persons commonly known as
"hawkers" and "hucksters."
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association or
any agent thereof.
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes from house to house buying, selling
or attempting to take orders for the sale of merchandise or for services,
whether to be delivered or rendered presently or in the future, with or
without accepting an advance payment and whether or not such person has,
carries or exposes for sale a sample or a catalog description of the object
or service to be sold. The term "solicitor" shall include a person commonly
known as a "canvasser"; provided, however, that this definition shall not
include wholesale salesmen calling on retail merchants.
§ 174-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent fraud, crime and unethical and
dishonest business practices. The fees to be charged for the issuance of
licenses are not to be considered as revenue, but are charged for the
purposes of regulating the conduct of licensees.
§ 174-3. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or distributor to sell, offer
for sale or distribute merchandise, printed material or services within the
Township without first having obtained a license therefor. No licensed
peddler, solicitor or distributor shall seek contact with any person or entity
registered on the Township's No-Knock List.
§ 174-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 174-4
170:733
§ 174-4. Separate license for agents.
A separate license must be obtained for every agent or employee working
for a peddler, solicitor or distributor.
§ 174-5. Exception to licensing requirement; providing list in lieu of
license.
§ 174-6. Application for license.
Every applicant for a license shall file with the Police Department a sworn
written application, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the Police
Department, which shall give the following information:
A. The requirements of § 174-3 shall not apply to the following:
(1) Any person who sells or collects goods, the proceeds of which are
devoted exclusively to the purposes of a nonprofit charitable or
religious society on whose behalf said person is acting as an agent.
(2) Any school, political or civic organization, benevolent society, first
aid squad, service club or organization not for profit which is
located in the Township.
(3) Any person honorably discharged from the active military service
of the United States, who is a resident of this state, and possesses a
peddler's license issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq.,
as amended and supplemented.
(4) Any person who is an exempt member of a volunteer fire
department, volunteer fire engine, hook and ladder, hose, supply
company or salvage corp, of any municipality or fire district of this
state, who holds an exemption certificate issued to him as an
exempt member of any such department, company or corps, and
who is a resident of this state, as provided in N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et
seq., as amended and supplemented.
(5) Any public utility or its employee, which said public utility is
subject to regulation by the State Board of Public Utility
Commissioners; provided, however, that such employees shall
display the identification badge or card issued by the employer.
(6) Any person engaged in delivery of merchandise or other article or
things, in the regular course of business, to the premises of the
person who has previously ordered the same and is entitled to
receive the same by reason of a prior agreement.
(7) Persons engaged in the sale or delivery of newspapers.
B. Persons excepted from the licensing requirement in accordance
herewith shall provide a list of all peddlers, solicitors, distributors or
canvassers to the Police Department not less than 24 hours prior to
beginning operations.
§ 174-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 174-6
170:734
§ 174-7. License fee.
At the time the application is filed, a fee of $25 shall be paid to the
Police Department to cover the costs of processing the application and for
processing and issuing the identification card.
§ 174-8. No-Knock List.
A. Name and physical description of the applicant.
B. The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
C. A brief statement of the nature of the business and a description of the
merchandise or service to be sold, together with the name and address
of the person who will be supplying the merchandise or service.
D. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials describing the relationship.
E. The length of time for which the license is desired.
F. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle, its serial (VIN)
and license plate number and proof that said vehicle is insured in an
amount as required by law.
G. The place where the goods or property to be sold or offered for sale are
manufactured or produced, where such goods or property are located
at the time such application is filed and the proposed method of
delivery.
H. Two copies of a photograph of the applicant taken within one year prior
to the date of the application, which photograph shall clearly show the
head and shoulders of the applicant and shall be a minimum size of two
inches by two inches and shall portray a reasonably accurate likeness of
the applicant.
I. Three business or character references.
A. Establishment of No-Knock List. All residents of the Township may
register their name, address and/or unit/apartment number with the
Municipal Clerk to be placed on the No-Knock List, indicating that they
do not want canvassers, distributors, solicitors, peddlers, transient
merchants or hawkers of any sort to approach their homes and/or seek
personal contact with the occupants of the registered residence. The
Municipal Clerk shall provide the registration form, which shall be
available during normal business hours. By registering for the No-
Knock List, the resident acknowledges that the Township police, fire
and other emergency services groups are exempt from the
requirements of this section.
B. Updating and provision of list. The Municipal Clerk shall maintain a No-
Knock List, a copy of which shall be provided to all persons or
organizations required to obtain a license or to register pursuant to this
§ 174-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 174-8
170:735
§ 174-9. Issuance of license.
If the application is complete, the Police Department shall issue a license
to the applicant within 24 hours thereafter. Such licenses shall contain the
signature of the issuing officer, the name and address and a photograph
of the licensee, the class of the license issued, the kind of merchandise
or services to be sold thereunder, the date issued, the length of time the
license shall be operative and the license number and other identifying
description of any vehicle to be used by the licensee. The license shall be
clearly visible and displayed when approaching and contacting residents or
places of business in the Township.
§ 174-10. Expiration of license.
Every license issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of one year from
the date of issuance of said license.
§ 174-11. Prohibited activities.
No peddler, solicitor or distributor shall:
chapter. Registrants shall remain on the No-Knock List for a period
of five years from the date of registration or until such time as they
advise the Municipal Clerk, in writing, that they wish to be removed
from the list. The Municipal Clerk shall ensure that the list is updated
periodically.
C. Registration and display of decal. Upon completion of registration on
the No-Knock List, the subscriber may purchase and receive, for a fee of
$2, a decal stating "DO NO KNOCK; Registered on the No-Knock List
with the Township of River Vale, Municipal Clerk; VIOALTORS[??] WILL
BE PROSECUTED," which may be displayed in a clearly visible location
(e.g., front door or window adjacent to the front door).
A. Call at any private residence which is on the No-Knock List.
B. Attempt to peddle, solicit or distribute merchandise or printed material
without first having identified himself as a peddler, solicitor or
distributor licensed with the Township and displaying his/her license.
C. Conduct himself/herself in such a manner as to become objectionable to
or annoy any person or entity approached.
D. Shout, cry out, blow a horn, use any sound-making or amplifying
devices upon any of the streets, parks or public places of the Township
or upon private premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or
produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the
streets, avenues, parks or other public places of the Township or upon
private premises, for the purpose of attracting to any merchandise or
service.
§ 174-8 RIVER VALE CODE § 174-11
170:736
§ 174-12. Revocation of license.
§ 174-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating ay of the provisions of this chapter, whether as
principal, agent or employee of another, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or to imprisonment not to exceed 60
days, or both.
E. Distribute obscene merchandise or printed material or that which
advocates unlawful conduct.
F. Litter the streets, public places or properties within the Township with
any merchandise or printed material.
A. Any license issued under the provision of this chapter may be revoked
by the Mayor and Council, after notice and hearing, for any of the
following:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application for the license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement by the licensee in the
course of conducting the license activity.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction pursuant to any statute or ordinance of any municipality
involving moral turpitude.
(5) Picking up or discharging passengers not licensed under this
chapter or allowing unlicensed persons to ride in vehicles owned or
operated by a licensee.
(6) Conducting the licensed business in an unlawful manner or in such
manner that constitutes a breach of the peace, a nuisance or a
menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of a hearing for revocation of the license before the Mayor and
Council shall be given in writing. Such notice shall set forth the specific
grounds of complaint, the time and place of the hearing, and shall be
sent by certified mail to the licensee at his/her known home or local
business address at least seven days prior to the date set for the
hearing or shall be served upon the licensee personally at least five
days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 174-11 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 174-13
170:737

ARTICLE II
Charitable Solicitation on Roadways
§ 174-14. Solicitation permitted.
Organizations which qualify as charitable organizations under the Internal
Revenue Code and as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20 shall be permitted to
solicit charitable contributions on the roads running through the Township,
provided that such organizations comply with the provisions set forth
hereafter. No solicitations for charitable contributions shall be permitted
on any county road or intersection thereof without the approval of the
Bergen County Board of Chosen Freeholders (the Freeholder Board). No
solicitations for charitable contributions shall be permitted on any New
Jersey state highway or intersection thereof without the approval of the
New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT).
§ 174-15. Permit and approval requirements.
Solicitation by charitable organizations shall be permitted only at signalized
intersections or when the existing traffic control device causes temporary
interruption in the flow of normal traffic. No solicitation shall be permitted
without the charitable organization having first obtained all requisite
permits and approvals from the Township of River Vale hereunder, the
Freeholder Board, and NJDOT, where applicable. A charitable solicitation
permit from the Township of River Vale shall be the subject of a written
application submitted to the Police Chief who may prescribe the form of
such application and amend same from time to time. Applications for a
charitable solicitation permit shall be filled with the Police Chief no later
than 30 days prior to the requested commencement date for charitable
solicitations.
§ 174-16. Requirements for charitable solicitations.
Any person who, after the issuance of a charitable solicitation permit by the
Police Chief, engages in charitable solicitation in accordance with such a
permit shall comply with the following requirements:
A. All solicitation permits required for charitable solicitation activities
shall be in possession of one designated responsible person on the
scene at all times when charitable solicitation activities are occurring.
B. Each person soliciting charitable contributions on behalf of a charitable
organization shall be at least 18 years old.
C. Solicitations shall be subject to the specific terms and conditions of
each permit granted.
D. Solicitation shall not cause the stoppage of traffic or impede the flow of
traffic. Traffic must be stopped before solicitation may occur, and shall
cease when traffic is moving. Use of a flagman shall be prohibited.
§ 174-14 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 174-16
170:739
§ 174-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person guilty of violating any provision hereof shall be liable for a fine
not to exceed $100 for each day of such violation.
E. The charitable organization shall be responsible for cleaning up any
debris from the roads and adjoining areas.
F. Solicitation shall only be permitted during the daylight hours.
G. Enforcing agencies of Bergen County and NJDOT, as well as members of
the Township's Police Department, may suspend solicitation operations
at any time if any condition of the permit is violated or, in the police
officer's or the agency's sole discretion, traffic is being impeded or
delayed or the public safety is at risk.
H. Solicitors shall not drink alcoholic beverages, use controlled dangerous
substances or be under the influence thereof when soliciting. Solicitors
shall not harass the public.
I. Solicitation shall conform to the locations, dates, duration, and times of
charitable solicitation as approved by the Police Chief as reflected in
the charitable solicitation permit issued by the Police Chief to a
charitable organization.
J. All solicitors shall wear safety vests that are in accordance with the
standards of the NJDOT.
K. No solicitor shall install any traffic control devices and the parking of
vehicles of solicitors shall comply with all applicable traffic regulations.
L. Signs advertising charitable solicitations shall be permitted, provided
that such signs must be of a temporary construction, be of a breakaway
nature to the extent possible, and shall be no larger than six square
feet.
M. At least two warning signs shall be placed on each approach at all
locations where charitable solicitations occur. The first sign shall be
placed at least 500 feet ahead of the solicitation location, and one sign
must identify the names of the charitable organization soliciting. Signs
shall not be permitted in the traveled way or in the medians less than
eight feet in width. All signs, warnings, noticing, and advertising shall
be removed immediately following each solicitation activity.
§ 174-16 RIVER VALE CODE § 174-17
170:740
Chapter 178
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Payment of taxes and assessments — See Ch.
149, Art. I.
§ 178-1. Applicability.
A person shall be deemed to be a dealer in gold and other precious metals or
secondhand jewelry if he is engaged in the business of purchasing, offering
to purchase, swapping, offering to swap, accepting for consignment, selling,
offering to sell, hypothecating or otherwise dealing in or trading gold and
other precious metals, articles made therefrom, coins, with or without
numismatic value, used jewelry of all descriptions, sterling silver, silver
plate, precious gems, semiprecious gems or watches, other than as a
consumer buying the same in a normal commercial manner or as an
incidental seller of such an item so acquired.
§ 178-2. Permit required; conditions for issuance. [Amended
8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
No person shall engage in the business of dealing in the commodities,
merchandise or articles hereinabove described until a permit to do so has
been obtained from the Chief of Police, which permit shall be issued upon
the applicant's identifying himself to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police
and payment to the Township Clerk of a fee of $100.
§ 178-3. Recordkeeping; inspection of records.
Every dealer or trader in the commodities, merchandise or articles
hereinabove described shall keep a suitable, legible and complete record of
each item thereof purchased or received by him reciting the date and time
acquired and the price paid therefor, together with the name, residence,
occupation, age and correct description of the person from whom he
received the item. The records shall be on forms approved by the Township
Police Department and shall be available for inspection by the Township
Police Department at all times.
§ 178-4. Availability of records.
Every dealer in the commodities, merchandise or articles hereinabove
described shall produce for inspection and copying, to the Township Police
Department on demand, during normal business hours, a legible and
correct transcript of the records of his transactions. Said transcript shall be
on forms prescribed by the Chief of Police.
§ 174-17 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 178-5
178:741
§ 178-5. Disposition and storage of merchandise.
No dealer in the commodities, merchandise or articles hereinabove
described shall sell, melt, change the form of, remove from the premises or
otherwise dispose of any article bought or received by him in the Township
of River Vale within five business days unless the proposed transaction is
reported to the Chief of Police as herein required. Any dealer wishing to
store his merchandise other than on the premises where he is engaged
in business may make application to the Chief of Police for permission to
remove the same from his premises to the alternate designated location;
provided, however, that said location is in the Township of River Vale.
§ 178-6. Violations enumerated.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to transact any business to which this
chapter refers without having first obtained the permit herein required or
to fail to adhere to the recordkeeping and reporting requirements hereof. It
shall be a separate and distinct violation of this chapter for each article and
each transaction which shall be omitted from the reports.
§ 178-7. Violations and penalties.
The initial offense under this chapter shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14. Any subsequent offense
shall, in addition to the aforesaid penalties, result in the revocation of the
dealer's permit by the Township Council.
Chapter 180
PROPERTIES, VACANT OR ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 73
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 90.
Registration of contractors — See Ch. 93.
Land use — See Ch. 142.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 181.
§ 180-1. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter to protect and preserve the public health,
safety and welfare and security and quiet enjoyment of residents and
neighborhoods by: requiring all property owners, including lenders,
trustees and service companies to properly maintain vacant and/or
foreclosing properties; and regulating the maintenance of vacant and/or
foreclosing properties in order to prevent blighted and unsecured
properties.
§ 178-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 180-2
178:742
§ 180-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When consistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural include the singular and words in the singular include the plural.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CREDITOR — The creditor having a right of foreclosure, including, but not
limited to, the holder of a mortgage on a property, and any agent, servant
or employee of the creditor, a loan servicing company, or any successor
in interest and/or assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations
under the document granting foreclosure rights.
DAYS — Consecutive calendar days.
FORECLOSING — The legal process by which the creditor of a title holder
of a parcel of property, which has been placed as collateral or security for
a financial obligation, seeks to divest the title holder of his rights to the
property and have the property sold at a sheriff's sale to satisfy the debt
after the title holder defaults on the aforesaid financial obligation.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any commercial, industrial and mixeduse
real estate, or portion thereof, located in the Township of River Vale,
including improvements thereon.
NUISANCE —
Any nuisance known at common law or inequity jurisprudence or as
provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey or the ordinances of
the Township.
A.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health
or safety of children, whether in a building, on the premises of a
building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to:
abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes,
refrigerators, motor vehicles, boats, any structurally unsound fences or
structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation, such as poison
ivy, oak or sumac, which may prove to be a hazard for inquisitive
minors.
B.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health of
persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist.
C.
D. Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this Code.
Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation of
this Code.
E.
Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous
to health in violation of this Code.
F.
G. Fire hazards.
§ 180-2 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 180-2
178:743
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly with several others, shall have
legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, or who shall have charge, care or control of any
property unit as owner or agent of the owner, including, but not limited to, a
lessee, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver
or guardian of the estate or as a foreclosing mortgagee or mortgagee in
possession, regardless of how that possession was obtained. Any person
who is a lessee subletting or assigning any part of any property or property
unit shall be deemed to be co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint
responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by said
lessee.
PROPERTY — Any real estate, including residential, commercial, industrial
and mixed use, or portion thereof, located in the Township of River Vale,
including any improvements thereon.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property that contains one or more
dwelling units used, intended or designed to be occupied for living
purposes.
SECURITY — Measures taken to ensure that the property is inaccessible to
unauthorized persons.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of River Vale.
VACANT — With regard to any property, that no portion of the property is
legally occupied. A property shall not be deemed "vacant," for purposes of
this chapter:
§ 180-3. Registration of vacant properties; designation of
responsible individual.
Where there is a building on the property containing multiple
residential units, if any of the residential units are legally occupied;
A.
Where the legal occupant has temporarily left the property for vacation
or other purposes for a period not exceeding 180 days, possessing both
the intent to return and the legal right to return, such as a residential
property owner or tenant who resides in another municipality or state
for a portion of the year; or
B.
Where the building is under construction with current valid
construction permits, and work is being performed on the property on a
regular basis. A mixed-use property is considered vacant if the portion
of the property dedicated to commercial use is not legally occupied
even though one or more residential units may be legally occupied.
C.
A. All owners of vacant residential property must register such vacant
properties with the Township of River Vale Clerk within 10 days of such
property becoming vacant. The registration must be renewed annually
as set forth below for as long as the property remains vacant.
B. All owners of vacant nonresidential property must register such vacant
properties with the Township of River Vale Clerk within 30 days of such
§ 180-2 RIVER VALE CODE § 180-3
178:744
§ 180-4. Registration Fees for Vacant Properties.
property becoming vacant. The registration must be renewed annually
as set forth below for as long as the property remains vacant.
C. Owners of vacant properties shall designate an individual or property
management company responsible for the security and maintenance of
the property. The individual or property management company
responsible for the security and maintenance of the property shall have
an office located in New Jersey within 25 miles of the property.
D. The registration required by this section must contain the following
information:
(1) The owner's name, telephone number, and mailing address. The
mailing address may not be a P.O. Box.
(2) The street address and tax map designation (lot and block) of the
property,
(3) Whether the property is residential, nonresidential, commercial or
mixed use.
(4) The name, telephone number, e-mail address and mailing address
of an individual or property management company located in the
State of New Jersey which is responsible for the security and
maintenance of the property. The mailing address may not be a P.O.
Box.
(5) A statement from the owner certifying that the property was
inspected as required by this chapter.
(6) Proof of utility (gas, electric, water) connections or disconnections.
(7) Proof of insurance meeting the requirements of § 180-7C of this
chapter.
E. The owner shall have a continuing duty to notify the Township of any
changes to the information contained in the registration between
registration cycles.
F. The Clerk of the Township of River Vale may promulgate forms on which
the information in the registration must be provided.
G. The owner must notify the Township of River Vale Clerk if, at any time
subsequent to registration as a vacant property, the property is no
longer vacant, and provide proof that the property is no longer vacant.
A. The initial registration fee for vacant residential property shall be $500
and must accompany the registration form. The initial registration shall
be valid for the remainder of the calendar year in which the property is
registered. Renewals for subsequent calendar years shall run from
January 1 to December 31, and payment of the renewal registration fee
§ 180-3 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 180-4
178:745
§ 180-5. Registration of foreclosing properties; designation of
responsible individual.
shall be due by January 15 of the relevant year. The fee for the first
annual renewal shall be $1,000; the fee for the second annual renewal
shall be $3,000 and the fee for the third and subsequent renewals shall
be $5,000. Registration fees and renewal fees will not be prorated or
refunded.
B. No fee shall be charged at the time the owner registers vacant
nonresidential property with the Township. If a tenant is not secured for
the registered vacant nonresidential property within six months of the
date of registration of the vacant nonresidential property, an initial
registration fee of $500 shall be charged to the owner. The initial
registration shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year in
which the property is registered. Renewals for subsequent calendar
years shall run from January 1 to December 31, and payment of the
renewal registration fee shall be due by January 15 of the relevant year.
The fee for the first annual renewal shall be $1,000; the fee for the
second annual renewal shall be $3,000; and the fee for the third and
subsequent renewals shall be $5,000. Registration fees and renewal
fees will not be prorated or refunded.
C. No governmental agency shall be required to pay the initial or renewal
registration fee.
A. A creditor serving a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on
a mortgage or other lien against any property in this Township,
including, but not limited to, residential property, shall, within 10 days
of serving the summons and complaint, file a registration with the
Township of River Vale Clerk. The registration must be renewed as set
forth below until title to the property has been transferred to a new
owner or the foreclosure action is dismissed. A creditor who takes title
to a vacant property shall then be required to register as an owner of
such vacant property, and to renew such registration for as long as the
property remains vacant.
B. If the property is vacant or the creditor is located outside the State of
New Jersey, the creditor must designate an individual or property
management company responsible for the security and maintenance of
the property. The individual or property management company
responsible for the security and maintenance of the property shall have
an office in New Jersey located within 25 miles of the property.
C. The registration shall contain the following information:
(1) The creditor's name, telephone number, e-mail address and mailing
address. The mailing address may not be a P.O. Box.
(2) The street address and tax map designation (lot and block) of the
property for which foreclosure has been sought.
§ 180-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 180-5
178:746
§ 180-6. Registration fees for foreclosing properties.
(3) Whether the property is residential, nonresidential, commercial or
mixed use.
(4) The name, telephone number, e-mail address and mailing address
of a designated representative of the creditor who is located in the
State of New Jersey and is responsible for receiving complaints of
property maintenance and code violations for that property. The
mailing address may not be a P.O. Box.
(5) If the property is vacant, the name, telephone number, and mailing
address of an individual or property management company located
in the State of New Jersey which is responsible for the care,
maintenance, security and upkeep of the property. The mailing
address may not be a P.O. Box.
(6) If the property is vacant, a statement from the creditor certifying
that the property was inspected as required by this chapter.
(7) If the property is vacant, proof of utility (gas, electric, water)
connections or disconnections.
(8) If the property is vacant, proof of insurance meeting the
requirements of § 180-6C of this chapter.
D. The creditor shall have a continuing duty to notify the Township of any
changes to the information contained in the registration between
registration cycles.
E. The Township of River Vale Clerk may promulgate forms on which the
information in the registration must be provided.
F. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s.c.(1), an out-of-state creditor's failure
to appoint an in-state representative or agent for residential properties
is subject to fines set forth in § 180-10B of this chapter.
G. Once the foreclosure action has terminated, either through dismissal,
or transfer of title, the creditor must provide proof of such termination,
sale, transfer or occupancy to the enforcement authority within 30 days
of sale, exchange or transfer.
A. The initial registration fee shall be $500 and must accompany the
registration form. The initial registration shall be valid for the
remainder of the calendar year in which the property is registered.
Renewals for subsequent calendar years shall run from January 1 to
December 31, and payment of the renewal registration fee shall be due
by January 15 of the relevant year. The fee for the first annual renewal
shall be $1,000; the fee for the second annual renewal shall be $3,000;
and the fee for the third and subsequent renewals shall be $5,000.
Registration fees and renewal fees will not be prorated or refunded.
§ 180-5 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 180-6
178:747
§ 180-7. Maintenance requirements.
B. No governmental agency shall be required to pay the initial or renewal
registration fee.
A. Properties subject to the requirements of this chapter must be
maintained in accordance with the all applicable federal, state and local
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The owner, creditor, local
individual or local property management company, as appropriate, must
inspect the property twice a month for the duration of the vacancy or
foreclosure as appropriate.
B. In addition to, and not in lieu of meeting all other applicable federal,
state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations owners,
creditors, local individual or local property management companies
must maintain property that is subject to this chapter as follows:
(1) Property shall be kept free of accumulated snow and ice, weeds,
dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials,
unregistered vehicles, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars,
flyers, notices (except those required by law), and discarded
personal items, including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing,
large and small appliances, printed material or any other items
giving the appearance that the property is vacant.
(2) Property shall be kept free of graffiti, tagging, or similar markings.
In the event that any graffiti, tagging, or similar markings are
placed on the property, it/they shall either be removed or painted
over with an exterior-grade paint matching the color of the portion
of the structure where the graffiti, tagging, or similar marking was
placed.
(3) Front yards, rear yards, and side yards of properties subject to the
requirements of this chapter shall be landscaped and maintained to
neighborhood standards. Landscaping and maintenance shall
include, but is not limited to, care of grass, mulch, decorative rock,
artificial turf/sod specifically designed for residential or
commercial installation, or other ground cover, bushes, shrubs,
hedges, trees, or similar plantings, removal or repair of gravel,
broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting,
mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material, in addition to
regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of
required vegetation and removal of all trimmings.
(4) Any pool, spa, or other standing body of water shall either be kept
in working order so the water remains clear and free of growth,
pollutants, and debris, and does not become a harborage for
vermin or insects; or drained and kept dry. In either case,
properties with pools or spas must comply with the security fencing
requirements of the Township.
§ 180-6 RIVER VALE CODE § 180-7
178:748
§ 180-8. Inspections.
The enforcement authority shall have the authority to inspect the properties
subject to this chapter for compliance and to issue summonses for any
violations.
§ 180-9. Enforcement.
Enforcement authority shall be vested in the River Vale Department of
Administration (Mayor and/or Business Administrator), the River Vale
Building Department, and the River Vale Department of Health, and their
respective officials and inspectors. The River Vale Police Department and
Department of Public Works shall also have enforcement authority with
respect to this chapter. The Mayor and/or Business Administrator may
also designate, when necessary, enforcement duties to other Township
departments.
C. The owner of any vacant property shall acquire and maintain liability
insurance covering injury or damage to any person or any property in
not less than $300,000 for residential buildings, and $1,000,000 for
nonresidential buildings or property.
D. The owner shall be responsible for property maintenance. However, if
the owner of a property vacates or abandons any property on which a
foreclosure proceeding has been initiated or if a property is or becomes
vacant at the time of or at any point subsequent to the creditor's filing
the summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage
against the subject property, but prior to vesting of title in the creditor
or any other third party, and the property is found to be a nuisance or in
violation of any applicable state or local code, the enforcement
authority shall notify the creditor, which shall have the responsibility to
abate the nuisance or correct the violation in the same manner and to
the same extent as the title owner of the property, to such standard or
specification as may be required by state law or Township ordinance.
The enforcement authority shall include a description of the conditions
that gave rise to the violation with the notice of violation and shall
provide a period of 30 days (or 10 days if the violation presents an
imminent threat to public health and safety) from the creditor's receipt
of the notice for the creditor to remedy the violation. The issuance of a
notice of violation pursuant to this section shall constitute proof that a
property is vacant and abandoned for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73.
If the creditor fails to remedy the violation within that time period, the
Township may impose the penalties allowed for the violation of
municipal ordinances pursuant to § 180-10 of this chapter against the
creditor to the same extent as they could be imposed against the owner
of the property.
E. Adherence to this chapter does not relieve the owner or creditor of
obligations set forth in any other statute, regulation, ordinance, or
other source of authority or obligation.
§ 180-7 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 180-10
178:749
§ 180-10. Penalties.
§ 180-11. Township's authority to abate and impose lien.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Township from taking action
to abate a nuisance or correct a violation where the owner or creditor,
as applicable, has failed to abate the nuisance or correct the violation
on a vacant property or a property in foreclosure after notice and the
opportunity to abate or correct. In such situations, the Township may
impose a lien against the property for costs to correct the violation or abate
the nuisance. Such lien shall hereafter form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon said lands, the same to bear interest at the same
rate as such taxes to be collected and enforced by the same officers and in
the same manner as such taxes.
§ 180-12. Governmental entities exempt.
No governmental entity shall be required to register under this chapter.
However, nothing contained herein shall be construed as granting
exemption to the governmental entity from property maintenance or other
obligations imposed by any other statute, regulation, or ordinance.
§ 180-13. Implementation.
Upon the effective date of this chapter, the owner of any currently vacant
property and a creditor pursuing a pending foreclosure shall have 30 days
within which to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Violation of any of the terms of this chapter (except for those violations
which pertain to out-of-state creditors set forth in §§ 180-10B and
180-10C of this chapter) shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
$100 nor greater than $2,000 per occurrence in addition to any
registration fee or renewal fee that may be due and owing. Each
subsequent occurrence shall result in an increased penalty.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s.c.(1), an out-of-state creditor's failure
to appoint an in-state representative or agent for residential properties
within 10 days of the service of the foreclosure summons and complaint
shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day of the violation.
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s.c.(2), an out-of-state creditor's failure
to correct a care, maintenance, security or upkeep violation on a
residential property within 30 days of service of the notice of violation
(or 10 days if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health
and safety) shall be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the
violation.
§ 180-10 RIVER VALE CODE § 180-13
178:750
Chapter 181
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 70.
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
Littering — See Ch. 152.
Solid waste collection — See Ch. 210, Art. I.
Junk vehicles — See Ch. 241.
§ 181-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Municipal Clerk of the Township of River Vale, being marked and designated
as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Township of River Vale, in the State of New
Jersey, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and
the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as provided in
the chapter; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of such property maintenance on file in the office of
the Municipal Clerk of the Township of River Vale are referred to adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 181-2 of this
chapter.
§ 181-2. Additions, insertions, deletions and changes.
The following sections are hereby added, inserted, deleted or changed:
Chapter 186
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 152. Solid waste collection — See Ch. 210, Art. I.
A. Chapter 1, Administration, is removed in its entirety.
B. Section 302.4 insert "seven inches" as maximum height. [Added
7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 341-2018]
§ 180-13 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 181-2
178:751
§ 186-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to comply with the New Jersey Statewide
Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act, P.L. 1987, c. 102 (N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.11 et seq.) and the New Jersey Recycling Act of 1981, P.L. 1981, c.
278 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-92 to 13:1E-9980).
§ 186-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have meanings indicated:
ALUMINUM — Recyclable aluminum cans.
AUTOMOTIVE WASTE OIL — Used oil from motor vehicles, lawn mowers
and motorcycles.
COMPOSTABLE BAG — A biodegradable, two-ply, wet-strength-treated,
recyclable paper or corn silk bag which can be placed or added directly to a
compost pile.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Cardboard of the type to make cardboard
boxes, cartons, pasteboard and similar corrugated and kraft paper material.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those recyclable materials
including glass, food waste, corrugated cardboard, newspapers/magazines,
high-grade paper, aluminum, automotive waste oil and leaves.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda, ash and limestone
which are transparent or translucent and used for packaging or bottling of
various matter and all other materials commonly known as glass; excluding,
however, blue and flat glass commonly known as "window glass," "plate
glass" and "automotive glass."
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — White typing and ledger paper, white
notepad paper, copier paper, carbonless computer printout paper, manila
tab cards and file folders.
HOUSEHOLD GENERATED BATTERIES — Any type of button, coin,
cylindrical, rectangular or other shaped enclosed device or sealed container
consisting of a combination of two or more voltaic or galvanic cells
electrically connected to produce electric energy, composed of lead, lithium,
manganese, mercury, mercuric oxide, silver oxide, cadmium, zinc, copper or
other metals or any combination thereof and designed for household use,
including any alkaline, manganese, lithium, mercuric oxide, silver oxide,
zinc-air or zinc-carbon battery, nickel-cadmium rechargeable battery or
sealed lead rechargeable battery.[Added 2-23-1995 by Ord. No. 0-3-95]
LEAVES — Leaves only, and shall not include grass clippings and brush.
80.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 13:1E-92 to 13:1E-95 and 13:1E-97 to 13:1E-99 were repealed by L.
2002, c. 128. See now N.J.S.A. 13:1E-213 et seq., the Clean Communities and Recycling
Grant Act.
§ 181-2 RIVER VALE CODE § 186-2
178:752
MAGAZINES — Magazines or similar periodicals, as well as all other paper
periodicals of any nature whatsoever.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest.
NONRECYCLABLE MATTER — All solid waste not listed in the definitions
of aluminum, automotive waste oil, corrugated cardboard, designated
recyclable materials, glass, high-grade office paper, leaves, magazines and
newspaper.
PRIVATE SCAVENGER — A carter which files a tariff with the New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities and holds a license from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
RECYCLING CENTER — The area designated by the Township as such
where designated recyclable materials may be disposed of in the
appropriate receptacles provided. The recycling center is located in an area
at the rear of the Public Works Department.
SOLID WASTE — All materials, including recyclable and nonrecyclable
matter, intended for disposal methods.
§ 186-3. Recycling Coordinator; Deputy Recycling Coordinator;
rules and regulations; reports.
§ 186-4. Regulations for residential users.
A. The positions of Recycling Coordinator and Deputy Coordinator are
hereby created and established within the Township of River Vale.
B. The Recycling Coordinator and Deputy shall be appointed by the Mayor
for a one-year term.
C. Subject to the approval of the Mayor and Township Council, the
Recycling Coordinator shall establish and promulgate reasonable rules
and regulations as to the manner, days and times for the collection,
storage, transportation, sale and/or marketing of said recyclable
materials in order to encourage the preservation of material resources
while minimizing the cost of the recycling program to the Township of
River Vale.
D. The Recycling Coordinator shall annually submit a recycling tonnage
report to the New Jersey Office of Recycling and such other reports
required by the Bergen County Utilities Authority, with copies to the
Township Council and Mayor.
A. Designation of recyclable materials. [Amended 8-26-1993 by Ord.
No. 0-15-93R]
(1) Mandatory. The following are identified as mandatory materials, to
be separated from all other solid waste produced by residences:
§ 186-2 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 186-4
178:753
(a) Aluminum.
(b) Glass.
(c) Leaves.
(d) Grass.
(e) Tin cans.
(f) Ferrous scrap.
(g) White goods.
(h) Newspapers.
(i) Magazines.
(j) Household-generated batteries. [Added 2-23-1995 by Ord.
No. 0-3-95]
(k) Construction and demolition debris (concrete, brick, tree
parts, nonferrous/ferrous metal, asphalt, corrugated
cardboard, where practical). [Added 4-27-2009 by Ord. No.
208-2009]
(l) Corrugated cardboard. [Added 4-27-2009 by Ord. No.
208-2009]
(m) Mixed paper. [Added 4-27-2009 by Ord. No. 208-2009]
(n) Type 1 and 2 plastic containers. [Added 4-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 208-2009]
(2) Voluntary. Automotive waste oil and plastics are voluntary
recyclable materials.
B. Separation, collection and disposal methods of designated recyclable
materials.
(1) Aluminum and glass (mandatory) shall be rinsed clean and may
either be separated or commingled and placed in reusable
containers for curbside collection. The reusable container shall be
placed at curbside on designated days, with contents to be
collected by a contractor selected by the Township. Aluminum may
also be disposed of in receptacles provided at the municipal
recycling center during posted hours of operation.
(2) Automotive waste oil (voluntary) may be separated and disposed of
in receptacles provided at the Municipal Recycling Center.
(3) Glass (mandatory) shall be rinsed clean, with neck rings and caps
removed from all bottles, and either separated or commingled with
aluminum and placed in individual reusable containers for curbside
collection. These reusable containers shall be placed at curbside on
§ 186-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 186-4
178:754
§ 186-5. Regulations for commercial users.
designated days, with contents to be collected by a contractor
selected by the Township. Glass may also be disposed of in
receptacles provided at the Municipal Recycling Center during
posted hours of operation, but only if said glass is color separated
into clear, amber and green.
(4) Leaves (mandatory) shall be placed at the curb between January 1
and December 31 for collection by the Township for composting; in
the alternative, residents shall compost said leaves on their own
property. [Amended 5-24-1990 by Ord. No. 0-8-90]
(5) Newspapers/magazines (mandatory) shall be put at the curb in
reusable containers or tied in separate bundles (not mixed together
and not to exceed 15 inches in height). Such bundles shall not be
contained in paper bags. These bundles shall be placed at curbside
on designated days, to be collected by a contractor selected by the
Township. [Amended 8-26-1993 by Ord. No. 0-15-93R]
(6) Townhouse and apartment residents shall place mandatory
recyclable items (aluminum, glass, newspapers, magazines) in the
designated areas within their respective complex for collection
purposes. Newspapers/magazines must be bundled as above.
Townhouse and apartment residents may also dispose of recyclable
items in receptacles provided at the Municipal Recycling Center
during posted hours of operation.
C. Set-out time. For collection pursuant to a schedule announced by the
Township of River Vale, all reusable containers must be placed at the
curbline where easily accessible. No containers shall be set out prior to
6:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection, and all containers shall be
removed by 8:00 p.m. on the collection day. When a regular collection
day falls on a legal holiday, containers shall not be set out until the next
regularly scheduled collection date. Paper, plastic bags and cardboard
boxes shall not be utilized as containers for glass or aluminum.
D. Procedure upon refusal to collect. Any solid waste placed for collection
by a residential user not in accordance with this section will be refused
by the collector, and it shall be the responsibility of the residential user
to remove said solid waste from the curbline by 8:00 p.m. on the day of
collection and have it properly containerized, packaged or secured for
purposes of collection on the next scheduled date or disposed of in
accordance with § 186-7.
A. Designation of recyclable materials. [Amended 8-26-1993 by Ord.
No. 0-15-93R]
(1) Mandatory. The following are identified as mandatory recyclable
materials, to be separated from all other solid waste produced by
commercial establishments:
§ 186-4 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 186-5
178:755
(a) Automotive waste oil.
(b) Corrugated cardboard.
(c) High-grade office paper.
(d) Glass.
(e) Ferrous scrap.
(f) White goods.
(g) Aluminum cans.
(h) Mixed paper.
(i) Construction and demolition debris (source-separated,
nonputrescible recyclable material generated from the
construction, alteration, repair, maintenance and/or demolition
of structures within Bergen County. This material shall include
concrete, bricks, block, ferrous and nonferrous scrap, asphalt,
asphalt shingles, recyclable wood scrap and any and all other
material generated from the construction, alteration, repair,
maintenance and/or demolition of a structure or structures).
(j) Newspapers.
(k) Magazines.
(l) Grass.
(m) Leaves.
(n) Food waste.
(o) Type 1 and 2 plastic containers. [Added 4-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 208-2009]
B. Separation, collection and disposal methods of designated recyclable
materials.
(1) Aluminum (mandatory) may be separated and disposed of by
private scavenger or in receptacles provided at the Municipal
Recycling Center, with prior authorization of the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator.
(2) Automotive waste oil (mandatory) shall be separated and disposed
of by either private scavenger or deposited in receptacles provided
at the Municipal Recycling Center, with prior authorization of the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
(3) Corrugated cardboard (mandatory) shall be separated and
disposed of by private scavenger.
§ 186-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 186-5
178:756
(4) Ferrous metal [white metal] (mandatory) shall be separated and
disposed of by private scavenger.
(5) Food waste (mandatory) shall be separated and disposed of by
private scavenger.
(6) Glass (mandatory) shall be disposed of by either private scavenger
or disposed of in receptacles provided at the Municipal Recycling
Center, only if color separated, with prior authorization of the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
(7) High-grade office paper (mandatory) shall be separated and
disposed of by private scavenger.
(8) Leaves (mandatory), between September 1 and December 31, shall
be placed at the curb: loose during the period of time so designated
by the Township and in bags at all other times.
(9) Newspapers/magazines (mandatory) shall be separated and
disposed of in receptacles provided at the Municipal Recycling
Center, with prior authorization of the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
(10) Other mandatory materials shall be separated and disposed of by
private scavenger. [Added 8-26-1993 by Ord. No. 0-15-93R]
C. Registration requirements. It shall be the responsibility of all occupants
of business and/or commercial properties to register annually with the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator on forms provided by the Township.
The annual registration must be filed with the Recycling Coordinator on
or before January 10 of each year. New businesses and/or commercial
properties must file within 45 days of the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or similar approval.
D. Reporting requirements. It shall be the responsibility of all occupants of
business and/or commercial properties to report semiannually to the
Recycling Coordinator on or before March 1 for the preceding sixmonth
period of July 1 through December 31 and on or before
September 1 for the preceding six-month period of January 1 through
June 30, the quantities of materials recycled on forms prescribed and
provided by the Recycling Coordinator.
E. Private scavenger contracts. If the commercial user is either unable or
unwilling to secure a market and collector for designated mandatory
recyclable materials, the Township of River Vale, through its Recycling
Coordinator, may, at its option, secure such markets and enter into
contracts or other arrangements on behalf of the commercial user for
the collection and disposal of designated recyclable materials;
provided, however, that the commercial user shall be responsible for
any and all expenses associated with said contract.
§ 186-5 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 186-6
178:757
§ 186-6. Regulations for institutional users. [Amended 4-11-2005 by
Ord. No. 106-2005]
It shall be mandatory for all private, public and governmental institutions
and buildings to separate glass, aluminum and all paper produced by such
institutions for private collection and the ultimate recycling of said
materials under procedures set forth above.
§ 186-7. Direct disposal by residents.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit any occupant of
residential property from disposing of recyclable materials privately,
provided that in no event shall such recyclable materials be left at the curb
for any private pickup, and further provided that in no event shall any such
recyclable materials be disposed of as part of the nonrecyclable solid waste
pickup by private scavenger.
§ 186-8. Ownership after placement at curb; unauthorized
collectors.
From the time recyclable materials are placed at the curb by the occupant
for collection, in accordance with the collection schedules established under
this chapter, such recyclable materials shall become the property of the
Township of River Vale. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
person and/or scavenger not authorized to collect or pick up or cause to
be collected or picked up any such recyclable materials for any purpose
whatsoever once the same has been placed at the curb. Any such collection
in violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 186-9. Notification of public.
A. The Recycling Coordinator, during the month of May, shall notify all
persons occupying property within the Township of River Vale of the
Township's recycling opportunities and the source separation
requirements of this chapter. This notice shall be done by mailing all
postal patrons within the Township and by posting a notice in public
places where the public notices are customarily posted by the
Township.81
B. The Recycling Coordinator shall semiannually notify all persons
occupying residential, commercial and institutional premises within the
Township of River Vale of local recycling opportunities and the source
separation requirements of this chapter. Said notification shall be made
by a mailing to all postal patrons within the Township and by posting a
notice in public places where public notices are customarily posted by
the Township. The River Vale Township Newsletter may be used for this
notification.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 186-6 RIVER VALE CODE § 186-10
178:758
§ 186-10. Master Plan and land use regulations amendments.
This chapter shall be referred to the Planning Board of the Township of
River Vale for a revision of the Master Plan in accordance with N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.16c, specifically with regard to the collection, disposition and
recycling of designated recyclable materials within any development
proposal for the construction of 50 or more units of single-family residential
housing or 25 or more units of multifamily residential housing and any
commercial or industrial development proposal for the utilization of 1,000
square feet of land. The Planning Board shall also make recommendations
to the Township Council for amendments to Chapter 142, Land Use, in
accordance with this section.82
§ 186-11. Enforcement.
The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be the responsibility
of the Recycling Coordinator and Deputy Recycling Coordinator and the
Department of Police. The responsibility of monitoring the program for the
adequacy of the collection and all other terms of the established rules and
regulations is that of the Recycling Coordinator.
§ 186-12. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 187
RETAIL BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fraudulent checks — See Ch. 85.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 149.
Service stations — See Ch. 197.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with
any provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant thereto shall be punishable, upon conviction thereof, by a fine
and/or penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
§ 1-14.
B. Fines levied and recovered for noncompliance with any and all
provisions of this chapter shall be transmitted monthly by the Court
Administrator to the Township Treasurer and placed in the current fund
and recorded as a dedication by rider, to be utilized for the purpose of
the Township's recycling program, to include but not limited to
education, awareness and improvement in services, in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:4-39.
82.Editor's Note: See Part 10, Multifamily Development Recycling Facilities, of Ch. 142, Land
Use.
§ 186-10 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 186-12
178:759

ARTICLE I
Hours of Operation
[Adopted 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 212-2009]
§ 187-1. Findings; purpose.
§ 187-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAIL BUSINESS — Any business which holds itself out to the general
public for the sale of goods at retail..
§ 187-3. Closing hours.
Every retail business located within the Township, excluding restaurants,
catering businesses, pharmacies, nighttime recreational centers and
businesses regulated by the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control, shall be closed to the public, and business with the public therein
shall be and is hereby prohibited, between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 5:00 a.m., except that fitness centers shall be closed to the public, and
business with the public therein shall be and is hereby prohibited, between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m.
A. The Mayor and Council have found that undesirable noise,
inconvenience and disturbance is caused by retail businesses remaining
open late at night.
B. The Mayor and Council deem it to be in the best interests of the
residents of the Township of River Vale for retail businesses to cease the
conduct of their business at a reasonable hour.
§ 187-1 PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS § 187-3
178:761
Chapter 193
SATELLITE ANTENNAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 142.
§ 193-1. Location.
No satellite antenna shall be erected other than on the roof of a building or
in the rear yard of a lot.
§ 193-2. Number.
Not more than one satellite antenna may be erected or maintained on a
building lot.
§ 193-3. Dimensions.
§ 193-4. Screening.
A satellite antenna erected in the rear yard of a lot shall be effectively
screened from off-site view by plantings or other suitable screening of
adequate height and density.
§ 193-5. Building permit required; fee.
§ 193-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision hereof will be liable, for each
violation, for the penalties provided for in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I, § 1-14, each week being a separate offense.
A. Excepting its circumference or perimeter, no dimension of a roofmounted
satellite antenna shall exceed two feet and of a groundmounted
antenna, eight feet.
B. The height of a roof-mounted antenna shall not exceed the gable or
peak elevation of the roof, and the height of a ground-mounted antenna
shall not exceed 10 feet above the ground elevation.
A. No satellite antenna shall be constructed or erected except pursuant to
a building permit issued by the Construction Code Official pursuant to
an application therefor, the said application and permit to conform to
the restrictions and standards hereof.
B. An application for a satellite antenna permit shall be accompanied by a
fee of $100. [Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
§ 187-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 193-6
193:762
Chapter 197
SERVICE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 142.
§ 197-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful hereafter for any person or persons, corporation or
corporations to engage in the business of operating and maintaining
gasoline and oil stations, commonly called "service stations" and automobile
garages, or to conduct any street stands for the sale or distribution of
gasoline, oil or other automobile fuel or lubricant, without first obtaining a
license for such purpose as hereinafter provided.
§ 197-2. Application procedure.
Any person or persons, corporation or corporations desiring a license to
conduct and operate any of the businesses aforesaid shall make application
in writing to the Township Council, stating the exact location of the place or
places where such person or persons, corporation or corporations desire to
conduct such business, the name and address of the owner of the premises
and of the tenant and occupant thereof, as well as the person who desires
to engage in such business.
§ 197-3. Inspection.
Upon receipt of the application, the Township Council may request such
further and other information as it deems necessary, and may proceed, by
its agents and servants, to an inspection of the premises and location of the
proposed business.
§ 197-4. Issuance or denial of license.
After investigation as aforesaid, said Township Council may grant such
license, or if in the opinion of said Council, the said business may create a
condition hazardous to the public health, welfare or safety, may refuse to
grant such license.
§ 197-5. Display of license required.
Any person or persons, corporation or corporations to whom a license as
aforesaid is granted shall exhibit the same in a conspicuous place about the
premises thus licensed; and the said license shall apply only to the person
or persons, corporation or corporations and to the particular place or places
to whom and for which the same is granted, and shall not be transferable.
§ 193-6 SERVICE STATIONS § 197-6
197:763
§ 197-6. Fees. [Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
Every application shall be accompanied by a fee of $100, which shall be
retained as a license fee if granted and shall be returned to the applicant in
case the same is refused.
§ 197-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, corporation or corporations violating this chapter ,
or any section thereof, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, in the discretion of the Judge before whom such
conviction shall be had.
Chapter 203
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 90. Sanitary sewers — See Ch. 142, § 142-211.
§ 203-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows. All other definitions shall be as set forth in the Township of River
Vale Plumbing Code.83
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, corporation,
partnership, society or group or any combination thereof.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of River Vale or any officer, employee or agent
designated by the Township Council to act in the matter on behalf of the
Township.
TOWNSHIP SEWER SYSTEM — The entire network of public sewers in the
Township and all appurtenances thereto.
§ 203-2. Installation and connection required; authority.
If, after the expiration of the one-year period the owner shall have failed to
install such toilet facilities and to make such sewer connection as required
by the Plumbing Code, the Township may cause such installation or
connection to be made and assess the cost thereof as a first and paramount
lien against the property, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:26A-1 et seq.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 197-6 RIVER VALE CODE § 203-3
203:764
§ 203-3. Permit required.
No person, other than a person authorized by permit by the Board of
Health and the Township Council, shall uncover, make any connection with
or opening into, use, repair, alter or disturb any public sewer or building
lateral thereof, and the appurtenances thereto.
§ 203-4. Application; fee for lateral installation. [Amended
8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
If no building sewer lateral is available, the property owner shall, prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, apply to the Township Clerk to
have a building sewer lateral installed under the auspices of the Township
Engineer. Each application shall be accompanied by a payment of $500
which is hereby fixed as the minimum charge. If, because of the nature and
extent of the work to be done or the pavement or terrain to be penetrated,
or the width of the road, or any like circumstances, the sum of $500 shall
not be sufficient to cover the costs and expenses of the Township, the
Township of River Vale shall fix the fee at a higher figure to cover fully all
the costs and expenses of such installation. Any cost or expense in excess of
the sum paid with the application shall constitute a lien against the property
until paid.
§ 203-5. Barricades and lights for protection of public property.
Each person performing work on public property of the Township for the
purpose of installing or making connections to building sewer laterals
shall cause the work to be adequately guarded with barricades, lights and
other measures for protection of the public. Streets, sidewalks, parkways,
curbs and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall
be restored or replaced in a manner satisfactory to the Township and in
compliance with law.
§ 203-6. Maintenance and work on sewer system.
Maintenance of the public sewer and building sewer laterals, and all work
performed on the sewer system between the main and the property line
including the installation of building sewer laterals, shall be performed
by the Department of Public Works, or other persons authorized by the
Township. Any person so authorized (other than a Township employee),
shall be required to post a performance guaranty in the amount of 125% of
the Township Engineer's estimate of the cost. Said performance guaranty
shall be in such form as the Township shall prescribe.
§ 203-7. Prohibited actions.
No person shall:
A. Place or deposit, or cause or permit to be placed or deposited, in any
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the Township
or in any street or other area under the jurisdiction of the Township, any
§ 203-3 SEWERS § 203-7
203:765
human or animal excrement, garbage, industrial waste, foul liquids, or
any other liquid or solid waste that is malodorous or unsanitary.
B. Discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, to any natural outlet or
storm sewer in the Township, or any street or other area under the
jurisdiction of the Township, any domestic sewage, industrial waste or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with this chapter.
C. Uncover, or cause or permit to be uncovered, any portion of the public
sewer or any storm drain or the connecting branches thereof, or to open
any manhole or flush tank, unless authorized in writing by the Township
to do so.
D. Open, or cause or permit to be opened any public street or place for the
purpose of making any sewer connection, or to make or cause to be
made, any connection with the public sewer, or any other branch of the
public sewer, unless authorized in writing by the Township to do so.
E. Make, or cause or permit to be made, any excavation within four feet of
any public sewer or to blast any rock within 10 feet thereof, unless
authorized in writing by the Township to do so.
F. Break, cut or remove or cause or permit to be broken, cut or removed,
any pipe of the public sewer unless authorized in writing by the
Township to do so.
G. Direct the discharge, or cause or permit the direction of the discharge,
into any portion of the public sewer, directly or indirectly, of any clear
drainage, such as the discharge from air-conditioning units,
groundwater, surface water or rainwater from sidewalks, yards, areas,
courts, roofs, or any sump, cistern or tank overflow, combined sewers
being hereby prohibited.
H. Discharge, or to cause or permit the discharge, into any building
connection, building sewer lateral, or any portion of the public sewer,
directly or indirectly, of any drainage or overflow from cesspools,
manure pits, privy vaults, privies or other receptacles storing or
designed to store organic wastes, or any underground drains or
channels, unless the connection thereof to the building connection,
building sewer lateral or public sewer shall have been authorized and
approved in writing by the Board of Health.
I. Connect, or to cause or permit the connection with, any portion of the
public sewer, directly or indirectly, of any exhausts, boiler blowoffs,
sediments, drips or any pipes carrying or constructed to carry acids,
dyes, brine, germicides, greases, brewery mash, gasoline, naphtha,
benzine, oil, flammable or explosive liquids, industrial wastes,
radioactive materials or any other substance detrimental to the sewers
or their appurtenances or to the operation of the Township or the
authority sewer systems.
§ 203-7 RIVER VALE CODE § 203-7
203:766
§ 203-8. Prohibited wastes.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge, or cause or
permit to be discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes
into any public sewer:
§ 203-9. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
J. Throw or deposit, or to cause or permit to be thrown or deposited, in
any fixture, vessel, receptacle, inlet or opening connected directly or
indirectly with any portion of the public sewer, anything other than
sewage; it being the intent hereto to prohibit any straw, garbage, wood,
glass, feathers, plastics, vegetables, parings, ashes, cinders, fabrics or
tar or other viscous material, or any other substance capable of causing
obstructions from being introduced into the public sewers.
A. Any liquid which may contain more than 100 parts per million by weight
of fat, oil or grease.
B. Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
C. Any liquid having a pH factor lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to the structure, equipment and personnel of the Township or
the Authority.
D. Any liquid containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
E. Any liquid containing suspended solids of such character and quantity
that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such matters at
the sewage treatment plant.
F. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the owner when,
in the opinion of the Board of Health, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for one-family dwelling houses. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Board of
Health and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
B. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of a substantial construction, watertight and
equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place,
§ 203-7 SEWERS § 203-9
203:767
§ 203-10. Certain liquids prohibited.
No person shall introduce, or cause or permit to be introduced, into the
public sewer, on an average daily basis, any liquids having a BOD greater
than 300 parts per million by weight; more than 350 parts per million
by weight of suspended solids: any quantity of substance having the
characteristics described in § 203-8 hereof; or an average daily flow greater
than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the Township, unless approval
therefor shall first have been procured from the Board of Health. If
necessary, in the opinion of the Board of Health, the owner shall provide,
at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to reduce
the BOD to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts
per million by weight; reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents
to within the maximum limits provided for in § 203-8 hereof; or reduce
the quantities and rates of discharge of such liquids and adjust the times
thereof to 2% of the average daily flow of the Township. Plans, specifications
and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary
treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Board of
Health and of the Department of Health of the State of New Jersey. No
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals shall
first have been obtained in writing.
§ 203-11. Maintenance of treatment facilities.
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any liquids, the
owner, at his expense, shall maintain them in continuously effective
operation.
§ 203-12. Control manhole.
When required by the Board of Health, the owner of any property served
by a building connection or building sewer lateral carrying industrial waste
shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the waste. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the Board of Health. The manhole shall
be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so
as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 203-13. Adoption of testing methods; place of testing.
shall be gastight and watertight. All grease, oil and sand interceptors
shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense in continuously
effective operation at all times.
A. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of liquids to
which reference is made in §§ 203-8 and 203-10 shall be determined in
accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water,
Sewage and Industrial Wastes, published by the American Public
Health Association, Inc., being particularly the 1955 10th Edition
§ 203-9 RIVER VALE CODE § 203-13
203:768
§ 203-14. Administration and enforcement.
The Board of Health and the Township of River Vale shall have concurrent
jurisdiction in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 203-15. Right of entry.
The duly authorized officers, agents and employees of the Township and
of the Board of Health, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall
be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 203-16. Liability; recovery of costs.
Any person who, by reason of the violation of the provisions of this chapter
or other improper use of the Township sewer system or any of its branches,
appurtenances or connections, shall cause damage to said Township sewer
system or to the system of facilities of the Authority to which the Township
sewer system is connected, shall be liable to the Township for all costs and
expenses that may be incurred by the Township for the correction of any
such damage. The Township shall have the right to recover such costs and
expenses and the cost and expense of prosecuting its claim from any such
person by appropriate action at law in a court of competent jurisdiction. The
right of the Township to be reimbursed for any costs and expenses incurred
shall be an additional remedy and such person shall also be subject to the
penalties contained in this chapter for violation of its provisions.
thereof, a copy of which is hereby adopted, is annexed hereto and made
a part hereof and incorporated herein as fully as if set forth at length.
B. Three copies of said Standard Methods for the Examination of Water,
Sewage and Industrial Wastes have been placed on file in the office of
the Township Clerk of the Township of River Vale upon the introduction
of this chapter and will remain on file there until final action is taken on
this chapter, for the use and examination of the public. Upon adoption
of this chapter, said copies shall remain on file in said office so long as
this chapter is in effect, and in addition, three copies shall be placed on
file and shall remain on file in the office of the Board of Health of the
Township of River Vale so long as said ordinance is in effect, for the use
and examination of the public.
C. All such measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes shall be determined at the control manhole provided
for in § 203-12 hereof, or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the downstream manhole in
the public sewer nearest to the point at which the building sewer is
connected.
§ 203-13 SEWERS § 203-17
203:769
§ 203-17. Tampering with sewer system structures and equipment.
No person shall break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the Township
sewer system.
§ 203-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter, or who shall participate or assist in such violation or failure to
comply, or who, as owner, tenant or other person in occupancy, architect,
contractor or agent, servant or employee shall permit the commission of
such violation or maintain such violation or shall suffer such violation to
continue, shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, in the discretion of the court
before whom such conviction shall be had. Each day that such violation shall
continue, or be permitted or suffered to be continued or maintained, shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 210
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Multifamily development recycling
facilities — See Ch. 142, § 142-289 et seq.
Littering — See Ch. 152.
Recycling — See Ch. 186.
§ 203-17 RIVER VALE CODE § 203-18
210:770
ARTICLE I
Collection
[Adopted 5-25-1993 by Ord. No. 0-7-93 (Ch. 68 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 210-1. Definitions.
The following words, for the purposes of this section, shall have the
following meanings:
REGULAR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE — The scheduled pickup
and removal of solid waste from residential, commercial or institutional
premises located within the boundaries of the Township, at least once a
week.
RESPONSIBLE SOLID WASTE GENERATOR — Any property owner, tenant
or occupant of any single-family residential dwelling or multiple dwelling, or
the owner of any commercial or institutional building or structure located
within the boundaries of the Township, who generates solid waste at those
premises.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse and other discarded materials resulting
from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations, and from domestic
and community activities, and shall include all other waste materials,
including liquids, except for solid animal and vegetable wastes collected by
swine producers licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to collect,
prepare and feed such wastes to swine on their own farms.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION — The activity related to pickup and
transportation of solid waste from its source or location to a solid waste
facility or other destination.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — A receptacle, container or bag suitable for
the depositing of solid waste.
SOLID WASTE FACILITIES — The plants, structures and other real and
personal property acquired, constructed or operated or to be acquired,
constructed or operated by any person pursuant to the provisions of any
statute, including transfer stations, incinerators, resource recovery
facilities, sanitary landfill facilities or other plants for the disposal of solid
waste, and all vehicles, equipment and other real and personal property and
rights therein and appurtenances necessary or useful and convenient for
the collection or disposal of solid waste in a sanitary manner.
§ 210-2. Single-family residential housing, multifamily residential
housing, commercial and institutional buildings or structures.
In the case of single-family residential housing, multifamily residential
housing, commercial and institutional buildings and structures located
within the Township, each responsible solid waste generator, if he or she
has not already done so, shall enter into a contract for regular solid waste
collection service with any person lawfully providing private solid waste
collection services within the Township.
§ 210-1 SOLID WASTE § 210-3
210:771
§ 210-3. Additional requirement for multifamily residential
housing.
In addition to the foregoing, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of a
multiple dwelling to provide a sufficient number of appropriate solid waste
containers for the deposit of nonrecyclable waste materials to be disposed
of as solid waste.
§ 210-4. Exemption.
The requirements of this article shall not apply to solid waste generators
who transport the solid waste which is generated at his or her residential
premises directly to the solid waste facility utilized by the Township for
disposal. A solid waste generator who is transporting the solid waste which
is generated at his or her residential premises directly to the solid waste
facility utilized by the Township for disposal shall furnish proof that the
responsible solid waste generator is transporting the solid waste which is
generated at his or her residential premises directly to the solid waste
facility utilized by the Township for disposal to the Township Clerk at least
once every 12 months. In order to fulfill the requirements of this section,
the responsible solid waste generator may include the proof of service with
the municipal tax payment mailed to the Township Tax Collector.
§ 210-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14.
§ 210-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 210-5
210:772
ARTICLE II
Yard Waste Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 111-2005]
§ 210-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the Township of River Vale so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 210-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 210-8. Yard waste collection.
A. Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not
be placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet.
B. Placement of such yard waste at the curb or along the street at any
other time or in any other manner is a violation of this article. If such
placement of yard waste occurs, the party responsible for placement of
the yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or said
party shall be deemed in violation of this article.
§ 210-6 SOLID WASTE § 210-9
210:773
§ 210-9. Enforcement.
The Police Department and Division of Building and Code Enforcement of
the Township of River Vale shall enforce this article.
§ 210-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 210-9 RIVER VALE CODE § 210-10
210:774
Chapter 212
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 142. Sewers — See Ch. 203.
§ 210-10 SOLID WASTE § 210-10
210:775

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 9-23-2004 by Ord. No. 0-7-04]
§ 212-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 212-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This ordinance shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that are under review,
pending approval or require preliminary or final site plan or
subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted
by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.S.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This ordinance shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of River Vale.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this ordinance are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act
or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. This
ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law except
§ 212-1 SOLID WASTE § 212-1
210:777
§ 212-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure; any mining
excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
that, where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
or other provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher
standards shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 212-1 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-2
210:778
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development means
any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC); and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments
or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body or to a
particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
crossing or disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance," for the
purpose of this chapter, is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Township of River Vale, or political subdivision of this
state subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
§ 212-2 SOLID WASTE § 212-2
210:779
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural and
construction waste or runoff or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. Pollutant includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REVIEWING AGENCY — The Municipal Engineer, the Developmental Board
of the Township of River Vale or the Bergen County Planning Board, as
appropriate.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin) or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
§ 212-2 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-2
210:780
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 212-3. General standards.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 212-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this ordinance apply to development and are
intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
§ 212-2 SOLID WASTE § 212-3
210:781
§ 212-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
groundwater recharge. The standards may apply to new
development, at the discretion of the Township of River Vale, to
the extent that alternative design and performance standards are
applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or water
quality management plan, which are not as strict as those herein,
adopted in accordance with Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 212-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
13:1B-15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or
Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 212-4F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity and stormwater runoff quality requirements
of § 212-4F and G may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing
public roadway or railroad or the construction or enlargement of a
public pedestrian access, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates, through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of § 212-4F and G to the maximum
extent practicable;
§ 212-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-4
210:782
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 212-4F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
§ 212-4F and G that were not achievable onsite.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 212-4F and
G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at this § 212-4E into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
§ 212-4 SOLID WASTE § 212-4
210:783
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 212-4E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 212-4E(2)(i)[2] above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash and other floating, suspended or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard, see § 212-4E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels and stormwater basin floors.
§ 212-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-4
210:784
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 212-4G(1) are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long
and one and one-half inches wide (this option does not
apply for outfall netting facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 212-4G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 212-4F and G
shall be dedicated to a government agency, subject to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity, and
sufficient performance guarantees are provided for their
maintenance.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual and as amended. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in § 212-7, or found on the
§ 212-4 SOLID WASTE § 212-4
210:785
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's website at
www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 212-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100 percent of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks for
§ 212-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-4
210:786
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels; and lubricants, solvents and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 212-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
§ 212-4 SOLID WASTE § 212-4
210:787
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 212-2 shall be submitted to the
appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80 percent of the anticipated load from the developed
site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
§ 212-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-4
210:788
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 212-7, or found on the Department's website
at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 212-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
§ 212-4 SOLID WASTE § 212-4
210:789
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 212-6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 212-4F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 212-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological exceptional recreational
significance, exceptional water supply significance and exceptional
§ 212-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-4
210:790
fisheries significance of those established Category One waters.
These areas shall be designated and protected as follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway,
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway, where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard For Off-Site Stability in the Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
§ 212-4 SOLID WASTE § 212-4
210:791
§ 212-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95 percent TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only he allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 212-4G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
§ 212-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-5
210:792
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at § 212-5A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at § 212-5A(1)(b). A runoff coefficient or
a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies
that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of
the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time
of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is
in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods) or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land
use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
§ 212-5 SOLID WASTE § 212-5
210:793
§ 212-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427, (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure, as appropriate, and shall have
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the
elevation of the water quality design storm. For elevations higher
than the water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet
structure shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the
diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum
spacing between bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between
bars of six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must
comply with the requirements of § 212-8D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed and installed to be strong, durable and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half inches in
diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 212-8.
§ 212-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-6
210:794
§ 212-7. Sources for technical guidance.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 212-4 of this ordinance.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 212-4 of this ordinance, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology,
certified by the Department, and accepted by the Township of River
Vale.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.C. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625,
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation.
§ 212-6 SOLID WASTE § 212-7
210:795
§ 212-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin, and any
existing facilities or basins shall meet these standards at least as set
forth in § 212-8B(1), (2) and (3). All existing systems and basins shall be
brought into compliance within one year of the adoption of this
ordinance.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A "trash rack" is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ft sq.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft sq.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
§ 212-7 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-8
210:796
§ 212-9. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 212-8C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than two and one-half feet. Such safety ledges
shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to
six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately two
and one-half feet below the permanent water surface, and the
second step shall be located one foot to one and one-half feet
above the permanent water surface. See § 212-8D for an
illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management
basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin
may be found on the websites of the NJDEP and other websites set forth
herein.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this ordinance, the applicant shall submit all of the
required components of the checklist for the site development
stormwater plan at § 212-9C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval to the
reviewing agency as defined herein.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this ordinance.
(3) The applicant shall submit 12 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
§ 212-9C of this ordinance.
§ 212-8 SOLID WASTE § 212-9
210:797
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this ordinance.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of 1 inch equals 200 feet or
greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations, A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 212-3
through 212-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
§ 212-9 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-9
210:798
§ 212-10. Maintenance and repair.
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 212-4 of this ordinance.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 212-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this ordinance may, in
consultation and with the approval of the Municipal Engineer,
waive submission of any of the requirements in § 212-9C(1)
through (6) of this ordinance when it can be demonstrated that the
information requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a
hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not
materially affect the review process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 212-1C of this ordinance
shall comply with the requirements of § 212-10B and C.
§ 212-9 SOLID WASTE § 212-10
210:799
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris or trash removal; and the name,
address and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project unless such owner or tenant owns or leases
the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 212-10B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on § 212-10B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice
removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 212-10B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders. Those documents and logs shall
be submitted to the Municipal Engineer yearly on of immediately
after January 2.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 212-10B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust, upon
§ 212-10 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-10
210:800
§ 212-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this ordinance shall be
subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
§ 1-14.
§ 212-12. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon the receipt by the county
review agency or 60 days from the receipt of the ordinance by the county
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act in
recommending changes or supplements. The ordinance shall be effective as
to all sections where no changes or supplements are sought upon the filing.
consultation and consent of the Municipal Engineer, the plan and
the deed, after review and approval by the Township Attorney, as
needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 212-10B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by § 212-10B(6) and (7) above.
(9) The requirements of § 212-10B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
Those facilities which are not accepted by the Township of River
Vale shall require the posting of a three-year maintenance
guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 and a financial
management plan for all the years thereafter.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of an
additional and supplemental performance or maintenance guarantee in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
§ 212-10 SOLID WASTE § 212-12
210:801

ARTICLE II
Illicit Connections
[Adopted 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 108-2005]
§ 212-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of River Vale, so
as to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
Township of River Vale, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 212-14. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater
or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Township of River Vale unless that
discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier A
Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include but are not limited to,
leaks, flows or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL. WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b) or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of River Vale or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
§ 212-13 SOLID WASTE § 212-14
210:803
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 212-15. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of River Vale any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 212-16. Enforcement.
The Police Department and Division of Buildings and Code Enforcement of
the Township of River Vale shall enforce this chapter.
§ 212-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,500.
§ 212-14 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-17
210:804
ARTICLE III
Dumping or Disposal of Materials
[Adopted 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 109-2005]
§ 212-18. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Township of River Vale so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare of the residents of River Vale and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply with the provisions of this article.
§ 212-19. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of River Vale or other
public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 212-20. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of River
Vale is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 212-21. Exceptions to prohibition.
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
§ 212-18 SOLID WASTE § 212-21
210:805
§ 212-22. Enforcement.
The Police Department and Division of Building and Code Enforcement of
Township of River Vale shall enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 212-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water.
(1) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e g., shoveling and
sweeping), Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
(2) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 212-21 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-23
210:806
ARTICLE IV
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 233-2010]
§ 212-24. Purpose.
An article requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of River Vale so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 212-25. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Township of River Vale or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 212-26. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 212-24 SOLID WASTE § 212-26
210:807
§ 212-27. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 212-26 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see § 212-27C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 212-27 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
§ 212-26 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-27
210:808
§ 212-28. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Superintendent of Public Works of the
Township of River Vale.
§ 212-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each storm drain inlet that
is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register-listed historic property.
§ 212-27 SOLID WASTE § 212-29
210:809

ARTICLE V
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 234-2010]
§ 212-30. Purpose.
An article requiring dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of River Vale and/or the waters of the
state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 212-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Township of River Vale or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or ground water, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 212-32. Prohibited conduct.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
§ 212-30 SOLID WASTE § 212-32
210:811
§ 212-33. Exceptions to prohibition.
§ 212-34. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Superintendent of Public Works of the
Township of River Vale.
§ 212-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of River Vale.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 212-32 RIVER VALE CODE § 212-35
210:812
Chapter 214
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Visual obstructions near roadways — See Ch.
70, Art. II.
Snow and ice removal in Planned Residential
Districts — See Ch. 142, § 142-117.
Street design standards — See Ch. 142,
§ 142-207.
§ 212-35 SOLID WASTE § 212-35
210:813

ARTICLE I
Use of Streets and Roads
[Adopted 6-14-1973 by Ord. No. 0-9-73 (Ch. 61 of the 1967 Code)]
§ 214-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Includes any individual, partner, member or employee of any
partnership or association, and the officers, agents or employees of any
corporation.
§ 214-2. Prohibited acts. [Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No.
106-2005]
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 214-3. Removal of obstructions.
The Director of Roads shall have the power to compel the removal of any
obstruction placed on any Township road in violation hereof.
§ 214-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, § 1-14. Each day any such violation shall be continued
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, and conviction shall not
excuse the violation nor permit it to continue.
A. Cast, throw or spill any dirt, sand, ashes, gravel, brick, stones,
wastepaper or other similar loose material on any Township road.
B. Mix any dry or wet concrete, cement or plaster of any kind or
description upon the surface of any Township road.
C. Spill any turpentine, kerosene, gasoline, petroleum, lubricating oil or
other highly flammable oils or their volatile products or allow any of
such fluids to escape upon the surface of any Township road, or operate
any tank truck or other vehicle from which any of such fluids are
permitted to escape.84
D. Flush or cause to be placed on any Township road any permanent or
temporary obstruction of whatever kind unless specially allowable,
such as the lawful parking of motor vehicles.
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 128, Hazardous Materials Cleanup.
§ 214-1 SOLID WASTE § 214-4
210:815

ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Adopted 9-18-1980 by Ord. No. 0-25-80 (Ch. 71, Art. I, of the 1967
Code)]
§ 214-5. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Streets Ordinance of
the Township of River Vale."
§ 214-6. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person filing an application pursuant to the provisions
of this article or performing any work which is regulated by the provisions
hereof and his agents, employees and/or servants.
APPROPRIATE TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL — For a major street opening, the
appropriate Township official is the Township Engineer. For a minor street
opening, the appropriate Township official is the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works.[Amended 1-26-1989 by Ord. No. 0-24-88]
EMERGENCY — Such combination of circumstances as may constitute a
threat to life, health or property and which shall be determined as such by
the Mayor or appropriate Township official or their designees.
LEGAL HOLIDAY — Such legal holidays as may be established from time to
time by the State of New Jersey.
MAJOR STREET OPENING — Any excavation or tunnel which is not a minor
street opening.[Added 1-26-1989 by Ord. No. 0-24-88]
MINOR STREET OPENING — Any excavation or tunnel which extends less
than 30 linear feet and is less than six feet in depth.[Added 1-26-1989 by
Ord. No. 0-24-88]
PERSON — Any person or persons, partnership, firm or corporation.
ROAD or STREET —
TOWNSHIP — The Township of River Vale.
TOWNSHIP COUNCIL — The Township Council of the Township of River
Vale.
§ 214-7. Permit required. [Amended 1-26-1989 by Ord. No. 0-24-88]
Any road, street, curb, sidewalk or other public place dedicated to,
designated or accepted by the Township or any portion thereof.
A.
The paved area of the public right-of-way, including the sidewalks,
curbs, gutters, catch basins and manholes. [Added 1-26-1989 by Ord.
No. 0-24-88]
B.
§ 214-5 SOLID WASTE § 214-7
210:817
§ 214-8. Application for permit. [Amended 1-26-1989 by Ord. No.
0-24-88]
A. No person shall make an excavation in or tunnel under any street
without first obtaining a permit issued through the office of the
Township Clerk following classification of the street opening (major or
minor) by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and
approval of said classification by the appropriate Township official.
B. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit when an
emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to commence work
immediately; provided, however, that prior to such commencement the
application for a permit shall have been filed with the Township Clerk,
together with an estimate of the requisite fees and of the performance
guaranty; provided further, however, that the filing of such application
and estimates may be deferred until the next business day following the
commencement of work when the emergency arises after closing of the
office of the Township Clerk. The permit, when issued, shall be
retroactive to the date on which the work commenced.
C. Such permit shall remain in effect for 30 days, provided that such time
may be extended, upon application made to the Township Clerk within
said thirty-day period, for an additional 30 days upon good cause being
demonstrated to the appropriate Township official for the
noncompletion of the work within the initial period.
A. All applications for street opening permits shall be made through and
filed with the office of the Township Clerk on forms provided by such
office and shall recite the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the party to be reached in
the event of an emergency.
(3) Street address of premises adjacent to the proposed opening.
(4) The Tax Map lot and block numbers of properties abutting and
lying adjacent to that portion of the street to be opened.
(5) Name, address and phone number of the property owner for whose
benefit the opening is to be performed.
(6) Classification of the street opening, i.e., major or minor.
(7) Character and purpose of the proposed work.
(8) Estimated time when the work is to be commenced and completed.
(9) Plans and specifications, in quadruplicate, showing exact locations
and dimensions in respect of major street openings only.
§ 214-7 RIVER VALE CODE § 214-8
210:818
§ 214-9. Fees; exceptions. [Added 1-26-1989 by Ord. No. 0-24-88]
(10) Name, address and telephone number of the person who is to
perform the work.
(11) An acknowledgment that the applicant agrees to replace, at his
own cost and expense, the street, curb, gutter, bike path, sidewalk,
catch basins, manholes and all other disturbed areas, so as to
restore said area to such state and condition as complies with
Township standards, within 90 days of the street opening;
provided, however, that within 24 hours of such opening the area
shall be temporarily restored by the placement of a stabilized base
course, maintained as determined in the reasonable judgment of
the appropriate Township official until the final surface has been
laid. The final surface shall not be installed between November 15
and April 15 unless otherwise permitted by a written authorization
signed by the Mayor.
(12) A certification by the applicant that he has followed the mark-out
procedure for determining the locations of utilities and
obstructions within the area of the proposed work and submission
of a mark-out reference number.
B. Application hereunder shall be filed not less than two days in advance of
any excavation, except that in case of emergency the application shall
be filed pursuant to § 214-7.
A. Each applicant for a permit shall, before its issuance, pay to the
Township Clerk a fee in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) The fee for a minor street opening shall be $750 per street or every
1,500 thereof. [Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No. 0-9-04]
(2) The fee for a major street opening shall be $1,500 per street or
every 1,500 feet thereof. [Amended 8-26-2004 by Ord. No.
0-9-04]
B. In the event that a public utility company shall be exempted by statute
from payment of fees as required by the preceding subsection, the
utility company shall nevertheless file with the Township Clerk annually
a surety bond, approved as to form by the Township Attorney, in the
penal sum of not less than $25,000, conditioned upon the complete
restoration of the disturbed surface to such condition as complies with
Township standards.
C. No fee shall be required for any permit issued to a municipal agency.
D. The use or assignment of police officers or other Township personnel
shall be at their individual hourly rates, together with the additional
payment or reimbursement of all pension and FICA contributions which
are normally the responsibility of the Township, together with an
administrative and overhead charge of 20% on the hourly rates of the
§ 214-8 SOLID WASTE § 214-9
210:819
§ 214-10. Bond requirement. [Amended 1-26-1989 by Ord. No.
0-24-88]
officers or personnel. In the event police vehicles or other equipment
are required or directed to be present at such sites, work or road
openings, the costs thereof shall be at the rate of $200 per vehicle for
each day or part thereof that the equipment is assigned. The Township
may request sufficient monetary escrows to be posted in advance to
cover these costs, if it deems it necessary. [Added 8-26-2004 by Ord.
No. 0-9-04]
A. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has filed with the Township
Clerk a cash bond in an amount equal to 120% of the estimated cost of
closing the road in a manner as is herein provided and completing any
work incidental thereto as estimated by the appropriate Township
official. The Township Council may, in its discretion upon appropriate
application by a public utility, require the posting of a surety bond or
waive the bond requirement of this section upon the presentation of
satisfactory proof that the utility is capable of meeting any claim
against it arising out of the work anticipated to be performed. Such
bond shall be executed by the applicant as principal and by a surety
company in good standing and licensed to do business in the State of
New Jersey as surety and shall be conditioned as follows:
(1) To indemnify and hold harmless the Township from all losses,
damages, claims and expenses, including expenses incurred in the
defense of any litigation arising out of injury to person or property
resulting from any work done by the applicant under the permit.
(2) To indemnify the Township for any expense incurred in enforcing
any of the provisions of this article.
(3) To indemnify any person who shall sustain personal injuries or
damages to his property as a result of any act or omission of the
applicant, his agents, employees or subcontractors in the course of
any work under the permit.
(4) Upon the applicant's restoring the surface and foundation of the
street for which the permit is granted in a manner acceptable to the
appropriate Township official.
B. A single bond may be accepted to cover a number of excavations by the
applicant. Bonds shall remain in force for a period of 12 months after
the date the last work is performed to guarantee the integrity of the
street closing.
C. A bond may be waived by the appropriate Township official if it is
already provided for in a subdivision or developer's agreement.
§ 214-9 RIVER VALE CODE § 214-11
210:820
§ 214-11. Inspection and engineering fees. [Amended 1-26-1989 by
Ord. No. 0-24-88]
Each applicant shall deposit in trust with the Township Clerk an amount
as determined by the appropriate Township official which is an estimate of
all anticipated inspection and engineering costs and fees. In the event that
such actual costs and fees are less than the amount deposited in trust, then
the Township shall refund the difference between the amount deposited in
trust and the actual costs and fees charged to the applicant. In the event
that such actual costs and fees exceed the amount deposited in trust, then
the difference between the actual costs and fees and the amount deposited
in trust shall be payable from the bond required by the terms of § 214-10.
§ 214-12. Release of bond. [Amended 1-26-1989 by Ord. No.
0-24-88]
§ 214-13. Limitations. [Amended 1-26-1989 by Ord. No. 0-24-88]
Except in the case of an emergency, the following limitations shall be
applicable to all roads and streets within the Township:
A. No bond shall be released unless the surface and foundations of the
road or street shall have been satisfactorily restored in accordance with
the provisions of this article. Any determination as to whether or not
such road or street shall have been so restored shall be made solely by
the Township Council, after receiving the advice and recommendation
of appropriate Township officials, and the determination of the
Township Council shall be final and conclusive.
B. The bond shall also secure the Township against damage to, removal of
or interference with Township property.
C. Upon written notification to the applicant by the appropriate Township
official that Township property has been damaged, removed or
interfered with, the applicant shall correct such condition within a
reasonable time thereafter as determined by the appropriate Township
official or the cost of such correction shall be payable from such bond.
The bond shall also secure the Township for the costs of engineering
and inspection fees, as specified in § 214-11.
A. No excavation or backfilling shall be undertaken from November 15
through March 31, and no restoration or pavement construction shall
be undertaken prior to April 15 except upon special written approval
signed by the Mayor, upon written advice of the appropriate Township
official. Such special approval may be granted if weather conditions
permit and suitable materials are available; provided, however, that no
such special approval will be granted if ambient temperatures below
40° F. are anticipated during the course of the work or where frozen
subgrade exists. No such special approval shall relieve the applicant
from compliance with all the other provisions of this article.
§ 214-11 SOLID WASTE § 214-13
210:821
§ 214-14. Barricades, warnings and signs.
During the course of any work for which application is required pursuant
to the provisions of this article, the applicant shall at all times provide
and maintain suitable and sufficient barricades with warning lights, danger
signals and signs. Barricades with warning signs shall be placed at all roads
or streets closed to traffic. Warnings and detour signs shall be placed at
all closures, intersections and along detour routes such as to clearly mark
same. All barricades and warning lights shall be illuminated from sunset
until sunrise. Wherever necessary for adequate protection of the public, a
watchman and/or flagman will be provided by the applicant, as determined
by the Director of Police.
§ 214-15. Insurance.
Each applicant shall furnish proof at the time of application that it maintains
sufficient public liability insurance with an insurance company licensed to
transact business in the State of New Jersey, in an amount of not less than
$500,000 for injuries or death to any one person, not less than $1,000,000
for injuries or death in any one occurrence and $500,000 for property
damage in any one occurrence. Said policy of insurance shall specifically
designate the Township and its employees and agents as named insureds
and shall require 10 days' written notice to the Township prior to
termination thereof. Policies shall also provide motor vehicle liability
coverage in identical amounts and shall have X, C and U exclusions deleted.
§ 214-16. Entry upon private property.
No applicant shall enter upon or make use of any private property without
the written permission of the owner thereof.
§ 214-17. Limitation of hours.
Except in case of emergency, no work for which application is required
pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be performed or undertaken
on Sundays or legal holidays or between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m.
§ 214-18. Time limit for completion.
Notice of commencement of work for which application is required pursuant
to the provisions of this article shall be given to the appropriate Township
official not less than two days in advance thereof and shall be completed
within the time limits specified hereinafter. Thereafter, the Township may
cause such work to be completed, and the costs thereof shall be payable
from the applicant's bond.
B. No street or road which has been paved with macadam or bituminous
concrete surface shall be excavated or otherwise opened for a period of
three years from the date of completion thereof except upon prior
approval granted by the Mayor.
§ 214-13 RIVER VALE CODE § 214-19
210:822
§ 214-19. Specifications and procedures for excavation and
trenches.
The following specifications and procedures shall be applicable to all
excavations and trenches:
§ 214-20. Specifications and procedures for backfilling.
Trenches and excavations above pipe grade shall be backfilled within 24
hours after subsurface work is completed, unless written approval is
obtained from the appropriate Township official. Backfill shall be approved
granular material, free of organic matter, clay, silts, cinders or other
deleterious materials. Backfill shall be placed in maximum nine-inch layers
and mechanically tamped after placement of each layer such as to achieve a
density equal to preexcavation conditions. Backfill shall be sufficiently moist
to achieve proper compaction.
§ 214-21. Specifications and procedures for pavement.
The following specifications and procedures shall be applicable to all
pavement on roads and streets:
A. The applicant shall determine the exact location of all underground
structures, known or unknown, and shall take appropriate measures for
protection of adjacent piping or utilities. The applicant shall be
responsible for any damages to pipelines or utilities and shall give
notice to any utility concerned prior to repair or backfill.
B. The pavement shall be cut by saw or pavement cutters in straight lines.
Trenches shall be dug so that pipe can be laid to the alignment and
depth required. Minimum depth of cover from the surface of the ground
to the top of the pipe barrel shall be as shown on drawings. Trenches
shall be braced and drained so that the workers may work safely and
efficiently; the applicant shall comply with requirements of the State
Construction Code and the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Act.
C. Discharge from trench dewatering pumps, free of soil materials, shall
be conducted to natural drainage channels or drains.
D. Trenches shall be excavated to a depth required to provide a uniform
and continuous bearing and support for pipe on solid and undisturbed
ground. Any portion of trench excavated below specified grade shall be
corrected with approved material and thoroughly compacted. Where
the bottom of trench at subgrade is unstable or includes ashes, cinders,
refuse, vegetable or fragments of inorganic material, the applicant shall
excavate and remove such unsuitable material.
E. Hand methods of excavation shall be employed in locations designated
on drawings. Otherwise, the applicant may utilize trench digging
machinery or hand methods of excavation.
§ 214-19 SOLID WASTE § 214-21
210:823
A. For openings of less than 100 square feet in surface area, the upper 7 1/
2 inches of trench shall be filled by the applicant with graded one-andone-
half-inch stone equal to Division 3, Section 2, of State Specification,
with dust, compacted by five-ton roller. After 24 hours of traffic, or
other period as stipulated by the appropriate Township official, the
edges of the trench shall be saw cut parallel to the street center line
and six inches outside the widest trench limits, after which the upper
3 1/2 inches of stone shall be removed and final pavement shall be
constructed. After 30 days, and after six months, the applicant shall
place fine aggregate bituminous concrete in depressed areas to form a
smooth, even street surface.
B. For openings of greater than 100 square feet in surface area, the upper
7 1/2 inches of trench shall be filled by the applicant with five inches of
graded one-and-one-half-inch stone equal to Division 3, Section 2, of
State Specification, with dust, and 1 1/2 inches of stabilized base
material equal to Division 3, Section 2A, of State Specification,
compacted by a ten-ton roller. The surface shall be maintained by the
applicant for not less than 30 days and, at the discretion of the
appropriate Township official, to a maximum of 90 days, such that
maximum surface depression is one inch. Thereafter, the edges of the
trench shall be saw cut parallel to the street center line and six inches
outside the widest trench limits, after which the upper 3 1/2 inches of
material shall be removed, and final pavement shall be constructed.
After six months, the applicant shall place fine aggregate bituminous
concrete in depressed areas to for a smooth, even, street surface.
C. For emergency openings from November 15 through March 31, the
procedure shall be as for openings greater than 100 square feet, except
that temporary paving material may be approved cold patching
compound, if hot material is not available.
D. Final pavement, in all cases, shall be four inches of graded one-and-onehalf-
inch stone, equal to Division 3, Section 2, of State Specification,
with dust, two inches of stabilized base material equal to Division 3,
Section 2A, of State Specification, 1 1/2 inches of fine aggregate
bituminous concrete equal to Division 3, Section 12, Type SM-1 of State
Specification, feathered over a twelve-inch width of tack coat, to meet
adjacent surfaces. All thicknesses shall be as measured after
compaction by a ten-ton roller.
E. Where a trench exceeds 100 feet in length, a one-and-one-half-inch
surface course shall be placed from curb to street center line on deadend
streets and from curb to curb on through streets. Where a trench
exceeds six feet in width, is skewed to street center line or is connected
to spur trenches, a one-and-one-half-inch surface course shall be placed
from curb to curb. In all cases, surface shall be cleaned and a tack coat
placed before application of the surface course, which shall be
feathered toward each curb.
§ 214-21 RIVER VALE CODE § 214-21
210:824
§ 214-22. New streets and roads. [Amended 1-26-1989 by Ord. No.
0-24-88]
Pavement in new streets or roads shall be in accordance with specifications
and procedures specified in § 214-21D.
§ 214-23. Specifications and procedures for curbs.
Curbs damaged by excavations shall be restored, and curbs in new streets
and roads shall be installed in accordance with the following specifications
and procedures:
§ 214-24. Specifications and procedures for sidewalks.
Sidewalks damaged by excavations shall be restored and sidewalks on
new streets and roads shall be installed in accordance with the following
specifications and procedures:
F. Upon prior approval of the appropriate Township official, subgrade
stone may be replaced with an equivalent thickness of stabilized base
material.
A. Curbs shall be six inches wide at the top, nine inches wide at the bottom
and 20 inches deep, of which six inches shall extend above finished
grade at gutter.
B. Foundations under curbs shall be undisturbed, compacted, nonorganic
material. If placed on fill, such material shall be granular, nonorganic
and compacted in nine-inch layers.
C. Curbs shall be poured in approved forms, using four-thousand-poundsper-
square-inch concrete with maximum slump of four inches. Forms
shall be inspected before pouring, and concrete shall be thoroughly
vibrated and cured as approved. No concrete shall be poured except in
dry weather, at ambient temperatures between 50° F and 90° F.
D. Curb sections shall not exceed 10 feet in length and shall be separated
by contraction joint material.
E. Depressed curb sections shall be poured at driveways and barrier-free
ramps. Breaking of full curbs to create depressed curbs is prohibited.
A. Sidewalks shall be 48 inches wide and four inches thick, set to approved
grades.
B. Foundations under sidewalks shall be undisturbed, compacted,
nonorganic material. If placed on fill, such material shall be granular,
nonorganic and compacted in nine-inch layers.
C. Sidewalks shall be poured in approved forms, using three-thousandpounds-
per-square-inch concrete with maximum slump of four inches.
No concrete shall be poured except in dry weather, at ambient
§ 214-21 SOLID WASTE § 214-24
210:825
§ 214-25. Noncompliance; right of Township to remedy. [Added
1-26-1989 by Ord. No. 0-24-88]
If the applicant does not satisfactorily comply with the provisions of
§§ 214-20, 214-21, 2141-22, 214-23 and/or 214-24, then the Township may
give notice to the applicant that the applicant must comply with the
specified provisions within 48 hours, weather permitting. Satisfactory
compliance is to be determined by the appropriate Township official. If the
applicant fails to satisfactorily comply within the forty-eight-hour period,
then the Township may remedy said noncompliance without further notice
to the applicant at the sole cost of the applicant. Such cost shall be charged
against the bond as specified in § 214-10.
§ 214-26. Cleanup procedures.
The applicant shall, at all times, maintain the excavated street or road in
a clean condition. All dirt, rubbish and excess materials shall be regularly
removed by the applicant, and backfill shall be mounded within the limits
of excavation. All tools and temporary structures shall be removed by the
applicant upon completion of work.
§ 214-27. Approvals and special procedures.
All materials and subcontractors shall he subject to the approval of
appropriate Township officials who shall be authorized to order such special
maintenance, pavement procedures and safety requirements as
circumstances may require.
§ 214-28. Special conditions. [Added 1-26-1989 by Ord. No.
0-24-88]
§ 214-29. Rules and regulations. [Added 1-26-1989 by Ord. No.
0-24-88]
The Township Engineer may make any reasonable rules and regulations
which he considers necessary for the administration and enforcement of
temperatures between 50° F. and 90° F. and shall be cured in approved
fashion.
D. Sidewalk sections shall be separated by contraction joints at four-foot
intervals and by construction joints at twelve-foot intervals. Surfaces
shall be troweled to approved finish.
A. The Township Council may impose such conditions in any case it deems
necessary and appropriate.
B. Under extraordinary conditions not covered by this article, the
Township Engineer shall receive a copy of the plan of the permittee and,
after an evaluation, set a fee commensurate with the circumstances in
the exercise of his reasonable judgment.
§ 214-24 RIVER VALE CODE § 214-29
210:826
this article, but no regulation shall be inconsistent with, alter or amend any
provision of this article or impose any requirement which is in addition to
those expressly or by implication imposed by this article. No regulation shall
be effective unless it shall have been approved by resolution of the Township
Council. Copies of all current rules and regulations shall be furnished to
each permittee at the time of the issuance of the permit.
§ 214-30. Utility companies. [Added 1-26-1989 by Ord. No. 0-24-88]
§ 214-31. Waiver of provisions.
In the event of an emergency as hereinabove defined, application for waiver
of specific provisions of this article may be made to the Mayor or to the
appropriate Township official who is authorized in such cases to permit
waiver of requirements and impose additional conditions as required to
protect the public interest and Township property.
§ 214-32. Construal of provisions.
Except as herein otherwise provided, this article is not intended and shall
not be construed to repeal any provision of any other ordinance of the
Township of River Vale.
§ 214-33. Violations and penalties.
For each violation of the provisions of this article, the person convicted
thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge before
whom such conviction is had. Each day that a violation shall exist shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation of this article.
A. Utility companies, including those engaged in the installation of gas,
water and electric lines, shall report to the Department of Public Works,
quarterly, their intentions with regard to prospective work requiring
future street openings in the community, for the purpose of
coordinating such activity with pavement projects anticipated by the
Township.85
B. Except in the case of emergency, the Township shall have the right to
schedule street openings with utility companies in a manner which will
create the least disturbance to pavement courses, in furtherance of
which purpose the Township shall provide to the utilities a schedule of
expected street construction and resurfacing.
85.Editor's Note: See Ch. 233, Utilities, Underground.
§ 214-29 SOLID WASTE § 214-33
210:827

ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 4-23-1987 by Ord. No. 0-6-87 (Ch. 71, Art. II, of the 1967
Code)]
§ 214-34. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Snow Removal Ordinance
of the Township of River Vale."
§ 214-35. Removal of snow and ice required.
§ 214-36. Charge for removal by Township.
A. The owners, tenants and occupants of improved or unimproved
premises abutting upon public streets and roads within the Township of
River Vale shall remove all snow and ice from the full width of sidewalks
and/or walkways abutting their respective premises within 12 hours of
daylight after any snowfall or accumulation of ice occurs. In the event
that ice may be so frozen as to make removal impracticable, the owners,
tenants or occupants of the abutting premises shall cause the sidewalk
and/or walkway to be thoroughly covered with sand, ashes, sawdust or
rock salt within 12 hours of daylight after the accumulation of such ice.
B. The owner of any garden apartment development, nursing home, office
building and shopping center and the owner of any property within the
Township to which the public is invited for business purposes shall
remove all snow and ice from the driveways, parking areas, sidewalks,
walkways, steps and fire hydrants located upon such property within six
hours of daylight after any snowfall or accumulation of ice occurs. In
the event that ice may be so frozen as to make removal impracticable,
the owner shall cause the sidewalks and/or walkways and steps to be
thoroughly covered with sand, ashes, sawdust or rock salt within six
hours of daylight after the accumulation of such ice.
A. In the event of a violation of the provisions of § 214-35, the Township
may undertake the removal of all snow and ice from any sidewalk
abutting a public street or road, and the Township may undertake the
removal of all snow and ice from driveways, parking areas, sidewalks,
walkways, steps and fire hydrants located upon any garden apartment
development, nursing home, office building, shopping center or any
other property within the Township to which the public is invited for
business purposes. In such event, the cost of such removal shall be
certified to the Township Council by the Superintendent of the
Township Department of Public Works. The Township Council shall
examine such certificate and, if found to be correct, shall cause such
cost to be billed to the owner of such abutting premises or to the owner
of any other premises mentioned in § 214-35 as to which snow or ice
removal work has been performed by the Township, as such owner
appears from the latest Township tax records. Unless promptly paid,
§ 214-34 SOLID WASTE § 214-36
210:829
§ 214-37. Definitions; placement of snow and ice. [Amended
2-8-1996 by Ord. No. 0-5-96]
§ 214-38. Enforcement.
All members of the Township Police Department and members of the
Township Department of Public Works are authorized to file complaints for
violations of this article.
§ 214-39. Violations and penalties.
Any owner, tenant or occupant who fails to comply with any requirement
of this article or who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article I, § 1-14, and every day that a violation of this article continues shall
be considered a separate offense.
such cost shall be charged against such premises and be added to and
be part of the taxes next to be levied and assessed thereon and enforced
and collected with interest by the same officers and in the same manner
as other taxes.
B. The provisions of this section shall not relieve any owner, tenant or
occupant of any penalty under § 214-39.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, company, partnership, corporation or any
other entity not including the Township of River Vale or its agencies.
STREET — The paved area of the public right-of-way, including the
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, catch basins and manholes.
B. No person shall throw, place or deposit snow or ice into or on any public
street, sidewalk or private property belonging to another.
§ 214-36 RIVER VALE CODE § 214-39
210:830
ARTICLE IV
Traffic Control in Construction and Maintenance Zones
[Adopted 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 269-2012]
§ 214-40. Purpose; adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
§ 214-41. Preconstruction meeting.
§ 214-42. Emergency contact telephone numbers.
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Traffic Bureau with
at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of
emergency problems at any construction or maintenance site prior to the
start of any work. If, for any reason, emergency contacts cannot be reached
or if the emergency contact person does not respond to a call from the
A. The Township Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur when traffic must be moved through or around road or
street construction, maintenance operations and utility work above or
below ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the
normal flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the
public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish
controls and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement
of traffic through construction and maintenance zones and to provide
safety for the workforces performing these operations.
B. The Township of River Vale in the County of Bergen, State of New
Jersey, does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, hereafter known as "MUTCD" as may be
supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction, maintenance operations or utility work obstructs the
normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor or utility which fails to
comply with the provisions of MUTCD while performing such work is in
violation of this section.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or public utility
wishing to conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the
Traffic Bureau of the River Vale Police Department in order to arrange a
preconstruction meeting to submit plans for the safe movement of
traffic during such period of construction or work. Any person,
contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the
start of such work or whose plans are not approved by the Traffic
Bureau of the River Vale Police Department is in violation of this
section. Public utilities conducting routine maintenance work need not
comply with the preconstruction meeting requirement. A valid road
opening permit from the Township (see §§ 214-7 to 214-9) or Bergen
County shall be provided at the preconstruction meeting. Proof of utility
mark out notification is required at the preconstruction meeting.
§ 214-40 SOLID WASTE § 214-42
210:831
Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the Township may
respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for such
emergency services by the Township shall be charged to the person,
contractor or utility responsible for such condition.
§ 214-43. Heavily traveled roads.
The River Vale Police Department Traffic Bureau shall maintain a list of
all roads determined to be heavily traveled for the purposes of this article.
Such determination shall be made by the Police Department Traffic Bureau,
and shall be binding. Said list may be amended from time to time as
conditions warrant to include roads which become heavily traveled due to
temporary conditions or events. This list shall be available for inspection
during normal business hours, and a copy shall be provided upon request of
any party.
§ 214-44. Time limits.
§ 214-45. Road closings and detours.
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the River Vale Police Traffic Bureau.
§ 214-46. Use or assignment of police officers.
A. Except as otherwise set forth herein, there shall be no construction,
maintenance operations or utility work, under or above any heavily
traveled roadway, as defined in this article, in the Township between
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or between 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
B. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work during the restricted
hours set forth in Subsection A by the officer in charge of the Traffic
Bureau of the River Vale Police Department. If it is determined by the
officer in charge of the River Vale Police Traffic Bureau, in his
reasonable discretion, that the construction or maintenance operations
prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. on any roadway would substantially
delay traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be
permitted only between 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
A. The use or assignment of police officers by utility companies, private
contractors and other vendors for traffic control details shall be
compensated at the officer's overtime rate, with an additional
administrative fee of 20% and FICA contributions. A vehicle fee of $200
per day per patrol car shall also be charged.
B. If it deems necessary, the Township may request sufficient funds to be
deposited to an escrow account in advance to cover these costs. The
funds received by the Township deposited in an escrow account shall be
utilized to compensate the police officers. The Township shall notify the
contractor or vendor upon the expenditure of 50% of the escrow funds.
At that time, a determination shall be made as to whether or not the
§ 214-42 RIVER VALE CODE § 214-46
210:832
§ 214-47. Traffic directors.
§ 214-48. Stop-work order.
The Traffic Bureau of the River Vale Police Department shall have the
authority to stop work, including the removal of equipment and vehicles,
stored material within the street right-of-way, backfilling of open
excavations and/or other related work, in order to abate any nuisance,
traffic delay and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this section.
balance is sufficient to pay for further services that may be required.
In the event the remaining balance is insufficient, the company,
organization or contractor shall, within 24 hours of notice of the
deficiency, deposit funds in an amount sufficient to cover the additional
services. Any funds remaining in the escrow account shall be refunded
to the organization, vendor or contractor that posted said escrow funds
within 60 days of receipt by the Township of the refund request.
C. Invoices shall be paid in full within 45 days of the date of the invoice. In
the event the invoice is not paid in full within 45 days, the organization
or contractor shall, for all future hiring of off-duty police officers, pay in
advance the amount of the compensation to be paid to the off-duty
police officers.
D. Officers assigned to a traffic control or road construction detail for a
utility company, private contractor or other vendor shall receive a
minimum compensation of four hours. Details exceeding the originally
scheduled hours shall be compensated at a minimum of two-hour
increments until the completion of the detail.
E. All cancellations require a minimum two hours' notification prior to the
scheduled start time of the detail. Noncompliance with this cancellation
notice shall result in the officer receiving a minimum of four hours'
compensation.
A. For the purposes of this section, a traffic director is that individual who
is responsible for traffic control at a roadway worksite and is either a
River Vale Police Officer or a civilian flagger who meets the
qualifications as set forth in Section 6E of the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices and is certified as a flagger by the American
Traffic Safety Services Association, Rutgers University or comparable
organization, approved by the Chief of Police. A traffic control plan and
proof of flagger certification is required at the preconstruction meeting.
B. Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the River Vale Police Department that same is
necessary to provide for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
C. Civilian flaggers shall not be used as traffic directors in any work zone
which contains an intersection with a traffic control device. In those
situations, only a police officer may be used as a traffic director.
§ 214-46 SOLID WASTE § 214-49
210:833
§ 214-49. Emergency repair work.
§ 214-50. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, upon conviction,
may be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000. Each day that such
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
A. In the case of emergency repair work where construction maintenance
operations or emergency utility work must be performed that will
obstruct, interfere or detour traffic on any roadway in the Township, the
person, contractor or utility performing such operation shall notify the
River Vale Police Department of such emergency operation. The person,
contractor or utility shall disclose the nature of the emergency, location
and hours of operation.
B. All emergency construction and maintenance operations shall be
performed with full regard to safety and to keep traffic interference to
an absolute minimum. During such emergency repair work, the person,
contractor or utility shall comply with the provisions of the MUTCD
while performing such emergency repair work.
§ 214-49 RIVER VALE CODE § 214-50
210:834
Chapter 218
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction code fees for swimming
pools — See Ch. 90.
Fences around swimming pools — See Ch.
142, § 142-250.
Location of private swimming pools — See Ch.
142, § 142-267.
§ 214-50 SWIMMING POOLS § 214-50
218:835

ARTICLE I
Public Swimming Pools
[Adopted 5-13-1957(Ch. 75, Art. I, of the 1967 Code); readopted in
its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 218-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
There is hereby adopted by the Township of River Vale, for the purpose of
establishing a Swimming Pool Code, that certain code known as "Swimming
Pool Code of New Jersey (1955)," said code being hereby adopted by the
Township of River Vale by reference, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1. A copy
of said code so intended to be adopted is annexed hereto, and three copies
of said code have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk
and will remain on file there until further action is taken on this article,
for the use and examination of the public. Said code is hereby adopted as
the official Swimming Pool Code of the Township of River Vale, and shall
be known and may be cited as "River Vale Swimming Pool Code (1957),"
excepting so much thereof as may be amended, supplemented, changed or
altered by and in this article.
§ 218-2. Amendments.
The aforesaid "Swimming Pool Code of New .Jersey (1955)" is hereby
amended, supplemented, changed or altered in the following respects:
§ 218-3. Permits and fees. [Amended 9-12-2005 by Ord. No.
133-2005]
No person, firm or corporation shall locale, construct, alter or operate a
swimming pool until a license or a permit therefor shall have been issued by
the Board of Health and in connection therewith the following fees may be
charged by the Board:
A. Wherever the words "administrative authority" shall appear in said
code, the same shall be read and construed to mean, Board of Health of
the Township of River Vale.
B. Wherever the word "construct" shall appear in said code, the same shall
be read and construed to mean and include the erection, building or
installation of a new swimming pool or enlarging or in any manner
changing or altering an existing swimming pool or any of its facilities.
A. Five hundred fifty dollars for year-round indoor pools.
B. Four hundred dollars for seasonal outdoor pools.
C. Two hundred dollars for wading pools.
D. (Reserved)
§ 218-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 218-3
218:837
§ 218-4. Citation of references for charging violations.
In charging any violation of the provisions hereof or of the aforesaid code
which is adopted by reference, as the same may be modified hereby, it shall
be necessary only to refer to the section or subsections appearing herein or
in said code, so adopted by reference, and to refer to the same by the same
section or subsection as may appear herein or therein.
§ 218-5. Violations and penalties.
E. All permits issued for the operation of a swimming pool shall expire
annually on the first day of April in each year, and application for
renewal thereof shall be submitted together with the required fee prior
to said first day of April in each year.
F. Permits acquired by this article or the code herein referred to may be
denied or suspended by the Board of Health, but the holder of any such
permit shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard, before the
suspension or revocation of any permit, and have a reasonable
opportunity to correct any condition not meeting the requirements of
such code or allegedly constituting such swimming pool a health hazard
or a potential health hazard.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article or of the code adopted hereby, as amended,
supplemented, changed or altered herein, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I, § 1-14, for each and every offense, and each day a
particular violation shall continue is hereby declared to be and shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. The failure to observe any requirement of this article or the code hereby
adopted, as amended, and the doing or performing of any act forbidden
herein or therein, shall constitute a violation of this article or of said
code.
§ 218-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 218-5
218:838
Chapter 223
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 81.
Hazardous materials cleanup — See Ch. 128.
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
Junk vehicles — See Ch. 241.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 245.
§ 223-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile or solid debris resulting from an accident, motor vehicle crash,
or otherwise from a highway, street or other public or private road, or a
parking area, or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle of any type used in the conduct
of any business of professional conveyance, or used as a public or livery
means, for the paid conveyance of passengers.
INSIDE BUILDING — A vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the wall, for storage and removal of vehicles
and that is secured by a locking device on each opening.
MOTOR VEHICLE CRASH — An occurrence in which a private passenger
automobile comes into contact with any other object for which the private
passenger automobile must be towed or removed for placement in a storage
facility. This includes all situations which are accidental as to the owner or
operator of the motor vehicle even if they were caused by the intentional
acts of a perpetrator where the perpetrator was not the owner or operator
of the motor vehicle.
OFFICIAL TOWERS — Entities which:
OUTSIDE SECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least
six feet high and is installed with a passive alarm system or a similar on-site
security measure. The facility is to be lighted at night.
A. Own or operate tow vehicles; and
B. Have been designated as official towers pursuant to this chapter.
§ 218-5 SWIMMING POOLS § 223-1
218:839
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier, and all
other storage facilities not defined above as "inside building" or "outside
secured."
PASSENGER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle of a private passenger or station
wagon type that is owned or leased and is neither used as a public or livery
conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a driver; and a motor
vehicle with a pickup body, or delivery sedan, a van, a sport utility vehicle
(SUV), or a panel truck or a camper-type vehicle used for recreational
purposes owned by an individual not used in the occupation, profession or
business of the owner(s).
STORAGE CHARGES FOR CALENDAR DAY — The maximum allowable
amount to be charged by a storage facility for a calendar day or portion
thereof. A new calendar day begins at 12:01 a.m.
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of motor vehicles.
TOW VEHICLE'S BASE OF SERVICE — The towing operator's principal
place of business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in use.
§ 223-2. Appointment of official towers.
A. The governing body of the Township of River Vale shall appoint persons
or companies meeting the criteria set forth in this chapter and engaged
in the business or offering the services of a motor vehicle towing or
wrecker service, whereby damaged, disabled or impounded motor
vehicles are towed or otherwise removed from the place where they are
damaged or disabled, by use of a tow vehicle, as defined in this chapter.
Such persons or companies shall be known as "official towers."
B. Official towers shall be identified by means of a license which shall be
issued as hereinafter provided.
C. From calendar year to calendar year, the list of official towers will
remain as is, provided:
(1) The official tower requests in writing to remain on the list;
(2) The official tower has been and remains in compliance with all
requirements of this chapter; and
(3) There is no pending administrative or disciplinary action against
the official tower by the Borough.
D. If a vacancy on the official tower list occurs for one or more of the
above-named reasons, a notice announcing the vacancy will be
published in local newspapers requesting applications be submitted to
the River Vale Police Department Traffic Bureau. Specific instructions
on the method of submitting an application will also be posted in this
§ 223-1 RIVER VALE CODE § 223-2
218:840
§ 223-3. Services to be furnished; subcontracting; tower
responsibilities.
notice. Applications will be processed in the order received, and the
vacant position will be awarded to the first-approved application.
E. If an official tower is denied renewal for any reason and seeks
subsequent return to the official towers list, the application will be
treated as a new application as of the date of receipt of such request.
A. All official towers shall furnish adequate and proper wrecking, towing,
storage and emergency repair services to motor vehicles damaged or
disabled, and located, within the geographic limits of the Township,
when requested to do so by an authorized Township official. The official
tower must be available on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis, seven days a
week, as scheduled by the Township.
B. A maximum response time of 25 minutes will be expected from each
official tower called by the Police Department. If the first-called official
tower fails to respond within the expected response time, the nextlisted
official tower will be called. Failure to respond within the stated
response time will be considered a violation of the license, and repeated
violations will result in suspension of the official tower license.
C. Official towers are and remain responsible for coverage for all periods
for which they are scheduled. Should the scheduled official tower
require another tower to cover a portion of the assigned schedule, the
substitution must be approved in advance by the Police Department
traffic supervisor or his designee and the covering tower must be
another official tower. Unauthorized arrangements for coverage may
result in the removal of the official tower and/or the alternate official
tower from the official tower list.
D. Substitution of towers under the immediately preceding Subsection C is
limited to 10 per calendar year. Should alternate coverage in excess of
10 be required, the requesting official tower will be removed from the
Township's official tower list.
E. Official towers are limited to no more than three missed tows during a
calendar year. A missed tow in excess of this number will constitute a
ground for removal from the official tower list for the remainder of the
calendar year or such other period determined in the sole discretion of
the Township.
F. If an official tower is removed from the tow list during a fiscal year, an
official tower applicant will be added to replace the official tower
removed.
G. The official tower shall be responsible for removing all solid and
sweepable debris resulting from a motor vehicle crash.
§ 223-2 SWIMMING POOLS § 223-3
218:841
§ 223-4. Application process.
H. When requested by the Police Department, the official tower shall be
responsible for the preservation of evidence.
I. The official tower shall comply with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning wages, hours and terms of employment.
J. The official tower will be required to file an employment
nondiscrimination statement.
K. The official tower will be required to establish and display to the public
procedures for notification of vehicle owners regarding storage fees
and removal of vehicles from storage.
A. Application.
(1) Applications for inclusion on the official tower list shall be made to
the Mayor and Council upon a form provided by the Business
Administrator and shall consist of an original and two true copies,
containing the following information:
(a) The complete name of the applicant (including the complete
corporate and any "doing business" names), business address,
telephone number and federal/state entity numbers.
(b) The residence and any other business address and telephone
numbers, including cell telephone numbers, of the owner or
the applicant. If the applicant or the owner is a corporation, the
application shall contain the name, residence and business
address, and telephone number of every stockholder or
member owning more than 10% of the issued stock or
membership interest.
(c) Proof of ownership or valid lease of the vehicles which will be
utilized to provide services pursuant to this chapter.
(d) Proof of ownership or valid lease of the proposed vehicle
storage area which will be utilized to provide services pursuant
to this chapter.
(e) Such information as may be required by the Mayor and Council
concerning the personnel, vehicles, equipment, storage
facilities and complaint history of such applicant, all as
hereinafter provided, showing that the applicant meets the
minimum standards of performance.
(f) A certificate or certificates of insurance evidencing adequate
insurance coverage as hereinafter provided.
(g) The names and addresses of two business references that have
knowledge of the applicant's business practices for (at least)
the two years preceding the date of the application.
§ 223-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 223-4
218:842
(h) A fee of $150 to cover the administrative expenses incurred by
the Township in processing the application.
(2) An applicant may submit only one application. Persons or entities
with ownership interests in the applicant may not submit
applications for, on behalf of, or in regard to any other applicant. An
applicant may list more than one applicant-company vehicle on its
application.
B. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Business Administrator will
forward at least one copy to the Chief of Police for review and approval.
Review by the Chief of Police shall consist of the following:
(1) A background check to determine if either the applicant or the
applicant's personnel have been convicted of a criminal offense or
have had their drivers' licenses suspended or revoked within the
past year. Conviction of a criminal offense or suspension of a
driver's license within the past year shall be a cause for
disqualification from inclusion on the official tower list.
(2) Inspections of the vehicles, equipment and storage area proposed
to be utilized by the applicant to verify the accuracy of the
information contained in the application and to determine ability to
comply with applicable laws, regulations and the standards of
performance required by this chapter.
(3) Interviews with the applicant and the applicant's personnel.
C. The Chief of Police will conduct the review and render a report to the
Mayor and Council, recommending either approval or denial of the
application and the reasons therefor, within 21 days of receipt of the
application from the Business Administrator. The Mayor and Council
will take action with regard to the application within 30 days of receipt
of the report of the Chief of Police.
D. The applicant shall be given notice of the date on which the Mayor and
Council will consider the application; the applicant shall be permitted
to appear and be heard at that meeting.
E. Written notice of the approval or denial of the application will be
provided to the applicant within seven days of the decision of the Mayor
and Council.
F. If the Mayor and Council fail to take action within 60 days of receipt of a
complete application by the Business Administrator, the application
shall be deemed to have been denied.
G. An applicant may be included on the official tower list by resolution
adopted at a regular public meeting when, from a consideration of the
application and from such other information as may otherwise be
obtained, the Mayor and Council find that all of the following
circumstances exist:
§ 223-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 223-4
218:843
§ 223-5. Issuance of license; fee; grounds for revocation; renewal.
(1) The applicant has not knowingly, and with intent to deceive, made
any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in
the application or in any other document required pursuant to this
chapter or which was submitted to the Borough in connection with
the application.
(2) The applicant has met the standards of performance described in
this chapter and has furnished the required hold-harmless
agreement and proper certificate(s) of insurance.
(3) The application has been reviewed and approved by the Chief of
Police.
(4) Neither the applicant nor the applicant's personnel have been
convicted of a criminal offense nor had their driver's license
suspended within the past year.
A. Upon approval of the application as herein provided, the Township
Administrator will issue the applicant an official tower's license for each
tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle to be utilized in providing services
pursuant to this chapter upon payment of the processing fee of $150 for
the application, a fee of $100 for the first license and $50 for each
additional license requested under the application.
B. The official tower license shall be displayed in the rear window of the
tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle to which it is issued so as to be visible to
the public at all times. The license is not transferable to any other
vehicle, and only those vehicles displaying a license shall be authorized
to perform the duties of official tower.
C. The official tower license shall be valid for a period of one year
beginning on January 1 of the calendar year and shall be
nontransferable. This license shall be subject to revocation by the
Mayor and Council for any of the following reasons:
(1) If it is subsequently determined that an applicant or official tower
knowingly, and with intent to deceive, made false, misleading or
fraudulent statements of material fact in the application or in any
other document required pursuant to this chapter or which was
submitted to the Township in connection with the application or
official tower license.
(2) Violation of any federal or state law or municipal ordinance or
regulation relating to the operation of a motor vehicle or the
provision of towing services.
(3) Violation of any law, rule or regulation promulgated by the New
Jersey Department of Insurance or the New Jersey Division of
Consumer Affairs.
§ 223-4 RIVER VALE CODE § 223-5
218:844
§ 223-6. Minimum standards of performance.
To qualify for inclusion on the list of official towers, applicants must meet
the following minimum standards:
(4) Unsatisfactory service provided pursuant to this chapter.
D. If the official tower license is not revoked by the Mayor and Council, the
license will be renewed upon the payment of the renewal fee of $100 for
the first license and $50 for each additional license requested by the
official tower, payable in advance for the next year on or before
December 31; and a satisfactory inspection of the licensed vehicle by
the River Vale Police Department Traffic Bureau.
E. No official tower license is required for the on-site repair and/or towing
or storage of any vehicle when the request is received by the official
tower from the owner of a vehicle.
A. Minimum vehicle requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall maintain and have available to render
services required by this chapter a minimum of one regular tow
vehicle and one flatbed vehicle.
(2) Vehicle classes.
(a) Regular tow vehicles must be equipped with a boom or winch
assembly mounted on the chassis, a tow sling or wheel lift
assembly with at least 100 feet of either three-eighths-inch or
seven-sixteenths-inch cable attached to a motor driven winch.
(b) Flatbed vehicles must be equipped with a winch or
hydraulically operated bed which slides or tilts to
accommodate transporting of vehicles.
(3) Each applicant shall submit, along with its application, proof of
ownership or lease of the vehicles which will be utilized to provide
services pursuant to this chapter.
B. Minimum equipment requirements.
(1) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall be equipped with the
following:
(a) At least one amber rotating beacon or strobe light mounted on
the highest practical location of the vehicles, visible from 360°
when in use and visible at a minimum distance of 500 feet
during daylight hours.
(b) One snatch block per winch.
(c) Safety tow lights or magnetic tow lights affixed on towed
vehicles at night, red colored, when other lights not available.
§ 223-5 SWIMMING POOLS § 223-6
218:845
(d) Extra chains and cable for pulling or securing a towed vehicle.
(e) At least one heavy-duty broom, a shovel, a crowbar or prybar, a
set of jumper cables, a flashlight, one two-pound-or-larger fire
extinguisher of dry chemical type, one dozen flares or similar
warning devices for placement at the scene of a motor vehicle
crash or behind a disabled vehicle, and a sufficient quantity
and types of tools to enable the tow vehicle operator to perform
proper and adequate emergency repair services for the tow.
(2) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall be in compliance with any
and all applicable state, federal and local laws, regulations and
ordinances pertaining to safety, lighting and towing equipment
requirements, and shall be subject to inspection by the Chief of
Police or his designee at any time. No structural or other change
may be made to an inspected vehicle or equipment unless prior
written approval is obtained from the Township.
(3) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle employed by the official tower
pursuant to this chapter shall display the official tower license and
shall have the name of the official tower displayed on the vehicle in
such manner and of such lettering as conforms to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 39:4-46.
C. Minimum personnel requirements. Official towers shall have available,
at all times, a minimum of two persons to provide the services required
by this chapter. All persons employed by official towers to provide the
services required by this chapter shall meet the following requirements
and be subject to the following regulations. They shall:
(1) Be competent mechanics able to provide minimum road services
for disabled vehicles.
(2) Have a valid New Jersey auto driver's license or commercial
driver's license (where required) having no restrictions or
conditional endorsements other than a condition requiring the
wearing of eyeglasses.
(3) Be mentally alert at all times.
(4) Obey all traffic laws and regulations.
(5) Be subject to interview, and be approved, by the Chief of Police of
the Township prior to rendering any services pursuant to this
chapter.
(6) Not have been convicted of a criminal offense nor had the driving
privilege suspended or revoked within the past year.
D. Minimum storage requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall maintain an inside building or outside
secured storage area meeting the following requirements:
§ 223-6 RIVER VALE CODE § 223-6
218:846
§ 223-7. Utilization of official tower list.
(a) The storage area shall be capable of storing a minimum of 10
passenger vehicles. All impounded vehicles shall be held in a
secured area, located either inside or outside in the secured
storage area.
(b) The location of both the storage area and the tow vehicle's
base of service shall be within the State of New Jersey and
within two miles of its boundary line.
(c) The storage area shall be fully enclosed by a sturdy fence
having a minimum height of six feet, with at least one lockable
gate for ingress and egress and shall be lighted from dusk to
dawn.
(d) The storage area shall be in an area legally zoned for such use.
(e) The storage facility shall be available to the official tower 24
hours a day, 365 days per year, and shall be open to the public
on weekdays during normal business hours and for limited
hours on weekends. The minimum hours for recovery of
released vehicles shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on
weekdays, and from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturdays.
Recovery of vehicles on holidays, Sundays or weekday and
Saturday hours beyond those specified above may be subject to
arrangement by the vehicle owner and official tower. Vehicle
recovery hours shall be posted in a conspicuous location visible
to the public.
(f) The official tower shall not charge a release fee or make any
other charge for releasing a vehicle to its owner after normal
business hours or on weekends.
(2) The applicant shall, with its application, submit proof of ownership
or lease of the storage area.
(3) The official tower shall be responsible for ensuring the proper and
safe storage of all vehicles towed pursuant to this chapter. The
official tower shall be liable for any damage incurred by such
vehicles while in transit to or while stored in the storage areas.
(4) The official tower is prohibited from piling of vehicles or parking on
public streets or sidewalks.
A. The names of official towers shall be placed on the list in the order in
which their application was approved. When the initial official tower list
has been established, new official towers will be added to the end of the
list upon approval of their applications.
B. The Borough will request wrecking, towing and storage services from
each official tower in monthly rotation. When called, the official tower
§ 223-6 SWIMMING POOLS § 223-7
218:847
§ 223-8. Hold-harmless agreement.
To qualify as an official tower and to maintain the official tower's license, all
applicants and official towers shall agree in writing to assume the complete
legal defense costs (including attorneys' and all other experts' fees, costs
and the reasonable disbursements) of the Township in any mediation,
arbitration or action of any kind (including all appeals), and to fully and
completely indemnify and hold harmless the Township, the Township's
elected officials, boards, commissions, officers, employees and agents from
any and all suits, actions, damages, claims, liabilities, expenses, losses or
judgments, of any kind and of any nature whatsoever, asserted against
the Township resulting from, caused by, arising out of or incurred as a
consequence of the official tower's provision of towing, wrecking, storage
and/or emergency services, including any and all ancillary or related
services, provided at the request of the Township pursuant to this chapter.
§ 223-9. Insurance.
shall advise the dispatcher if a tow vehicle is available and the
estimated time of arrival. If no tow vehicle is available or if, in the
discretion of the Township official making the request, the response
time is excessive under the circumstances to properly protect the
public health, safety or welfare, the next official tower on the list will
be called, with the first official tower called placed at the bottom of the
rotation list, and so on.
C. Official requests for service may be made by the Business Administrator
or any member of the Police Department.
D. The Township will request service only from official towers; provided,
however, that if no emergency or road hazard exists, the Township will
request service from such other person as the owner of the motor
vehicle in need of such services may request; and, provided further, that
if no official tower is available or able to provide services as requested
by the Township, or if an emergency exists, the Township may request
services from any other available source.
E. During adverse weather conditions, heavy traffic conditions or
emergency conditions, as determined in the sole discretion of the
Township, official towers shall give priority to requests for service
received from the Township over all requests received from any other
source.
A. No person or entity shall be included on the official tower list unless
and until the Borough has been provided with an appropriate certificate
or certificates of insurance evidencing that there is in effect the
following insurance coverage:
(1) Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than $500,000
combined single limits.
§ 223-7 RIVER VALE CODE § 223-9
218:848
§ 223-10. Towing and storage fee schedule.
(2) Workers' compensation as required by law.
(3) Garage keepers' liability in an amount not less than $100,000 per
location.
(4) Garage liability in an amount not less than $500,000 for personal
injury and $100,000 for property damage.
(5) Comprehensive general liability insurance in amounts and forms
satisfactory to the Township's risk analyst sufficient to protect the
Township from any liability, loss or damages arising out of the
activities to be conducted. In no event shall such insurance be less
than $500,000 for personal injury and $100,000 for property
damage.
B. Policies of insurance shall contain endorsements to provide collision
coverage for vehicles in tow.
C. Policies of insurance shall be written by insurance companies
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. Insurance
companies shall be acceptable to the Township and shall have at least a
B+ rating by a recognized rating service.
D. The Township of River Vale shall be named as an additional insured on
all policies of insurance provided pursuant to this chapter. All
certificates of insurance shall provide that the policies may not expire,
be canceled, terminated or have coverage decreased in the absence of
30 days' written notice to the Township.
E. Policies of insurance required by this chapter shall be maintained in full
force and effect at all times. In the event any insurance coverage
required by this chapter is canceled, terminated, interrupted or
decreased in amount, the official tower shall be removed from the
official tower list until such time as the required coverage is reinstated
or replaced and the circumstances are investigated by the Mayor and
Council.
A. Fees for towing and storage of private passenger vehicles, damaged in
a crash, disabled or impounded, may not exceed the fees established by
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.54 or by the New Jersey Division of Consumer Affairs in
the Department of Law and Public Safety pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.55.86Cleanup and sweep up of solid debris is included in these
fees.
(1) Passenger vehicles: $85 within the Township of River Vale or to an
official tower storage yard if located out of the Township.
86.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 2007, c. 193, § 24, operative 10-18-2008. For related
provisions, see now, e.g., the Predatory Towing Prevention Act, N.J.S.A. 56:13-7 et seq., and
N.J.A.C. 13:45A-31.
§ 223-9 SWIMMING POOLS § 223-10
218:849
(2) Flatbed tow: $100 to locations within the Township of River Vale or
to an official tower storage yard if located out of the Township. A
flatbed tow must be requested by the vehicle owner/operator, a
representative of the River Vale Police Department or be required
by the vehicle manufacturer in order to incur the fee of $100.
(3) Commercial vehicle/truck (vehicles up to 15,000 pounds and does
not include passenger vehicles registered commercially): $150 to
locations within the Township of River Vale or to an official tower
storage yard if located out of the Township.
(4) Heavy-duty vehicle/truck (vehicles 15,000 pounds and above): $500
to locations within the Township of River Vale or to an official tower
storage yard if located out of the Township.
(5) Additional mileage: $4 per mile (or part thereof) beyond the
Township border for passenger vehicle tows, flatbed tows and
commercial vehicle/truck tows (up to 15,000 pounds); $7 per mile
(or part thereof) beyond the Township border for heavy-duty
vehicle/truck tows (15,000 pounds and above).
(6) Additional services: $50 per 1/2 hour to a maximum of $150, for
winching, rolled vehicles, cleanup beyond clearing of the motor
vehicle crash site, etc.; $100 per 1/2 hour to a maximum of $450 for
the same services performed on a heavy-duty vehicle/truck. Special
services must be specified on the tow bill.
(7) Road service: $50 per call for flat tire, jump start, lockout or other
nonmechanical issues; $100 per call for the same services
performed on a heavy-duty vehicle/truck.
B. The following is the fee schedule for storage services:
(1) Storage charges:
(a) Outside storage: $35 per calendar day (or part thereof).
(b) Inside storage: $50 per calendar day (or part thereof).
(c) Heavy-duty vehicle/truck storage: $100 per calendar day (or
part thereof).
(2) Impound charges: Additional storage shall not accrue if the vehicle
has been released by the River Vale Police Department but the
official tower is not available to release it. In that case, the impound
charge will not accrue if the vehicle owner is on site at the storage
facility and can perform all acts necessary to retrieve the vehicle by
10:00 a.m. of the next business day.
§ 223-10 RIVER VALE CODE § 223-10
218:850
§ 223-11. Miscellaneous provisions.
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.55[b],87 the schedule of services and rates
for towing of motor vehicles shall be submitted to the New Jersey
Division of Consumer Affairs for review within 90 days of the effective
date of this chapter. In the event of revision by the Division of
Community Affairs, this chapter shall be amended accordingly.
D. Fees for towing and storage of private passenger vehicles, other than
those damaged in a motor vehicle crash or recovered after being stolen,
may not exceed the fees set forth above.
E. The fees set forth on the schedule for towing rates are the maximum
charges that shall apply to a private passenger automobile for basic
towing services. There shall be no additional charges other than those
provided herein, including, but not limited to, flat-bedding, waiting
time, winching, cleanup cost, and additional labor when only basic
towing services as defined are provided. Tow vehicles transporting
multiple passenger cars at one time shall receive the applicable fees for
each vehicle transported.
F. The fees set forth on the schedule for storage fees are the maximum
storage charges per calendar day that shall apply to a private
passenger automobile that is stored.
A. Copies of this chapter and the schedule of fees that may be charged by
official towers shall be made available to the public during normal
business hours at the Township Hall. Copies shall also be made
available to the public at each official tower's place of business.
B. All official towers shall post, in a prominent place at each storage area
clearly visible to the public, a schedule of the fees that may be charged
for all services provided pursuant to this chapter.
C. The Township reserves the right to make periodic unannounced
inspections of the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage areas of
all official towers.
D. The relationship between the official tower and the Township is one of
an independent contractor. Neither party shall be construed in any
manner whatsoever to be an employee of the other; nor shall any
employee or agent furnished by any party be construed to be an
employee or agent of the other party. Inclusion on the official tower list
shall not be construed or considered as a joint venture, partnership,
association, contract of employment or profit-sharing agreement.
E. The Township shall not be liable or responsible for compensating the
official tower for any of the services performed under this chapter
87.Editor's Note: Repealed by L. 2007, c. 193, § 24, operative 10-18-2008. For related
provisions, see now, e.g., the Predatory Towing Prevention Act, N.J.S.A. 56:13-7 et seq., and
N.J.A.C. 13:45A-31.
§ 223-10 SWIMMING POOLS § 223-11
218:851
§ 223-12. Dispute resolution and license revocation.
§ 223-13. Violations and penalties.
unless those services are performed for Township vehicles.
Compensation shall be the responsibility of the owner of the towed
motor vehicle and the official tower shall proceed directly against the
owner.
F. The official tower shall, at all times, be solely responsible for the
conduct of its employees.
G. Each official tower shall keep and maintain adequate, detailed and
complete records showing all vehicles towed, stored and released, all
services rendered, all fees charged and collected, and all documents
related to the official tower license. All such records shall be available
for inspection by the Township at any time during normal business
hours. Such records shall be kept, maintained and safeguarded by the
official tower at one location and shall be retained for a period of no less
than seven years. Records may be written, printed or computerized as
long as the requirements of this subsection are met.
A. Complaints involving the improper or unsatisfactory performance of
services by an official tower, excessive charges or damage to a motor
vehicle while in the custody of the official tower, or any other reason,
may be lodged with the Police Department Traffic Bureau. In the event
of receipt of a complaint, written notice of its receipt, together with a
copy of the complaint, shall be provided by the Business Administrator
to the official tower involved. The official tower shall have the
opportunity to respond, in writing, within five days.
B. Within 14 days of receipt of the official tower's response, or within 21
days of the receipt of the complaint, if no response is received, the
matter will be presented by the Business Administrator to the Mayor
and Council.
C. The Mayor and Council shall consider the matter at a regular public
meeting and may request that the complainant and/or the official tower
appear and give testimony regarding the complaint.
D. If, after considering the matter, the Mayor and Council shall determine
that one of the causes for revocation of the official tower's license
exists, the license of the official tower shall be revoked and the official
tower shall surrender same to the Business Administrator within one
day.
E. Failure to surrender the official tower license upon revocation shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
F. Nothing contained herein shall prevent or limit the right of any person
to commence or maintain an action for damages or any other relief
directly against an official tower in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 223-11 RIVER VALE CODE § 223-13
218:852
Chapter 225
TREE REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tree preservation and removal — See Ch. 142,
Art. XXXVII.
§ 225-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to control and regulate the indiscriminate
or excessive removal, large-scale, clear-cutting and destruction of trees
and to control, regulate and prevent conditions which cause an increase
in stormwater runoff, sedimentation, soil erosion, loss of wildlife habitat,
air or noise pollution or inhibit aquifer recharge or impair the ambiance or
physical appearance of a neighborhood. The regulations contained in this
chapter are designed to limit such adverse impact while not interfering with
the right of a River Vale property owner to appropriately remove trees in
accordance with the regulations set forth hereinbelow.
§ 225-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Township Engineer, Construction Code
Official or Department of Public Works Superintendent.[Amended
10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 306-2015]
LANDMARK TREE — A tree nominated by a property owner on whose
property the tree(s) is located, which said property owner considers to be
special by virtue of history, unusual size or age or of a rare species and as
so designated by the Planning Board.
LANDMARK TREE REGISTER — A register of all landmark trees which shall
be promulgated by the Planning Board after notification to the person on
whose property such a tree or trees are located. The Planning Board shall
promulgate and update the landmark tree register at a public hearing on
public notice to all property owners affected.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $750, and each
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the same
is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
B. In addition to the fine provided above, a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be cause for revocation of the official
tower license.
§ 223-13 SWIMMING POOLS § 225-2
218:853
PERSON — An entity whose existence is recognized by law, including, but
not limited to, any individual, partnership, corporation (for-profit, nonprofit
or municipal and its agencies), firm, association, or any combination of the
foregoing.
TREE — Any living woody perennial plant having a trunk diameter of at
least four inches measured at four feet above the natural ground level. If a
plant has multiple stems, then the aggregate of the stem diameters and/or
the aggregate of the circumferences shall be used in determining whether
the plant is a tree.[Amended 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 306-2015]
§ 225-3. Governed acts.
A person may remove or otherwise destroy any tree on any land within the
Township only in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
Caution should be taken, particularly during periods of construction, to
avoid the placement of materials, machinery or temporary soil deposits
within the dripline area of any tree located on any land within the Township.
§ 225-4. Permit required.
No person, directly or indirectly, shall, without first obtaining a permit or
approval as provided for hereinbelow, remove or otherwise destroy any tree
on lands located in River Vale as set forth in this section.
§ 225-5. Application for permit.
A. "Removal" shall include, but not be limited to, damage inflicted to the
root system by machinery, storage of materials and soil compaction,
change of natural grade above or below the root system or around the
trunk; damage inflicted on the tree permitting fungus, pests or other
infestation; excessive pruning or thinning leading to a failure to thrive;
paving over the root system with any impervious materials within such
proximity as to be fatally harmful to the tree; or application of any toxic
substance.
B. The following acts are hereby regulated and shall require the belowreferenced
permit: [Amended 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 306-2015]
(1) A tree removal permit shall be required prior to the cutting for
removal of more than one tree on a tax lot within any twenty-fourmonth
period. Any tree removal conducted in conjunction with the
issuance of a soil moving permit or building permit shall require
the replacement of two trees for every tree removed regardless of
the number removed. All tree replacement shall be in accordance
with § 225-5D. Donations to the Shade Tree Fund may be approved
when the required replacement is not feasible.
A. A person desiring to remove or otherwise destroy a tree as provided for
in § 225-2 hereinabove shall apply to the Township Engineer or his or
her designee for a permit to remove or otherwise destroy a tree. This
application should be in narrative form within a letter and specify:
§ 225-2 RIVER VALE CODE § 225-5
218:854
(1) The name and address of the owner of the premises.
(2) The name and address of the applicant for the permit, if other than
the owner, accompanied by the owner's consent to said application.
(3) A description by lot and block number of the premises for which the
permit is sought.
(4) If the tree is a landmark tree, the tree's register number.
B. The application for a permit should be accompanied by a sketch
containing the following:
(1) A description of the premises upon which the tree removal or
destruction is to take place by street address and lot and block
number;
(2) The size of the lot;
(3) The location upon the lot where the destruction or removal of the
tree or trees is proposed to take place;
(4) The identity of and the number of trees to be destroyed or removed;
(5) The purpose of the destruction or removal of the trees;
(6) The proposal, if any, for replacing any destroyed or removed trees
or other landscape improvement; and
(7) The location of all streams on the lot or adjacent properties.
C. The Township Engineer or his or her designee shall apply the following
standards in evaluating the permit for the tree removal or destruction.
Said Township Engineer or his or her designee shall visit the location
and inspect the land and trees which are the subject of the application
in order to determine the effect of the destruction or removal upon:
(1) The drainage or other physical conditions on the land and adjacent
property;
(2) The stability of the soil of the subject land, with particular concern
as to whether erosion will be created by the tree removal; and
(3) The growth and development of the remaining trees on the land
and adjacent property.
D. All tree replacements, including those for an approved tree removal
permit, shall meet the following: [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No.
306-2015]
(1) Reforestation for replacement of all nonexempt tree removal is two
trees for every tree removed.
(2) Replanted trees shall be at least 2 1/2 inches in diameter caliper,
measured at breast or chest height, and shall be nursey stock,
§ 225-5 SWIMMING POOLS § 225-5
218:855
§ 225-6. Issuance of permit for tree removal; time requirements.
The Township Engineer or his or her designee shall accept for filing the
permit application referenced in § 225-2 hereinabove. Said application shall
be date and time stamped when received, and the applicant shall be
furnished a copy of said application with said date and time stamped.
Thereafter, the Township Engineer or his or her designee shall within 15
business days of receipt of the completed application for the removal of a
nonlandmark tree(s):
balled in burlap and staked upon planting per municipal standards
provided by the Municipal Engineer or in accordance with the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Parks
and Forestry, New Jersey Forestry Services, as detailed in the most
recent Program Guidelines.
(3) Trees for reforestation shall be indigenous of the site from which
trees have been removed, consistent with the species found and/or
being considered for removal, and in accordance with the abovestated
publication.
(4) The location of replanted trees shall be determined by the following
schedule of preference when at all possible:
(a) In the development location where the trees are removed.
(b) Within the building or tax lot containing the removed trees.
(c) Within the street rights-of-way bounding the site and/or in the
same block.
(d) At the discretion of the Township Engineer or his/her designee,
a contribution may be made (for all or a portion of the required
replanted trees) to the Township's Shade Tree Fund based on
current market values as determined by the Township
Engineer of the required replacement trees in lieu of on-site
reforestation.
A. Visit and inspect the location of the application as provided for
hereinabove; and
B. Decide whether the destruction or removal of the trees, which is the
subject of the application, will cause or contribute to drainage
problems, soil erosion or the loss of tree species; and
C. Grant or deny the requested permit in whole or in part. The failure of
the Township Engineer or his or her designee to act upon the
application for the removal of a nonlandmark tree(s) within said 15
business days shall constitute approval of said application and entitle
the applicant to the permit requested unless an extension of the fifteenday
period has been agreed upon between the applicant and the
Township Engineer or his or her designee in writing before the period
§ 225-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 225-6
218:856
§ 225-7. Appeal.
Within 10 days of receipt of decision of the Township Engineer or his or
her designee or the Planning Board, which denies approval for the tree
removal or otherwise destruction, the applicant may appeal in writing to
the Township Council. The governing body shall decide the appeal within
30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The failure of the governing body
to decide the appeal within 30 days shall constitute reversal of the decision
by the Township Engineer or his or her designee or the Planning Board. In
any event, the applicant shall be notified of the governing body's action or
failure to act by written notice from the Township Clerk.
§ 225-8. Exceptions.
Excepted from the provisions of this chapter are the following:
expires. In the case of a landmark tree, the Township Engineer or his or
her designee shall refer a completed application to the Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall grant or deny the requested permit within
30 business days of the filing of the application by the applicant. Any
applicant may request an informal hearing in support of a permit, and
all decisions to deny the permit must be in writing, setting forth the
reasons for such denial.
A. The removal of any tree as ordered by the Enforcement Officer.
[Amended 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 306-2015]
B. Any tree located on publicly owned land and removed by the
appropriate public agency with the consent of the Enforcement Officer.
[Amended 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 306-2015]
C. Any tree that poses imminent danger to life or property. If prior
notification of the removal of said tree pursuant to this chapter has not
been given to the Enforcement Officer prior to removal, then
notification must be provided within three days of such removal.
[Amended 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 306-2015]
D. Any dead tree or substantially diseased tree as a result of natural
causes or storm damage where: [Amended 10-26-2015 by Ord. No.
306-2015]
(1) The person desiring to destroy or remove the tree is the owner of
the land upon which the tree is located;
(2) The person notifies the Enforcement Officer of the desire to remove
the tree; and
(3) The Enforcement Officer verifies that the tree is dead and
substantially diseased as a result of natural causes.
E. Accident- or storm-damaged trees where removal is in response to an
emergency.
§ 225-6 SWIMMING POOLS § 225-8
218:857
§ 225-9. Violations and administrative penalties. [Amended
10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 306-2015]
§ 225-10. Annual report.
The Township Engineer or his or her designee and the Planning Board shall
make an annual report to the Township Council as to permits granted and
denied in each calendar year pursuant to this chapter. Such report shall be
submitted by February 1 of each year as to the preceding year's activities.
§ 225-11. Fees. [Added 10-26-2015 by Ord. No. 306-2015]
F. Tree removal covered by approved site plan. However, a copy of any site
plan application, which provides for the removal of a landmark tree,
must be provided to the Township Engineer or his or her designee to
allow the Planning Board as provided for in § 225-2 to provide its review
and comment, if any, to the Planning Board.
G. The removal of any trees which are a part of an approved woodlot
management program pursuant to the provisions of the New Jersey
Farmland Assessment Act of 1964.
A. The Enforcement Officer or his/her designee is designated as the
enforcing agent for this chapter. Upon review of as-built plans or site
inspection of any development application or soil movement activity, the
Township Engineer shall inform the Enforcement Officer of any
violations.
B. Any individual, corporation or association violating any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not
exceeding $1,000 per offense. The cutting, destruction or removal of
each tree shall constitute a separate offense.
A. The fee for a tree removal permit shall be set forth as follows:
Number of Trees Fee
6 to 10* $150
11 to 20 $250
21 to 50 $500
51 and over $1,000 plus an additional $100 for
each additional 5 trees or part
thereof.
NOTE:
* There is no fee for removal of five or fewer trees in any twentyfour-
month period.
B. Notwithstanding the fee schedule, no permit fee shall be required for
the removal of a dead or hazardous tree, provided that the applicant
§ 225-8 RIVER VALE CODE § 225-11
218:858
Chapter 233
UTILITIES, UNDERGROUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land requirements — See Ch.
142, § 142-191 et seq.
§ 233-1. Utilities to be installed underground; exception.
For all major subdivisions, the applicant shall arrange with the serving
utility for the underground installation of the utilities' distribution supply
lines and service connections and streetlighting facilities, in accordance
with the provisions of the applicable standard terms and conditions
incorporated as a part of its tariff as the same are then on file with the State
of New Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners and shall submit to the
Planning Board, prior to the granting of final approval, a written instrument
from each serving utility which shall evidence full compliance with the
provisions of this section; provided, however, that in such subdivisions,
lots which abut existing streets where overhead electric or telephone
distribution supply lines have theretofore been installed on any portion of
the streets involved may be supplied with electric and telephone service
from such overhead lines or extensions thereof, but the service connections
from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground.
Streetlighting facilities shall be of a style and design compatible to the
nature and design of the subdivision and shall be approved by the Planning
Board.
§ 233-2. Waiver of requirements.
The Township Council may waive the aforesaid requirements upon
recommendation of the Board.
§ 233-3. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14.
and/or property owner satisfies all the other requirements of this
chapter.
§ 225-11 UTILITIES, UNDERGROUND § 233-3
233:859
Chapter 241
VEHICLES, JUNK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
Zoning — See Ch. 142, § 142-215 et seq.
Service stations — See Ch. 197.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 245.
§ 241-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Junk Vehicle Law of the Township of
River Vale."
§ 241-2. Legislative intent.
A clean, wholesome, attractive environment is declared to be of importance
to the health and safety of the inhabitants, and such an environment is
deemed essential to the economy of the Township and the general welfare
of its citizens. The unrestrained accumulation of motor vehicles not in
operating condition is a hazard to such health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Township, necessitating the regulation and restraint thereof.
§ 241-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Chief of Police of the Township,
unless the Township Council, by resolution, designates some other
Township official as "enforcement officer" or, by resolution, establishes
the position of enforcement officer for the Township and appoints some
qualified person thereto at a salary specified in such resolution.
JUNK VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle, whether automobile, bus, truck,
tractor, mobile home, motorcycle, motorbicycle, minibicycle or
snowmobile or any other contraption abandoned, stored, left or located
by its owner or any other person on public or private property in the
Township of River Vale.
Any motor vehicle which is not registered for operation on the
public highways and which has not been registered for the
preceding 12 months or is in an unsafe condition as defined in
N.J.S.A. 39:3-44 shall be defined as a "junk vehicle."
(1)
For the purposes of this chapter, a motor vehicle registered as a
farm vehicle or which is operable and used by the owner on his own
property for the transport of wood, snowplowing or similar uses
shall not be considered a "junk vehicle."
(2)
§ 233-3 RIVER VALE CODE § 241-3
241:860
§ 241-4. Open storage restricted.
Open storage of one or more junk vehicles shall not be permitted on private
or public property within the Township, except as permitted by this chapter.
§ 241-5. Permit required; application; issuance.
LEGAL OCCUPANT — Any person who, singularly or together with
other persons, is in possession of real property pursuant to an
agreement with the owner thereof. The term shall include tenants,
contract vendees and licensees.
OPEN STORAGE — Storage other than in a completely enclosed
structure, such as a garage constructed of wood, brick and metal.
OWNER — A person owning real property in the Township. A parcel of
real property owned by more than one person shall be considered as
having each such person being an owner.
PARCEL OF PROPERTY — Real property appearing on the tax rolls of
the Township as one unit.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, corporations, copartnerships,
unincorporated associations or any other organization of one or more
persons.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of River Vale and its officers and agents;
also public and private areas within the Township.
For the purposes of this chapter, "abandoned," "stored" or "located"
shall mean when the junk vehicle is visible from a public highway
or a dwelling unit on a neighboring property.
(3)
B. The term "shall" is always mandatory. Words used in the singular shall
include the plural and vice versa.
A. Any person wishing to store or locate a junk vehicle on a parcel of
property must first obtain a no-fee permit from the Township's
enforcement officer allowing such storage.
B. That permit may be granted after an application has been made
showing:
(1) The make, model and year of the vehicle.
(2) The name and address of the last registered owner and last
registration plate number as issued by the appropriate Department
of Motor Vehicles.
(3) The vehicle identification number.
(4) The nature of the applicants ownership or title to such vehicle.
(5) The purpose(s) for which the junk vehicle(s) are being stored or
located.
§ 241-3 VEHICLES, JUNK § 241-5
241:861
§ 241-6. Abandonment or storage of vehicles.
Any owner or occupant of a parcel of property in the Township who shall
abandon, store, locate, leave or allow or condone any other person to
abandon, store, locate or leave a junk vehicle upon a parcel of property
owned or occupied by him within said Township contrary to the provisions
hereof shall be guilty of a violation hereof. Any person, whether as owner or
driver of a vehicle or an operator of a towing vehicle or carrier, who shall
abandon, store, locate or leave a junk vehicle upon a parcel of property in
the Township of which he is not either the owner or legal occupant, without
the written permission of the legal occupant shall be guilty of a violation
hereof.
§ 241-7. Violations and penalties.
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I, § 1-14. Each junk vehicle abandoned, stored,
left or located in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation. Each week of continuous violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
§ 241-8. Additional remedies.
In addition to the penalties set forth above, the Township may commence
an action in its own name against any person in any civil court of competent
jurisdiction to seek an injunction to enforce compliance with this chapter.
Such an action for injunctive relief may be independent of or a part of an
action to collect the civil penalties as hereinabove provided.
C. Purposes for which junk vehicles can be stored or located are as
follows:
(1) Antique or classic car restoration for vehicles 25 or more years old.
A permit will be issued on an annual basis, renewable for a year at
a time.
(2) Restoration. A permit will be issued for a one-year period,
renewable for an additional one-year period. The renewal shall be
granted only if the junk vehicle has been substantially improved
since the issuance of the original permit.
(3) Removal of parts or components. A permit will be issued for a sixtyday
period, renewable for one sixty-day period only.
(4) Permits shall not be granted under this chapter for a motor vehicle
junk business or a motor vehicle junkyard. Such dealers must
comply with the Township ordinance licensing and regulating
motor vehicle junk businesses and motor vehicle junkyards
(Chapter 138, Junkyards).
§ 241-5 RIVER VALE CODE § 241-9
241:862
§ 241-9. Removal.
In addition to any penalty or fine as provided in § 241-7 hereof or the
remedy provided in § 214-8 hereof, any junk vehicle may be removed from
the premises upon which it is located by the Township in the manner
hereinafter provided:
§ 241-10. Right of entry.
The Township's enforcement officer or his designee shall have and is hereby
given the authority to go upon any parcel of real property in the Township,
A. The enforcement officer, upon detecting a junk vehicle, shall serve
written notice on the person owning the parcel of property on which the
same is located, ordering such person to remove the same or cause the
same to be removed therefrom within 30 days of the date of such
service. Such notice shall contain a description of the parcel of
property, a statement as to the location thereon of a junk vehicle and a
reference to this chapter and to the fact that the location of such junk
vehicle on such parcel of property is in violation of this chapter. If such
parcel of property is owned by more than one person, personal service
on any one of such owners shall suffice; however, as to any owner not
personally served with such notice or if no owner can be located upon
whom to make personal service, the enforcement officer shall mail such
notice to the owners not personally served or to the owner and to all
owners if no owner was personally served, by registered mail to their or
his last known address as shown on the latest completed assessment
roll of the town. In addition, the enforcement officer shall post
conspicuously a copy of such notice on the parcel or property upon
which said junk vehicle is located.
B. At the expiration of 30 days after the service or mailing and posting of
such notice, if such junk vehicle has not been removed, the Township
may cause such junk vehicle to be removed, and the cost of such
removal shall be certified by the enforcement officer to the Collector of
Taxes and shall thereupon become and be a lien upon the real property
from which said junk vehicle was removed and shall be added to and
form part of the taxes next to be assessed on said real property and
shall be collected and enforced by the same office and in the same
manner as taxes.
C. Any junk vehicle released to the Township by its owner shall be
disposed of at a public auction to the highest bidder, and the proceeds
shall be added to the general fund of the Township. Any junk vehicle
released to the Township by the owner or legal occupant of the parcel of
property from which it is removed, who is not the owner of the junk
vehicle, shall be disposed of by the procedure set forth in Subsections A
and B hereof. In the event that the junk vehicle is released to the
Township by the owner or legal occupant of the parcel of property who
is not the owner of the junk vehicle, there shall be no expense for the
removal thereof chargeable to the person so releasing said junk vehicle.
§ 241-9 VEHICLES, JUNK § 241-10
241:863
public or private, exclusive of enclosed structures or buildings, at any time
during daylight hours, to examine and inspect any vehicles or parts or
components thereof to determine whether a violation of this chapter has
been committed or to determine the condition of any vehicles or parts or
components thereof. The officer shall notify the property owner, in writing,
prior to the entering of such property.
§ 241-11. Construal of provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall be interpreted as amending or abrogating
the effect or provisions of Chapter 142, Land Use, and Chapter 138,
Junkyards, or any amendments to such chapters.
Chapter 245
VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 81. Junkyards — See Ch. 138.
§ 245-1. Operation on certain property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use or operate unlicensed
motor vehicles upon Township or Board of Education property as
hereinafter defined.
§ 245-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES — Refers to all vehicles required to be
licensed by the State of New Jersey pursuant to state statute or regulation.
TOWNSHIP OR BOARD OF EDUCATION PROPERTY — Any parks; ball
parks; recreation areas; lake, stream or reservoir areas; Township-owned
street easements, sidewalks or areas dedicated or commonly used for
nonmotorized bicycles or pedestrian traffic; Township storage facilities;
Township garage areas; Board of Education properties; and any and all
other Township and publicly owned lands and premises.
UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES — Refers to, but is not limited to, any of
the following: motorcycles, motor scooters, motor bicycles, dune buggies,
trail bikes, minibikes, go-carts and any other vehicle designed for the
transportation of the driver, passengers or products and propelled by an
internal combustion engine or other type of engine.
§ 245-3. Exceptions.
§ 241-10 RIVER VALE CODE § 245-3
245:864
§ 245-4. Impoundment.
Any unlicensed motor vehicle, as defined herein, which has been driven
or used in violation of any provision of this chapter, may, upon issuance
of a summons to the operator thereof and in order to prevent the further
violation of the provisions of this chapter, be impounded and removed by
the Township police in a conveyance to a place as may be from time to
time designated by the Township Council and there shall be held until such
unlicensed motor vehicle shall be retrieved by a person, who is at least 18
years of age, whether said person is the owner or is acting on behalf thereof.
§ 245-5. Violations and penalties.
For violation of any provision of this chapter, any person, upon conviction,
shall be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I,
§ 1-14. Each and every day upon which a violation of any provision of this
chapter occurs shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
Appendix
Chapter A251
PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 29.
A. It shall not be unlawful for any Township employee, School Board
employee or other public employee to operate unlicensed or licensed
motor vehicles on Township or Board of Education property for the
purpose of maintenance, repair or otherwise engaging in public work
on any of the lands described in § 245-2 above.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any recognized organization which has
applied for and received approval from the Township Council, Board of
Education or Board of Recreation Commissioners for specific privileges
to use areas under the control of said Council or Boards for the
purposes of having organized and supervised activities conducted
thereon, subject to all requirements, rules and regulations which the
appropriate body may from time to time adopt by resolution.
C. This chapter shall not apply to dedicated roads, streets or municipal
parking lots which are governed by the state statutes, county
resolutions or municipal ordinances.
§ 245-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § 245-5
A251:865

ARTICLE I
General Personnel Policy Statements
§ A251-1. Applicability of other laws and regulations.
It is the policy of the Township of River Vale to treat employees and
prospective employees in a manner consistent with all applicable
employment laws and regulations. The personnel policies and procedures of
the Township shall apply to all employees, volunteers, elected or appointed
officials and independent contractors. In the event there is a conflict
between these rules and any collective bargaining agreement, personnel
services contract, and federal or state law including the Attorney General's
guidelines with respect to Police Department personnel matters, the terms
and conditions of that contract or law shall prevail. In all other cases, these
policies and procedures shall prevail.
§ A251-2. Appointment and promotion dependent upon
appropriation for position.
All employees, officers and department heads shall be appointed and
promoted by the Mayor. No person shall be employed or promoted unless
there exists a position created by an ordinance adopted by the Township
Council as well as the necessary budget appropriation and Salary
Ordinance.
§ A251-3. Duties of Business Administrator.
The Business Administrator and all managerial/supervisory personnel are
authorized and responsible for personnel policies and procedures. The
Township Council has appointed the Business Administrator to implement
personnel practices. The Business Administrator shall also have access to
the Township Attorney for guidance in personnel matters.
§ A251-4. No-tolerance policy; open-door policy.
As a general principle, the Township has a no-tolerance policy towards
workplace wrongdoing. Township officials, employees and independent
contractors are to report anything perceived to be improper. The Township
believes strongly in an open-door policy and encourages employees to talk
with their supervisor, department head, Business Administrator or Mayor
concerning any problem.
§ A251-5. Intent of Manual; amendment and supplementation
without notice.
The Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual adopted by the Township
Council is intended to provide guidelines covering public service by
Township employees and is not a contract. This manual contains many, but
not necessarily all of the rules, regulations, and conditions of employment
for Township personnel. The provisions of this manual may be amended and
§ A251-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-5
A251:867
supplemented from time to time without notice and at the sole discretion of
the Township.
§ A251-6. Employment-at-will doctrine.
To the maximum extent permitted by law, the employment practices of the
Township shall operate under the legal doctrine known as "employment
at will." Within federal and state law, and any applicable bargaining unit
agreement, the Township shall have the right to terminate an employee at
any time and for any reason, with or without notice, except the Township
shall comply with all federal and state legal requirements requiring notice
and an opportunity to be heard in the event of discipline or dismissal.
§ A251-5 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-6
A251:868
ARTICLE II
Policies Relating to Employee Rights and Obligations
§ A251-7. Antidiscrimination.
The Township is committed to the principle of equal employment
opportunity pursuant to Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act as amended
by the Equal Opportunity Act of 1972. Under no circumstances will the
Township discriminate on the basis of sex, race, creed, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, age, marital or political status, disability, or sexual
orientation. Decisions regarding the hiring, promotion, transfer, demotion
or termination are based solely on the qualifications and performance of
the employee or prospective employee. If any employee or prospective
employee feels they have been treated unfairly, they have the right to
address their concern with their supervisor, or if they prefer their
department head, Business Administrator or Mayor.
§ A251-8. Americans with Disabilities Act.
§ A251-9. Contagious or life-threatening illnesses.
A. In compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and the New
Jersey Law Against Discrimination, the Township does not discriminate
based on disability. The Township will endeavor to make every work
environment handicap assessable and all future construction and
renovation of facilities will be in accordance with applicable barrierfree
federal and state regulations and the Americans with Disabilities
Act Accessibility Guidelines.
B. The Business Administrator shall initiate an interactive dialogue with
disabled employees and prospective employees to identify reasonable
accommodations that do not create a hardship. Accommodations
include modifications to facilities, equipment and work procedures,
auxiliary aides, services and permanent reassignment to vacant
positions. Employees who are reassigned to a different position shall
receive the salary of their new position. Accommodations shall not be
unduly expensive, extensive and disruptive or fundamentally alter the
nature of the operation. The Act does not require the Township to offer
permanent light duty, relocate essential functions or provide personal
use items such as eyeglasses, hearing aids, wheelchairs, etc. To be
eligible for accommodations, individuals must (1) be able to perform the
essential function of the position, (2) not create a real safety hazard to
themselves, co-employees or the public, and (3) be otherwise qualified
for the position in that they possess the prerequisites including
education, experience, training, skills, licenses or certificates and other
job-related requirements. All decisions with respect to accommodations
shall be made by the Mayor.
A. The Township encourages employees with contagious diseases or lifethreatening
illnesses such as cancer, heart disease, Hepatitis C and
§ A251-7 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-9
A251:869
§ A251-10. Safety.
The Township will provide a safe and healthy work environment and shall
comply with the Public Employees Occupational Safety and Health Act
(PEOSHA). The Township is equally concerned about the safety of the
public. Consistent with this policy, employees will receive periodic safety
training and will be provided with appropriate safety equipment. Employees
are responsible for observing safety rules and using available safety devices
including personal protective equipment. Failure to do so constitutes
grounds for disciplinary action. Any occupational or public unsafe condition,
practice, procedure or act must be immediately reported to the supervisor
or department head. Any on-the-job accident or accident involving Township
facilities, equipment or motor vehicles must also be immediately reported.
§ A251-11. Transitional duty.
HIV/AIDS to continue their normal pursuits, including work, to the
extent allowed by their condition. As in the case of other disabilities, the
Township shall make reasonable accommodations in accordance with
legal requirements to allow qualified employees with contagious or lifethreatening
illnesses to perform the essential functions of their jobs as
long as they are able to meet acceptable performance standards.
B. Medical information shall be treated confidentially. The Township will
take reasonable precautions to protect such information from
inappropriate disclosure. Managers and other employees have a
responsibility to maintain the confidentially of employee medical
information. Anyone inappropriately disclosing such information shall
be subject to disciplinary action.
C. Employees with questions or concerns about contagious or lifethreatening
illnesses are encouraged to contact the Business
Administrator.
A. The Township will endeavor to bring employees with temporary
disabilities back on the job as soon as possible and may assign
transitional duty to employees who temporarily cannot perform the
essential functions of their positions because of injury or illness.
Transitional duty is not guaranteed and will not exceed 45 workdays. If
a department already has one employee on transitional duty, it is
unlikely that another employee from that department will be assigned
transitional duty.
B. An employee requesting transitional duty or the workers' compensation
physician shall notify the Business Administrator as soon as the
temporarily disabled employee is able to return to work with
restrictions. Transitional duty will only be assigned if the employee will
probably be able to perform the essential functions of the position after
the transitional duty period. The Business Administrator will consult
with the department head to determine if there is any meaningful work
that can be performed consistent with the restrictions. Transitional
§ A251-9 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-11
A251:870
§ A251-12. Drugs and alcohol.
§ A251-13. Workplace violence.
duty assignments may be in any department and not just the employee's
normal department. The Business Administrator will decide if it is in
the best interest of the Township to approve a transitional duty request
and will notify the employee of the decision. The Township reserves the
right to terminate the transitional duty assignment at any time without
cause.
C. Employees may not refuse transitional duty assignments that are
recommended by the workers' compensation physician. In such cases,
failure to report to work as directed shall constitute immediate grounds
for dismissal. If the employee believes that the transitional duty
assignment is beyond the employee's abilities, the employee may
request a meeting with the Business Administrator who will render a
written response within 24 hours.
D. Employees on transitional duty will receive their regular salaries and
are prohibited from engaging in any outside employment of any kind
unless they receive prior written approval from the Business
Administrator. If transitional duty is approved, the employee or
workers' compensation physician must keep the Business Administrator
informed of the medical progress. If at the end of transitional duty
period the employee is not able to return to work without restrictions,
the Township reserves the right at its sole discretion to extend the
transitional duty or place the employee back on workers' compensation
or disability. This policy does not affect an employee's rights under the
Americans with Disabilities Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act, the
Fair Labor Standards Act, the contagious or life threatening illnesses
policy88 or other federal or state law.
A. The Township recognizes that the use of unlawful drugs and the abuse
of alcohol pose a threat to the health and safety of all employees. Any
employee who is intoxicated or under the influence of alcohol or drugs
during working hours shall be immediately suspended and subject to
termination. The supervisor or department head will immediately
report any suspensions to the Business Administrator.
B. Employees using prescription drugs that may affect job performance or
safety must notify their supervisor or department head who is required
to maintain the confidentiality of any information regarding an
employee's medical condition. Township personnel who hold a
commercial driver's license (CDL) are subject to the provisions of the
commercial driver's licenses drug and alcohol testing policy.
A. The Township will not tolerate workplace violence. Violent acts or
threats made by an employee against another person or property are
88.Editor's Note: See § A251-9 of this chapter.
§ A251-11 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-13
A251:871
§ A251-14. General anti-harassment.
The Township will not tolerate harassment in the work place including
harassment motivated by sex, race, creed, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, age, nationality, marital or political status, disability or sexual
orientation. Township officials, appointees, managers, supervisors,
employees, volunteers and outside contractors alike must comply with this
policy and take appropriate measures to insure that such conduct does
not occur. Violations of this policy will result in disciplinary action up to
and including discharge or, in the event nonemployees are found to be at
fault, other appropriate action. Employees who feel they have been subject
to harassment must report the harassment to their supervisor or, if they
prefer, to the department head, Business Administrator or the Mayor. See
employee complaint policy (§ A251-17).
§ A251-15. Anti-sexual-harassment.
cause for immediate dismissal and will be fully prosecuted. This
includes any violence or threats made on Township property, at
Township events or under other circumstances that may negatively
affect the Township's ability to conduct business.
B. Prohibited conduct includes:
(1) Causing physical injury to another person;
(2) Making threatening remarks;
(3) Aggressive or hostile behavior that creates a reasonable fear of
injury to another person or subjects another individual to emotional
distress;
(4) Intentionally damaging employer property or property of another
employee;
(5) Possession of a weapon while on Township property or while on
Township business except with the authority of the Police Chief;
and
(6) Committing acts motivated by, or related to, sexual harassment or
domestic violence.
C. Any potentially dangerous situations must be immediately reported.
The Township will actively intervene in any potentially hostile or violent
situation.
A. As a part of the anti-harassment policy, the Township also strictly
prohibits sexual harassment including, but not limited to:
(1) Making unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors a
condition of employment;
§ A251-13 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-15
A251:872
§ A251-16. Whistle-blower.
(2) Making submission to or rejection of such conduct the basis for
employment decisions affecting the employee;
(3) Creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment
by such conduct;
(4) Making unwelcome, offensive remarks or engaging in physical
contact with a subordinate or fellow employee that would not have
been made but for the employee's sex, or which is sexually oriented
to the extent that it would not occur but for the fact of the
employee's gender; or
(5) Harassment based solely on gender, which creates a hostile and
offensive work environment.
B. Sexual harassment may take different forms. One specific form is a
demand for sexual favors. Other forms of harassment include but are
not limited to:
(1) Sexual innuendoes, suggestive comments, jokes of a sexual nature,
sexual propositions or threats;
(2) Suggestive objects or pictures, graphic commentaries, E-mails,
suggestive or insulting sounds, leering, whistling, obscene
gestures;
(3) Unwanted physical contact, including touching, pinching, brushing
the body, pushing; or
(4) Nonsexual conduct such as intimidation and hostility based solely
upon gender.
C. Employees who feel they have been subject to sexual harassment must
report the harassment to their supervisor or, if they prefer, to the
department head, Business Administrator or Mayor. See employee
complaint policy (§ A251-17).
A. Employees have the right to complain of anything they perceive to be
improper. This right shall be communicated to all employees in a letter
outlining the specific employee complaint procedure. A written
acknowledgement that the employee received this letter will be
included in the employee's official personnel file. This right will also be
communicated in the Employee Handbook. All complaints will be taken
seriously and promptly investigated.
B. The Township shall not take any retaliatory action or tolerate any
reprisal against an employee for any of the following:
(1) Disclosing or threatening to disclose to a supervisor, department
head, the Business Administrator, other official or to a public body,
as defined in the Employment Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 34:19) an
§ A251-15 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-16
A251:873
§ A251-17. Employee complaint.
Employees who wish to complain of harassment or any other workplace
wrongdoing are requested to immediately report the matter to their
supervisor or, if they prefer, to their department head, Business
Administrator or Mayor. Employees are encouraged to complain in writing
using the Employee Complaint Form, but may make a verbal complaint
at their discretion. No retaliatory measures shall be taken against any
employee who complains of workplace wrongdoing. The Township will,
to the maximum extent feasible, maintain the confidentiality of such
complaints on a need-to-know basis. However, investigation of such
complaints may require disclosure to the accused party and other witnesses
in order to gather pertinent facts.
§ A251-18. Grievance.
activity, policy or practice that the employee reasonably believes is
in violation of a law, a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to
law;
(2) Providing information to, or testifying before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, an inquiry into any violation
of law, or a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law; or
(3) Objecting to or refusing to participate in any activity, policy, or
practice that the employee reasonably believes is a violation of a
law, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law; is fraudulent
or criminal, or is incompatible with a clear public policy mandate
concerning the public health, safety, or welfare.
C. In accordance with the statute, the employee must bring the violation to
the attention of the Township. However, disclosure is not required
where (1) the employee is reasonably certain that the violation is known
to one or more officials; (2) where the employee reasonably fears
physical harm; or (3) the situation is emergent in nature. Employees are
encouraged to complain in writing using the Employee Complaint
Form,89 but may make a verbal complaint at their discretion. See
employee complaint policy (§ A251-17). Under the law, the employee
must give the Township a reasonable opportunity to correct the activity,
policy or practice. The administration of whistle-blower complaints is
not subject to the limitations in the grievance policy (§ A251-18). In
accordance with the statute, a copy of this policy will be posted in all
facilities.
A. A grievance is any formal dispute concerning the interpretation,
application and enforcement of any personnel policy or procedure of
89.Editor's Note: The following forms are on file in the Township offices: Notice of Personnel
Discussion; Employee Letter Concerning Employee Complaint Procedure; Employee
Complaint Form; Application for Employment; New Jersey Division of Civil Rights Guide on
Pre-Employment Inquiries; Performance Appraisal; Counseling Action Plan; Employee
Evaluation Checklist.
§ A251-16 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-18
A251:874
§ A251-19. Access to personnel files.
The official personnel file for each employee shall be maintained by the
Business Administrator. Personnel files are confidential records that must
be secured in a locked cabinet and will only be available to authorized
managerial and supervisory personnel on a need-to-know basis. Records
relating to any medical condition will be maintained in a separate file.
Electronic personnel and medical records must be protected from
unauthorized access. Any employee may review his or her file in the
presence of the Business Administrator upon reasonable request.
§ A251-20. Conflict of interest.
the Township. Grievances from union employees will be handled
pursuant to the terms of the applicable bargaining unit agreement.
All grievances from nonunion employees must be presented within five
working dates after arising, and failure to report a grievance within
such time shall be deemed as a waiver of the grievance. In the event
of a settlement or ruling that results in a determination of monetary
liability, such liability shall not exceed more than 30 working days prior
to the date the grievance was first presented in writing.
(1) Step One. Any employee or group of employees with a grievance
shall verbally communicate the grievance to the supervisor or
department head who will discuss the matter with the Business
Administrator. The supervisor or department head will
communicate the decision to the employee within two working
days.
(2) Step Two. If the employee is not satisfied with the decision, the
employee must submit a written grievance to the Business
Administrator detailing the facts and the relief requested. The
decision in Step One will be deemed final if the employee fails to
submit a written grievance within five days working days of the
Step One decision. After consulting the Township Attorney, the
Business Administrator will render a written decision to the
employee within five working days after receipt of the written
grievance.
(3) Step Three. If the employee is not satisfied with the decision
rendered in Step Two, the employee may request its review by the
Mayor within a three-day period of the decision of the Business
Administrator.
B. These limitations do not apply to employee complaints made under the
general anti-harassment policy (§ A251-14), the anti-sexual-harassment
policy (§ A251-15) or the whistle-blower policy (§ A251-16).
A. Employees including Township officials must conduct business
according to the highest ethical standards of public service. Employees
are expected to devote their best efforts to the interests of the
§ A251-18 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-20
A251:875
Township. Violations of this policy will result in appropriate discipline
including termination.
B. The Township recognizes the right of employees to engage in outside
activities that are private in nature and unrelated to Township business.
However, business dealings that appear to create a conflict between the
employee and the Township's interests are unlawful under the New
Jersey Local Government Ethics Act (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.). Under
the Act, certain employees and officials are required to annually file
with the Township Clerk a state mandated disclosure form. The
Township Clerk will notify employees and Township officials subject to
the filing requirements of the Act.
C. A potential or actual conflict of interest occurs whenever an employee
including a Township official is in a position to influence a Township
decision that may result in a personal gain for the employee or an
immediate relative including a spouse or significant other, child, parent,
stepchild, sibling, grandparents, daughter-in-law, son-in-law,
grandchildren, niece, nephew, uncle, aunt, or any person related by
blood or marriage residing in an employee's household. Employees are
required to disclose possible conflicts so that the Township may assess
and prevent potential conflicts. If there are any questions whether an
action or proposed course of conduct would create a conflict of interest,
immediately contact the Township Clerk or Business Administrator to
obtain clarification.
D. Employees are allowed to hold outside employment as long as it does
not interfere with their Township responsibilities. Employees are
prohibited from engaging in outside employment activities while on the
job or using Township time, supplies or equipment in the outside
employment activities. The Business Administrator may request
employees to restrict outside employment if the quality of Township
work diminishes. Any employees who holds an interest in, or is
employed by, any business doing business with the Township must
submit a written notice of these outside interests to the Business
Administrator.
E. Employees may not accept donations, gratuities, contributions or gifts
that could be interpreted to affect their Township duties. Under no
circumstances shall employees accept donations, gratuities,
contributions or gifts from a vendor doing business with or seeking to
do business with the Township or any person or firm seeking to
influence Township decisions. Meals and other entertainment valued in
excess of $150 are also prohibited. Employees are required to report to
the Business Administrator any offer of a donation, gratuity,
contribution or gift including meals and entertainment that is in
violation of this policy.
§ A251-20 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-21
A251:876
§ A251-21. Political activity.
Employees have exactly the same right as any other citizen to join political
organizations and participate in political activities, as long as they maintain
a clear separation between their official responsibilities and their political
affiliations. Employees are prohibited from engaging in political activities
while performing their public duties and from using Township time, supplies
or equipment in any political activity. Any violation of this policy must be
reported to the supervisor, department head, or Business Administrator.
§ A251-22. Employee evaluation.
The department head will complete a written evaluation and appraisal form
for every employee to measure progress and to encourage self-improvement
at least twice a year. The evaluation will also record additional duties
performed, educational courses completed as well as a plan to correct any
weak points using the Employee Counseling Form. After completing the
evaluation, the supervisor or department head will review the results with
the employee and return the form(s) with the signed acknowledgement to
the Business Administrator. After review by the Business Administrator, the
form(s) are to be included in the employee's official personnel file. As a part
of the evaluation, employees have the right to request a conference with
the Business Administrator and submit written comments directly on the
evaluation form.
§ A251-23. Employee discipline.
A. An employee may be subject to discipline for all of the following
reasons:
(1) Incompetence, inefficiency or failure to perform duties;
(2) Conviction of a crime;
(3) Conduct unbecoming a public employee;
(4) Violation of Township policies, procedures and regulations;
(5) Falsification of public records including personnel records;
(6) Violation of federal, state or Township regulations concerning drug
and alcohol use and possession;
(7) Chronic or excessive absenteeism or lateness;
(8) Misuse of public property, including motor vehicles; and
(9) Other sufficient cause.
B. Major disciplinary action includes termination, disciplinary demotion or
suspension or fine exceeding five working days. Minor discipline
includes a formal, written reprimand or a suspension or fine of five
working days or less. Employees who object to the terms or conditions
§ A251-21 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-23
A251:877
§ A251-24. Employee termination.
§ A251-25. Resignation.
An employee who intends to resign must notify the department head in
writing at least two weeks in advance. After giving notice of resignation,
employees are expected to assist their supervisor and co-employees by
providing information concerning their current projects and help in the
training of a replacement. During the last two weeks, the employee may not
use paid time off except paid holidays. The department head will prepare an
Employee Action Form showing any pay or other money owed the employee.
The Business Administrator will conduct a confidential exit interview to
discuss benefits including COBRA options, appropriate retirement issues
and pay due. A COBRA notification letter will be sent to the employee's
home address. The exit interview will also include an open discussion with
the employee. On the last day of work, and prior to receiving the final
paycheck, the employee must return the employee identification card, all
keys and equipment. At this time, the employee will sign the termination
memo designating all money owed and this memo will be retained in the
official personnel file.
of the discipline are entitled to a hearing under the applicable
grievance procedure.
A. An employee may be terminated depending upon the circumstances for
any of the following:
(1) Incompetence, inefficiency or failure to perform duties;
(2) Conviction of a crime;
(3) Conduct unbecoming a public employee;
(4) Violation of Township policies, procedures and regulations;
(5) Falsification of public records including personnel records;
(6) Violation of federal, state or Township regulations concerning drug
and alcohol use and possession;
(7) Chronic or excessive absenteeism or lateness;
(8) Misuse of public property, including motor vehicles; and
(9) Other sufficient cause.
B. All discharges will be in accordance with federal and state laws as well
as applicable collective bargaining agreements.
§ A251-23 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-26
A251:878
§ A251-26. Work force reduction.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 4A: 8-1.1, the Township may institute layoff actions
for economy, efficiency or other related reasons, but will first consider
voluntary alternatives.
§ A251-26 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-26
A251:879

ARTICLE III
Workplace Policies
§ A251-27. Job description.
A job description including qualifications shall be maintained for each
position. All job descriptions must be approved by the Mayor. The Business
Administrator will make copies available upon request.
§ A251-28. Attendance.
All employees are expected to be at work and ready to assume their duties
at the beginning of the scheduled workday. Lateness and absence will be
tolerated only in emergencies or when the supervisor gives prior approval.
All absences must be reported to the supervisor prior to the start of the
normal workday. The normal working hours for administrative departments
are 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. The working hours for other departments are
established by departmental procedures and bargaining unit agreements.
§ A251-29. Early closing and delayed opening.
In the event of unsafe conditions, the Business Administrator may authorize
department heads to close operations earlier than the normal working
hours. If conditions exist prior to scheduled openings, the Business
Administrator shall notify department heads of a delayed opening and a new
opening time. Each department will have a calling system in place. If the
employee chooses not to report to work, a full vacation day or compensating
time will be charged. Sick time will only be charged for a legitimate illness.
If work is called off for the day, no time will be charged for the day. This
provision does not apply to the Department of Public Works or Police or any
personnel who may be required to assist in an emergency.
§ A251-30. Breaks.
Administrative personnel are entitled to a one hour lunch that is to be
arranged by the supervisor so that offices continue to function.
§ A251-31. Dress code.
Dress, grooming and personal hygiene must be appropriate for the position.
Uniforms are required for certain jobs and are to be worn in accordance
with applicable departmental standards. All other employees are required
to dress in a manner that is normally acceptable in similar business
establishments and consistent with applicable safety standards. Employees
shall not wear suggestive attire, athletic clothing, shorts, sandals, T-shirts,
novelty buttons, baseball hats and similar items of casual attire that do not
present a businesslike appearance. Hair, sideburns, moustaches and beards
must be clean, combed and neatly trimmed. Shaggy, unkempt hair is not
permissible regardless of length. Tattoos and body piercings, other than
earrings, may not be visible. With the advance approval of the Business
Administrator, the Township will make reasonable religious
§ A251-27 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-31
A251:881
accommodations that do not violate safety standards. Employees violating
this policy shall be required to take corrective action or will be sent home
without pay.
§ A251-32. No-smoking.
The New Jersey Legislature has declared that in all governmental buildings
the rights of nonsmokers to breathe clean air supersedes the rights of
smokers. In accordance with state law, the Township has adopted a smokefree
policy for all buildings. Township facilities shall be smoke-free and
no employee or visitor will be permitted to smoke anywhere in Township
buildings. Employees are permitted to smoke only outside Township
buildings and such locations as not to allow the reentry of smoke into
building entrances. This policy shall be strictly enforced, and any employee
found in violation will be subject to disciplinary action.
§ A251-33. Use of vehicles.
§ A251-34. Telephone usage.
Township telephones are for official business. The use of hand-held cell
phones while driving Township vehicles or while driving on Township
business is prohibited.
§ A251-35. E-mail, voice mail and Internet usage.
A. Township owned vehicles shall be used only on official business, and all
passengers must be on Township business. An employee who is also
employed by another governmental entity may use a Township vehicle
for that employment only if the employment is pursuant to an interlocal
agreement between the Township and the other jurisdiction.
B. Vehicles may be taken home only with the advance approval of the
Business Administrator except a department head may also grant
temporary approval to facilitate responses to after-hours emergency
calls. When an employee takes home a Township vehicle, it is to be used
for only official Township business any other use is not permitted. Any
violation of this policy constitutes cause for disciplinary action.
A. Township E-mail, voice mail and the Internet are for official business,
and use for nonbusiness purposes is prohibited. All E-mail, voice mail
and Internet messages are official documents subject to the provisions
of the Access to Public Records Act (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.).
B. The Township reserves the right to monitor, obtain, review and disclose
all E-mail, voice mail and Internet messages for lawful and legitimate
reasons. By using Township E-mail, voice mail and the Internet, each
user agrees that the Township has unrestricted access and the right to
disclose all information communicated or stored on the E-mail, voice
mail and the Internet for any security, health, employment or other
legitimate business reasons. Legitimate reasons also include systems
§ A251-31 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-35
A251:882
§ A251-36. Bulletin board.
The bulletin boards located in the Township administrative building and
other facilities are intended for official notices regarding policies,
procedures, meetings and special events. Only personnel authorized by the
Business Administrator may post, remove, or alter any notice.
maintenance, message routing, retrieval of business information,
troubleshooting hardware and software problems, preventing system
misuse, protecting confidential proprietary information, insuring
compliance with software license policies and complying with legal and
regulatory requests for information.
§ A251-35 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-36
A251:883

ARTICLE IV
Paid and Unpaid Time Off Policies
§ A251-37. Scope.
These policies cover nonunion employees. They also cover union employees
to the extent that their collective bargaining agreements do not cover these
issues.
§ A251-38. Paid holiday.
§ A251-39. Vacation leave.
A. Employees are entitled to the following paid holidays:
(1) New Year's Day.
(2) Martin Luther King's Birthday.
(3) President's Day.
(4) Good Friday.
(5) Memorial Day.
(6) Independence Day.
(7) Labor Day.
(8) Columbus Day.
(9) Veterans Day.
(10) Election Day.
(11) Thanksgiving Day.
(12) Day after Thanksgiving.
(13) Christmas Day.
B. A holiday falling on a Saturday will be observed on the preceding
Friday, and a holiday falling on a Sunday will be observed on the
following Monday.
A. Vacation is an accrued benefit based on the following schedule:
(1) Five days for six months to a year of service;
(2) Ten days for the second through fifth year;
(3) Twelve days after the completion of five years through 10 years;
and
(4) An additional vacation day will be added for each year of service at
the completion of 10 years, up to a maximum of 20 days.
§ A251-37 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-39
A251:885
§ A251-40. Personal leave.
Employees are entitled to three personal days per year, and any unused
days are forfeited at the end of each calendar year.
§ A251-41. Sick leave.
§ A251-42. Bereavement leave.
Employees are entitled to three consecutive calendar days leave of absence
for each death of an employee's immediate relative. Bereavement leave
shall not extend beyond three consecutive calendar days immediately
following the death of a family member. "Immediate relative" includes
spouse or significant other, child, parent, stepchild, sibling, grandparents,
daughter-in-law, son-in-law, grandchildren, niece, nephew, uncle, aunt, or
any person related by blood or marriage residing in an employee's
household. Employees are paid for all working days during the bereavement
leave.
(5) Employees must receive their supervisor's approval at least two
weeks in advance of the first vacation day. Employees who do not
use all of their vacation allowance may add up to five of their
unused days to their allowance for the following year. Employees
are not entitled to compensation for unused vacation days upon
separation of service from the Township.
A. Employees are entitled to one day of sick leave for every month of
continuous service with the Township. Sick leave is to be used only in
cases where the employee is ill and unable to work, or in cases of the
serious illness of a family member. Employees absent on sick leave for
three or more consecutive working days must submit a doctor's
verification of illness or injury. If an employee is attending to an
immediate family member, a doctor's verification of that individual is
required. After the 10th day of absence on sick leave in one calendar
year, a doctor's verification must be submitted for that day and all
subsequent sick leave absences, regardless of duration. Prior to the
return to work, the Township may require an employee to be examined
by a physician designated by the Township to verify fitness to return to
normal duties. An employee will not be permitted to return to work until
the verification is received.
B. At the end of each calendar year, an employee's unused sick time is
added to the allotment for the following year. The accumulation
continues indefinitely. Employees will be paid for 1/2 of their total
accumulated unused sick time or six months' salary, whichever is less,
upon retirement under the Public Employees Retirement System
guidelines and five years of full-time continuous service to the
Township.
§ A251-39 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-43
A251:886
§ A251-43. Jury duty.
An employee required to render jury service shall be entitled to be absent
from work during that service and will be paid the difference between any
payment received for jury duty and the employee's regular salary.
§ A251-44. Leave of absence.
§ A251-45. Family and Medical Leave Act.
A. Employees may be granted a personal leave of absence for up to six
months at the sole discretion of the Business Administrator if the leave
does not cause undue operational disruption. The leave must include
the use of any accrued vacation and sick leave time, regardless of the
length of leave requested. The portion of the leave that runs beyond the
exhaustion of vacation and sick leave will be without pay or longevity
credit. In exceptional circumstances, the Mayor may extend a leave of
absence for an additional six months, if such extension is considered in
the best interests of the Township.
B. Personal leaves are not granted for the purpose of seeking or accepting
employment with another employer, or for extended vacation time.
Employees on personal leave of absence for more than two weeks in any
month will not receive holiday pay, and will not accrue personal leave,
sick leave or vacation time for that month. Health benefits may also be
impacted. Refer to the Township health benefits policy (§ A251-50). A
personal leave is granted with the understanding that the employee
intends to return to work for the Township. If the employee fails to
return within five business days after the expiration of the leave, the
employee shall be considered to have resigned.
A. Employees who have been employed for at least 12 continuous months
and have worked at least 1,800 base hours, excluding overtime, in the
preceding twelve-month period are eligible for family and medical leave
with no loss of position or pay rate. However, employees on such leave
will not continue to accrue vacation days, sick days, personal days or
longevity. Employees taking family or medical leave under this section
continue to be eligible for paid health insurance coverage under the
Township policy.
B. Upon written notice, eligible employees are entitled to a family or
medical leave for up to 12 weeks to care for a newly born or adopted
child or a seriously ill immediate family member or for the employee's
own serious health condition that makes the employee unable to
perform the functions of the employee's position. Eligible employees
who take leave under this policy must use all accrued available
vacation, sick, compensatory time and personal days during the leave.
The use of accrued time will not extend the leave period. After
exhausting accrued time, the employee will no longer be paid for the
remainder of the leave.
§ A251-43 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-45
A251:887
§ A251-46. Military leave.
C. The period of leave must be supported by a physician's certificate. An
extension past 12 weeks can be requested, but medical verification of
the need must be submitted prior to the expiration of the leave. The
Township reserves the right to deny any request for extended leave.
Additional information concerning the family leave policy and eligibility
requirements are available from the Business Administrator.
A. Any full-time employee who is a member of the National Guard, Naval
Militia, Air National Guard, or a reserve component of any United
States Armed Force who is required to engage in field training will be
granted a military leave of absence with pay for the training period as
authorized by law. The paid leave will not be counted against any
available vacation.
B. When an employee, after one year's service with the Township, is called
to active duty or inducted into the United States military, the employee
shall automatically be granted an indefinite leave of absence for the
duration of military service. To be reinstated by the Township without
loss of privileges or seniority, the employee must report for duty with
the Township within 60 days following release from active duty under
honorable circumstances.
C. During the period of active military duty, the employee shall be paid the
difference between military salary and the employee's regular salary for
a period not to exceed 180 days. Employees on active service will also
continue to receive paid health insurance coverage during the period of
180 days plus an additional 30 days. After this period has expired,
employees may continue coverage for themselves or their dependents
under the Township group plan by taking advantage of the COBRA
provision. Members of the state-administered retirement systems
(PERS and PFRS) will continue accruing service and salary credit in the
system during the one-hundred-and-eighty-day period.
§ A251-45 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-46
A251:888
ARTICLE V
Compensation and Employee Benefits Policies
§ A251-47. Scope.
These policies cover nonunion employees. They also cover union employees
to the extent that their collective bargaining agreements do not cover these
issues.
§ A251-48. Payroll.
§ A251-49. Overtime compensation.
A. Salary ranges are established by ordinance, and the salary must fall
within the minimum and maximum ranges for the employee's title.
Employees are paid on the 15th and 30th of every month, with overtime
being held back for one pay period in order to compute payment of the
amount due. Employees who are going on vacation and would like their
checks in advance must make a written request at least two weeks in
advance of the vacation.
B. The Township will not accept responsibility for any employee's personal
finances. The Township will acknowledge judgments against an
employee's pay, but will not act as a mediator between the employee
and creditors.
A. Under the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act, certain employees in
managerial, supervisory, administrative or professional positions are
exempt from the provisions of the Act. The Business Administrator shall
notify all exempt employees of their status under the Act. Exempt
employees are not eligible to receive overtime compensation and are
required to work the normal workweek and any additional hours
needed to fulfill their responsibilities. Time off consideration for large
amounts of additional hours may be provided with the Business
Administrator's prior approval and at the sole discretion of the Business
Administrator.
B. All other employees are classified as nonexempt and are subject to the
provisions of the Act. Depending on work needs, nonexempt employees
may be required to work overtime. Nonexempt employees are not
permitted to work overtime unless the overtime is budgeted and
approved by the department head and the Business Administrator.
Nonexempt employees working overtime without prior approval will be
subject to disciplinary action.
C. Nonexempt employees will receive overtime compensation for hours
worked in excess of 37.5 hours in a weekly period. Employees may
choose overtime compensation in the form of overtime pay at their
regular hourly salary or compensating time off. The maximum number
of hours that an employee may accrue for future compensating time off
is 30. Once this maximum has been accumulated, all additional hours
§ A251-47 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-49
A251:889
§ A251-50. Health insurance.
§ A251-51. Prescription eye glasses and dental benefits.
Employees and their immediate family may be eligible for up to $300
annually for prescription eye glasses and dental benefits on a reimbursable
basis. The complete benefit plan is on file in the Business Administrator's
office, and a summary plan description will be provided to all employees.
Benefit levels for nonunionized employees are subject to change at the
discretion of the Township of River Vale.
will be compensated by overtime pay. Accrued and taken overtime
compensating hours must be noted on the employee's time sheet.
D. Nonexempt employees will receive 1 1/2 hours of overtime
compensation for each hour worked in excess of 37.5 hours in a weekly
period. For purposes of overtime compensation, hours worked are
computed to the nearest 1/2 hour per day. Previously scheduled
vacation time and holiday time are considered time worked for
purposes of determining overtime compensation, but sick time and
personal time are not.
E. Employees must make a request to their supervisor at least two days in
advance when they want to take compensating time off. The supervisor
will approve the request if the absence does not cause undue hardship
to the department.
A. Employees and their immediate family members are provided health
insurance coverage administered by the state health benefits plan. The
complete benefit plan is on file in the Business Administrator's office,
and a summary plan description will be provided to all employees.
Benefit levels for nonunionized employees are subject to change at the
discretion of the Township of River Vale.
B. Health insurance coverage for employees on a leave of absence or who
cease Township employment will terminate at the end of the month in
which the leave begins or employment is terminated except coverage
will continue for up to 12 weeks for employees on leave pursuant to the
Family and Medical Leave Act and up to 30 weeks for employees on
military leave. Upon termination of coverage, employees may extend
health insurance coverage for themselves or their dependents by taking
advantage of the COBRA provision for a period of up to 18 months. For
more information, consult the Business Administrator.
C. Employees who retire with 25 years of service to the Township may
continue to receive paid health insurance coverage. Employees
receiving retiree health benefits must notify the Business Administrator
in writing, with proof of enrollment, when they become eligible for
Medicare Parts A and B. For more information, consult the Business
Administrator.
§ A251-49 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-52
A251:890
§ A251-52. Retirement.
Under state law, all employees must enroll in the New Jersey Public
Retirement System or the Police and Fire Fighters' Retirement System as
applicable. The employee's contribution to the plan will be deducted from
the employee's pay. An employee who has completed the required number
of years and who has reached the required age under the plan may retire
by notifying the department head in writing. The state retirement plans
request six months' advance notice to process the application. After giving
notice of retirement, employees are expected to assist their supervisor and
co-employees by providing information concerning their current projects
and help in the training of a replacement. The department head will prepare
an Employee Action Form showing any pay or other money owed the
employee. The Business Administrator will conduct a confidential exit
interview to discuss benefits including COBRA options, appropriate
retirement issues and pay due. A COBRA notification letter will be sent
to the employee's home address. The exit interview will also include an
open discussion with the employee. On the last day of work, and prior
to receiving the final paycheck, the employee must return the employee
identification card, all keys and equipment. At this time, the employee will
sign the termination memo designating all money owed and this memo will
be retained in the official personnel file.
§ A251-53. Workers compensation.
Employees who suffer job-related injuries and illnesses may be entitled
to medical expenses, lost income and other compensation under the New
Jersey Workers' Compensation Act. The Township covers workers'
compensation benefits through its membership in a joint insurance fund.
Any occupational injury or illness must be immediately reported to the
supervisor or department head. All required medical treatment must be
performed by a workers' compensation physician appointed by the joint
insurance fund, and payment for unauthorized medical treatment may not
be covered pursuant to the Act.
§ A251-54. Educational assistance and training.
A. Subject to sufficient funds in the budget and upon approval of the
department head, employees may apply for reimbursement of tuition
expenses incurred for training or college courses directly related to the
employee's work. The Business Administrator will be the sole judge of
whether a particular course or program is directly related to the
employee's work. Employees are strongly urged to obtain this
determination before enrolling in a course or program.
B. The employee must reimburse the Township for 100% of tuition
expenses if the employee leaves Township employment within 12
months of receipt.
§ A251-52 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-55
A251:891
§ A251-55. Conference and seminar.
Requests to attend a conference or seminar must be approved by the
department head and the Business Administrator. Requests shall be made
sufficiently in advance to take advantage of discounts for early registration,
and must be submitted to the department head at least 30 days before
the event. Requests must be in writing including the conference schedule,
registration information and estimated costs. The department head is
responsible for detailing all training requests during the budget formulation
process. Approval of any conference or seminar request is conditioned upon
the availability of funds.
§ A251-55 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-55
A251:892
ARTICLE VI
Managerial/Supervisory Procedures
§ A251-56. Employment procedure.
A. The Business Administrator will coordinate the employment
recruitment process for all vacancies to ensure compliance with
contractual, legal, and equal opportunity requirements. When a
vacancy occurs, it is the responsibility of the department head to notify
the Business Administrator who will distribute notification of the
vacancy to all departments. The Business Administrator will undertake
to recruit qualified applicants in accordance with applicable federal and
state law. Where positions are advertised, the media or other periodical
utilized must have as wide a circulation as possible to encourage
applications from candidates from diverse backgrounds and must
prominently state that the Township of River Vale is an equal
opportunity employer.
B. All candidates must fully complete an application form. A resume will
not be considered as a substitute for this form. The application is a
confidential document and will not be available to anyone who is not
directly involved in the hiring process.
C. The Business Administrator or department head will coordinate the
interview process including the scheduling of applicants, development
of interview questions and standards to measure candidate responses.
All questions must be in accordance with the New Jersey Division of
Civil Rights Guidelines for Pre-Employment Inquiries. Reasonable
accommodations must be made for disabled applicants.
D. Physical examinations. The Business Administrator may require
applicants, prior to employment, to successfully pass a physical
examination consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act to
assure that the work required by the position will not cause injury to the
employee or co-employees and that the person is fit to meet the
requirements of the position. The Business Administrator may require
periodic physical examinations to determine the employee's continued
ability to perform the duties of the position. All physical examinations
must be performed by a physician chosen by the Township at the
expense of the Township. All medical records of employees and
prospective employees are confidential and are to be maintained by the
Business Administrator separate from the employee's official personnel
file.
E. Job offers. The final decision will be made by the Business
Administrator after all references and other information has been
verified. Every effort shall be made to offer reasonable accommodations
pursuant the Americans with Disabilities Act. The employment offer
must be made in a letter to the candidate outlining all terms and
conditions of the offer. The letter will also establish a deadline for
acceptance.
§ A251-56 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-56
A251:893
§ A251-57. Nepotism.
§ A251-58. Open Public Meetings Act procedure concerning
personnel matters.
Discussions by the governing body or any body of the Township concerning
appointment, termination, terms and conditions of employment,
performance evaluation, promotion or discipline of any current or
prospective officer or employee shall be in closed session unless the
individual requests in writing that the discussion be held in open session.
Such request must be granted. Prior to the discussion by the governing
body or any body of the Township concerning such matters, the Clerk
shall notify the affected person(s) of the meeting date, time and place, the
matters to be discussed and the person's right to request that the discussion
occur in open session. In the event more than one person is affected by
the discussion and one of the affected persons does not request that the
F. Acceptances and rejections. If the first offer is rejected, the Business
Administrator will decide to hire another candidate or re-open the
position. Once a candidate accepts the employment offer, all other
candidates will be notified in writing that they were not accepted for
the position.
G. Record retention. All applications, notes made during interviews and
reference checks, job offers and other documents created during hiring
process must be returned to the Business Administrator. Documents
related to the successful candidate will be placed in the employee's
official personnel file, except that medical records, including physical
examinations, must be maintained in a separate file. All records
documents related to other candidates must be retained for at least one
year. Records and documents created during the hiring process are
confidential and must be retained in a locked cabinet.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law or collective bargaining unit
agreements, immediate relatives shall not be hired, promoted or
transferred to a regular full-time or regular part-time position where:
(1) One relative would have the authority to appoint, remove,
discipline or evaluate the performance of the other;
(2) One relative would be responsible for auditing the work of the
other; or
(3) Other circumstances exist that place the relatives in a situation of
actual or reasonably foreseeable conflict of interest.
B. For purposes of this policy, immediate relative includes spouse or
significant other, child, parent, stepchild, sibling, grandparents,
daughter-in-law, son-in-law, grandchildren, niece, nephew, uncle, aunt,
or any person related by blood or marriage residing in an employee's
household.
§ A251-56 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-58
A251:894
discussion be in open session, then the discussion shall be in closed session.
If the individual(s) does not request that the discussion be held in open
session, the governing body or other body of the Township may at its sole
discretion invite the affected individual(s) to attend the applicable portion
of the closed session.
§ A251-59. Processing and orientation of new employees.
All new regular full-time and regular part-time employees will be scheduled
to meet with the Business Administrator and department head on their first
day for a general orientation. Copies of all forms and acknowledgements
must be returned to the Business Administrator for inclusion in the
employee's official personnel file. The orientation will include:
§ A251-60. Initial employment period.
Except where state requirements direct otherwise, new employees or
present employees transferring to new positions will be hired subject to an
initial employment period of not less than three months or more than 12
months, as determined by the Business Administrator or Mayor. During this
initial employment period, the new employee or transferee will be provided
with training and guidance from the supervisor. At the end of the initial
employment period, the supervisor will conduct an employee evaluation.
See performance evaluation procedure (§ A251-62). New employees may
be discharged at any time during this period if the Business Administrator
concludes that the employee is not progressing or performing satisfactorily.
Under appropriate circumstances, the Business Administrator may extend
the initial employment period.
§ A251-61. Employee Handbook.
The Business Administrator with the assistance of the Township Counsel
shall draft an Employee Handbook for the approval of the Mayor. A separate
version of the Handbook will be drafted for interns, part-time and seasonal
A. A tour of the appropriate facilities to acquaint the new employee with
overall operations as they relate to the specific position;
B. The completion of all pertinent personnel, payroll, insurance and
pension forms;
C. A review of the Employee Handbook and acknowledgement of receipt;
D. A review of the Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual if the
employee is a manager or supervisor and acknowledgement of receipt;
E. The employee complaint policy letter and acknowledgement;
F. A safety orientation and acknowledgement; and
G. Arrangements for the new employee to complete required PEOSHA
safety training.
§ A251-58 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-61
A251:895
employees as well as for major bargaining groups if appropriate and
required. Once approved, copies will be distributed and employees will
be required to sign an acknowledgement of receipt that will be placed in
the official personnel file. The Handbook will be revised and redistributed
whenever there is a significant change in personnel practice or every two
years.
§ A251-62. Performance evaluation.
A. Periodic evaluations are critical to create a formal record of an
employee's performance over time and establish a foundation for
personnel actions such as promotion and termination. In addition to
day-to-day feedback to the employee, a performance evaluation must be
conducted for all employees at least twice a year. The completed
appraisal becomes part of an employee's permanent record. This is a
legal document that is discoverable in lawsuits.
B. Performance discussions must also provide employees with guidance
regarding their ability to meet job standards. Extraordinary skills or
abilities should be recognized in addition to areas for improvement.
Supervisors or department heads should review future training needs
and career planning. The reviewer should also encourage the employee
to make suggestions about how the department can improve. The
reviewer should ask employees for feedback regarding the employee's
skills as they relate to communication, team building, delegation, and
sensitivity to needs of subordinates. Open communication is the key to
improvement.
(1) Setting the stage. The reviewer must create a productive climate
for the discussion. In preparing the evaluation form, prior
evaluations should be reviewed to identify trends. Employees must
be notified in advance of the meeting and should be given a copy of
the blank evaluation form. The meeting should be private without
interruptions in a comfortable environment.
(2) Confirm expectations. The reviewer should start the discussion of
each performance area by reviewing expectations. Ask the
employee to confirm the employee's understanding of job
requirements. Refer to the job description as appropriate.
(3) Continue the discussion by giving the employee's rating in each
performance area. The supervisor should be prepared to refer to
documentation. Employees should be evaluated based on set
standards, not as they compare to other employees. It is rare that
any person's rating in all areas is either high or low. The evaluation
should consider performance during the entire period, not just the
recent past. Care should be taken to avoid allowing one aspect of a
person's performance to overshadow all other performance factors
be it positive or negative. Ideally, each performance area should be
evaluated individually based on specific behaviors exhibited.
§ A251-61 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-62
A251:896
§ A251-63. Disciplinary action.
(a) "Outstanding" means exceptional performance in all areas of
responsibility. Planned objectives were achieved well above the
established standards and accomplishments were made in
unexpected areas.
(b) "Exceeds expectations" means consistently exceeds
established standards in most areas of responsibility. All
requirements must be met and objectives achieved above the
established standards.
(c) "Meets job requirements" means all job requirements were
met and planned objectives accomplished within established
standards. There were no critical areas where
accomplishments were less than planned.
(d) "Needs improvement" means performance in one or more
critical areas does not meet expectations. Not all planned
objectives were accomplished within the established standards
and some responsibilities were not completely met.
(e) "Does not meet minimum standards" means performance is
unacceptable and important objectives have not been
accomplished. Needs immediate improvement.
(4) Discussing future plans. This is where the reviewer should turn to
the discussion to the future performance and development of the
employee. A Counseling Action Plan Form must be completed if any
item is rated "needs improvement" or "does not meet minimum
standards." Specific performance goals must be established for the
next review period along with plans for achieving those goals.
(5) Closing the discussion. When all performance areas have been
discussed, close the discussion by summarizing all of ratings in an
overall rating for the review period.
C. After completing the evaluation, the reviewer will return the form(s)
with the signed acknowledgement to the Business Administrator. After
review by the Business Administrator, the form(s) are to be included in
the employee's official personnel file. As a part of the evaluation,
employees have the right to request a conference with the Business
Administrator.
A. All employees are expected to meet the Township's work performance
standards. The intent of the disciplinary action procedure is to formally
document problems and provide the employee with a reasonable time
to improve performance. The process should encourage development
by providing employees with guidance in areas that need improvement
such as poor work performance, attendance problems, personal
conduct, general compliance with the Township's policies and
procedures and other disciplinary problems.
§ A251-62 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-63
A251:897
§ A251-64. Personnel file.
B. Should a supervisor believe that an employee is not conforming to the
Township's policies and rules or to specific instructions, or has acted
improperly, the supervisor will first privately discuss the matter with
the employee to obtain the employee's view. If the supervisor
determines that the employee has acted improperly, the supervisor
shall take one of the following actions depending upon the gravity and
the employee's past record:
(1) Verbal reprimand. Depending on the circumstances, the supervisor
may verbally notify the employee that the employee's actions have
been improper and warn the employee against further occurrences.
The supervisor will prepare a record of the verbal reprimand
including the date, time and what was discussed with the
employee. This record must be forwarded to the Business
Administrator for the employee's official personnel file.
(2) Business Administrator review. Should the supervisor consider the
offense sufficiently serious to warrant consideration by the
Business Administrator, the employee will be so advised and a
meeting arranged with the Business Administrator at the earliest
possible date. All facts should be detailed at this meeting and, if
possible, a determination will be made at that time of disciplinary
action, if any.
(3) Written reprimand. When a supervisor determines that a written
reprimand is appropriate, the situation must be discussed with the
Business Administrator. The reprimand should clearly identify the
problem and outline a course of corrective action within a specific
time frame. The employee should clearly understand both the
corrective action and the consequence (i.e., termination) if the
problem is not corrected or reoccurs. The employee should
acknowledge receipt of the warning and may include additional
comments. A copy of the written reprimand with the signed
acknowledgement and comments must be forwarded to the
Business Administrator for the employee's official personnel file.
(4) Whenever an employee is recommended for suspension, the
Business Administrator will make the decision and may seek the
advice of the Township Counsel if appropriate. Suspended
employees may request a hearing under the applicable grievance
procedure.
(5) Whenever an employee is recommended for dismissal, the Business
Administrator will make the decision only after seeking the advice
of the Township Counsel. There must be a complete review of the
employee's personnel file and all other facts to determine if there is
sufficient cause for the dismissal. Terminated employees may
request a hearing under the applicable grievance procedure.
§ A251-63 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-64
A251:898
§ A251-65. Employee complaint investigation.
Employees have the right to formally or informally report any statement,
act, or behavior by a co-employee, supervisor, intern, municipal appointee,
elected official or visitor that they believe to be improper.
A. The official personnel files shall be maintained by the Business
Administrator and employee medical information will be maintained in
a separate file. At least annually, the Business Administrator will review
files to make sure they are up to date and will follow up with the
department heads as necessary.
B. The official file shall include at least the following:
(1) The original application signed by the employee;
(2) Notes from any preemployment interview and reference check;
(3) The original letter detailing an offer of employment and any
additional correspondence concerning the employee's hiring;
(4) A signed acknowledgement that the employee received a copy of
the employee complaint policy letter;
(5) A signed acknowledgement that the employee has received the
Employee Handbook;
(6) A signed acknowledgement that the employee received the safety
orientation;
(7) Annual written performance evaluations including documentation
that the evaluation was reviewed with the employee;
(8) Counseling action plans;
(9) Records relating to on-the-job accidents;
(10) Disciplinary actions including an acknowledgement that the
employee was notified of the proposed disciplinary action and was
given an opportunity to respond;
(11) Records relating to any other employment actions including
promotions, demotions;
(12) Transfers, resignations, leaves, etc.;
(13) Educational transcripts; and
(14) Any other pertinent information.
A. Employees should be asked to report complaints in writing utilizing the
Employee Complaint Form, but are not compelled to do so.
B. Identification/screening. The supervisor or department head must
report all written or verbal complaints to the Business Administrator
§ A251-64 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-65
A251:899
unless the complaint is against the Business Administrator. Upon
receipt, the Business Administrator will determine if the complaint was
made pursuant to the general anti-harassment policy, the anti-sexualharassment
policy, the whistle-blower policy, a grievance procedure
or is another form of complaint. A file will be established including
the written complaint, the investigation procedure followed and the
response action plan. As soon as possible but no later than 10 days after
receiving the complaint, the Business Administrator or investigator
appointed by the will interview the employee. If the employee is
reluctant to sign a written complaint, the Business Administrator will
prepare written notes of the date, time and place of the complaint
and the specific allegations. These notes will be read back to the
employee who will be asked to affirm, preferably in writing, as to the
information's accuracy.
C. The Business Administrator will seek the advice of the Township
Counsel when planning the investigation. The investigation should be
conducted by the Township Counsel or County Prosecutor if it involves
potential criminal charges. The investigation should establish the
frequency and nature of the alleged conduct and whether the complaint
coincides with other employment events such as a poor performance
evaluation. The investigation should also determine if other employees
were subjected to similar misconduct. It is important to protect the
rights of both the person making the complaint and the alleged
wrongdoer.
D. Response plan: no corrective action required. The Business
Administrator will discuss the conclusions with the Township Counsel
and render a decision within 14 days after the investigation is complete.
If the validity of a complaint cannot be determined or the complaint is
groundless, the complaining employee should be notified in writing.
Care should be taken to avoid being too specific, confrontational or
accusatory and to avoid any language that might be construed as
defamatory. A general statement is usually more appropriate that the
claim was thoroughly investigated, but could not be sufficiently
documented or confirmed to justify taking formal action. The employee
should be assured that future complaints will be investigated and that
the Township is committed to eliminating wrongful employment
practices when they are found to exist. If the investigation reveals that
the complainant intentionally and maliciously levied false charges
against the alleged wrongdoer, the complainant must be notified of the
seriousness of filing a false complaint, and the appropriate disciplinary
penalty under the circumstances, up to and including termination.
E. Response plan: corrective action required. If the investigation reveals
that the complaint is justified and substantiated, the Business
Administrator will formulate with the advise of the Township Counsel a
corrective action plan as well as possible disciplinary action. The
complaining employee will be notified, in writing that it appears that
the complaint was justified and an appropriate response plan has been
§ A251-65 RIVER VALE CODE § A251-65
A251:900
§ A251-66. Requests for employment verification and reference.
§ A251-67. Continuing education.
formulated. A copy of the response plan should be attached to the letter.
The response plan should provide for appropriate remedial action to
prevent a recurrence of the wrongful act or behavior.
A. Inquiries and written requests for references or employment
verification regarding a current or former employee must be referred to
the Business Administrator. No employee may issue a reference letter
without the permission of the Business Administrator. Under no
circumstances should any information be released over the phone.
B. In response to a request for information, the Business Administrator
will only verify an employee's name, dates of employment, job title,
department and final salary. No other data or information will be
furnished unless:
(1) The Township is required to release the information by law; or
(2) The employee or former employee authorizes the Township in
writing to furnish this information and releases the Township from
liability.
A. The Township, in conjunction with the Township Counsel, will arrange
for employment practices seminars at least annually to train all
managerial/supervisory personnel. The Township will also offer
nonmandatory training to all other employees with special emphasis on
employee rights and protections under various federal and state laws as
well as Township employment practices. Records will be maintained in
the official personnel files of all employees trained under this
procedure.
B. Managerial and supervisory personnel will also update employees
periodically by department meetings and memos that should address
specific problems and concerns that may arise. Every effort will be
made to encourage employee suggestions about ways to avoid
employer-employee disputes and violations of employment rights.
§ A251-65 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § A251-67
A251:901
Chapter A252
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
100-2005 2-14-2005 Poplar Road Sanctuary
rules and regulations
amendment
Ch. 166, Art. IV
101-2005 3-14-2005 Fees amendments Chs. 61, Arts. I and III;
105, Art. I; 112; 142
and 166, Art. II.
102-2005 3-28-2005 Board of Health
amendment
Ch. 21
103-2005 3-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 81, Art. IX
104-2005 Noise amendment;
uniform construction
codes amendment
Finally adopted as
Ord. Nos. 114-2005
and 115-2005
105-2005 3-28-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 142, Part 9
106-2005 4-11-2005 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
107-2005 4-11-2005 Possession or
consumption of alcoholic
beverages by underage
persons
Ch. 49, Art. III
108-2005 4-11-2005 Illicit connections to
storm sewers
Ch. 212, Art. II
109-2005 4-11-2005 Illegal discharges to
storm sewers
Ch. 212, Art. III
110-2005 4-11-2005 Littering amendment Ch. 152
111-2005 4-11-2005 Yard waste collection and
disposal program
Ch. 210, Art. IV
112-2005 4-11-2005 Feeding of wildlife Ch. 61, Art. V
§ A251-67 RIVER VALE CODE § DL-1
A251:902
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
113-2005 4-11-2005 Removal of feces
amendment
Ch. 61, Art. IV
114-2005 5-9-2005 Noise: commercial
activities
Ch. 159, Art. II
115-2005 5-9-2005 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 90
116-2005 5-9-2005 Acquisition of golf course NCM
117-2005 5-23-2005 Trees Ch. 225
118-2005 6-27-2005 Land use amendment Ch. 142
119-2005 6-13-2005 Bond NCM
120-2005 6-30-2005 Bond NCM
121-2005 6-30-2005 Bond NCM
122-2005 6-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 81, Art. IV
123-2005 6-30-2005 Appropriation NCM
124-2005 7-25-2005 Flood hazard areas
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 355-2019
125-2005 Utility poles Tabled
126-2005 7-25-2005 Recreation facilities
amendment
Ch. 166, Art. II
127-2005 Noise amendment Not adopted
128-2005 7-25-2005 Bond NCM
129-2005 Police ordinance Not adopted
130-2005 8-8-2005 Salaries NCM
131-2005 8-22-2005 Appropriation NCM
132-2005 9-12-2005 Development fees Repealed by Ord. No.
147-2006
133-2005 9-12-2005 Public swimming pools
amendment
Ch. 218, Art. I
134-2005 9-26-2005 Salaries NCM
135-2005 Soil movement Not adopted
136-2005 9-26-2005 Affordable housing Superseded by Ord.
No. 358-2019
137-2005 Utility poles Tabled
138-2005 11-28-2005 Land use amendment Ch. 142
§ DL-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § DL-1
A251:903
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
139-2005 11-28-2005 Bond NCM
140-2005 12-12-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 81, Arts. I, II and
VI
141-2006 2-18-2006 Bond NCM
142-2006 2-18-2006 Land use: land use
generally amendment;
soil removal amendment
Ch. 142, Parts 1 and 7
143-2006 2-27-2006 Bond NCM
143A-2006 2-27-2006 Exceed budget limit NCM
144-2006 3-13-2006 Land use: steep slopes Ch. 142, Part 13
144A-2006 Demolition of buildings
amendment; property
maintenance amendment
Not adopted
145-2006 3-13-2006 Township fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. III
146-2006 3-13-2006 Salaries NCM
147-2006 3-27-2006 Affordable housing
development fees
repealer
See Ch. 43; Ch. 142
148-2006 4-24-2006 Land use: shade trees
amendment
Ch. 142, Part 5
149-2006 4-24-2006 Land use: zoning
amendment
Ch. 142, Part 9
150-2006 Police department
amendment
Tabled
151-2006 5-8-2006 Bond NCM
152-2006 5-8-2006 Bond NCM
153-2006 5-8-2006 Bond NCM
154-2006 5-22-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
prohibited parking
amendment; pedestrian
crosswalks amendment
Ch. 81, Arts. I and XV
155-2006 10-12-2006 Bond NCM
156-2006 6-20-2006 Peddling and soliciting:
charitable organizations
in roadways
Superseded by Ord.
No. 359-2019
§ DL-1 RIVER VALE CODE § DL-1
A251:904
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
157-2006 6-20-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
prohibited parking
amendment; two-hour
parking amendment;
official traffic control
devices amendment
Ch. 81, Arts. I; XII; XIV
158-2006 7-24-2006 Affordable housing:
Municipal Housing
Liaison
Superseded by Ord.
No. 358-2019
159-2006 Land use: zoning
amendment
Defeated
160-2006 7-24-2006 Land use: zoning
amendment
Ch. 142, Part 9
161-2006 7-24-2006 Ethics in purchasing
amendments
Repealed by Ord. No.
174-2007
162-2006 8-1-2006 Police Department Repealed by Ord. No.
166-2006
163-2006 8-1-2006 Property maintenance
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
223-2009
164-2006 9-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
through streets and stop
streets amendment
Ch. 81, Art. II
165-2006 Police Department
repealer
Not adopted
166-2006 10-12-2006 Police Department Ch. 33, Art. I
167-2006 11-13-2006 Affordable housing
development fees
Superseded by Ord.
No. 358-2019
168-2006 Land use: zoning
amendment
Defeated
169-2006 Land use: zoning
amendment
Defeated
170-2006 Repeal of condemnation
ordinances
Defeated
171-2006 Acceptance of
conservation easement
Defeated
172-2006 Exchange of land Defeated
173-2007 1-22-2007 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 3
§ DL-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § DL-1
A251:905
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
174-2007 1-22-2007 Ethics in purchasing
repealer
Chs. 3; 13 (reference
only)
175-2007 2-12-2007 Affordable housing
development fees
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 358-2019
176-2007 4-9-2007 Exceed budget limit NCM
177-2007 4-9-2007 Appropriation NCM
178-2007 4-9-2007 Land use: steep slopes
amendment
Ch. 142, Part 13
179-2007 5-14-2007 Fees and procedures for
marriages and civil union
ceremonies
Ch. 105, Art. IV
180-2007 6-11-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 81
181-2007 Not yet adopted
182-2007 5-30-2007 Appropriation NCM
183-2007 10-22-2007 Appropriation NCM
184-2007 8-13-2007 Land use: zoning
amendment
Ch. 142, Part 9
185-2007 7-23-2007 Land use: zoning
amendment
Ch. 142, Part 9
186-2007 8-13-2007 Salaries NCM
187-2007 8-13-2007 Board of Health
amendment
Ch. 21
188-2007 9-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic:
prohibited parking
amendment; through
streets and stop streets
amendment; parking
prohibited certain hours
on certain streets
amendment
Ch. 81, Arts. I, II and
VI
189-2007 Land use: zoning
amendment
Defeated
190-2007 11-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic:
through streets and stop
streets amendment
Ch. 81, Art. II
191-2007 Defeated
§ DL-1 RIVER VALE CODE § DL-1
A251:906
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
192-2008 3-10-2008 Land use: zoning
amendment
Ch. 142, Part 9
193-2008 3-10-2008 Appropriation NCM
194-2008 3-10-2008 Salaries NCM
195-2008 3-10-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
196-2008 Not adopted
197-2008 4-14-2008 Salaries NCM
198-2008 5-12-2008 Police Department:
establishment;
composition; membership
amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
199-2008 6-9-2008 Land use: zoning
amendment
Ch. 142, Part 9,
footnote and table only
200-2008 7-14-2008 Fire prevention:
administration and
enforcement amendment
Ch. 112, Art. I
201-2008 10-14-2008 Animal control and
prevention of rabies
amendment
Ch. 61, Art. II
202-2009 2-9-2009 Fire Department bylaws
amendment
Ch. 18
203-2009 1-26-2009 Police Department: rules
and regulations
Ch. 33, Art. II
204-2009 2-23-2009 Open Space Trust Fund Ch. 19, Art. I
205-2009 3-9-2009 Appropriation NCM
206-2009 Budget Removed
207-2009 4-13-2009 Land use generally
amendment; subdivision
of land amendment;
zoning amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
214-2009
208-2009 4-27-2009 Recycling amendment Ch. 186
209-2009 5-11-2009 Salaries NCM
210-2009 5-26-2009 Bond NCM
211-2009 Defeated
212-2009 5-26-2009 Retail businesses Ch. 187
213-2009 6-22-2009 Land use: zoning
amendment
Ch. 142, Part 9
§ DL-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § DL-1
A251:907
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
214-2009 8-24-2009 Land use generally
repealer; subdivision of
land repealer; zoning
repealer
Repealer only
215-2009 Defeated
216-2009 Defeated
217-2009 8-24-2009 Land use generally
amendment; subdivision
of land amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 142, Parts 1, 8,
and 9
218-2009 9-14-2009 Vehicles and traffic:
prohibited parking
amendment; two-hour
parking amendment
Ch. 81, Arts. I and XII
219-2009 9-17-2009 Bond NCM
220-2009 9-29-2009 Vehicles and traffic:
parking prohibited
certain hours on certain
streets amendment
Ch. 81, Art. VI
221-2009 9-29-2009 Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 38, Art. I
222-2009 9-29-2009 Salaries amendment NCM
223-2009 12-14-2009 Property maintenance Ch. 181
224-2010 1-25-2010 Uniform Construction
Codes amendment
Ch. 90
225-2010 1-25-2010 Building materials:
identification of lightframed
construction
Ch. 72, Art. I
226-2010 1-25-2010 Affordable housing
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 358-2019
227-2010 3-22-2010 Bond NCM
228-2010 3-22-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
229-2010 4-26-2010 Land use: zoning
amendment
Ch. 142, Part 9
230-2010 4-26-2010 Vehicles and traffic: no
stopping or standing
amendment
Ch. 81, Art. VII
231-2010 4-26-2010 Affordable housing
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 358-2019
§ DL-1 RIVER VALE CODE § DL-1
A251:908
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
232-2010 5-10-2010 Vehicles and traffic: twohour
parking amendment
Ch. 81, Art. XII
233-2010 5-24-2010 Stormwater management:
private storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 212, Art. IV
234-2010 5-24-2010 Stormwater management:
refuse containers and
dumpsters
Ch. 212, Art. V
235-2010 5-24-2010 Affordable housing
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 358-2019
236-2010 7-15-2010 Acquisition of property NCM
237-2010 7-15-2010 Cable television franchise See Ch. A252
238-2010 7-15-2010 Salaries NCM
239-2010 9-13-2010 Bond NCM
240-2010 10-25-2010 Golf Utility Ch. 20
241-2010 10-25-2010 Golf course fees Ch. 105, Art. V
242-2010 11-29-2010 Land use: site plan review
amendment
Ch. 142, Part 6
243-2010 11-29-2010 Towing Ch. 223
244-2011 Defeated
245-2011 3-28-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
246-2011 3-28-2011 Criminal history record
checks
Ch. 97
247-2011 3-28-2011 Township fee schedule
amendment
Chs. 105, Art. III; 166,
Art. II
248-2011 3-28-2011 Golf course fees
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. V
249-2011 5-23-2011 Land use generally
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 142, Parts 1 and 9
250-2011 5-23-2011 Bond NCM
251-2011 5-23-2011 Salaries NCM
252-2011 5-23-2011 Tax exemption and
payments in lieu of taxes
for certain real property
NCM
253-2011 5-23-2011 Lease agreement NCM
254-2011 5-23-2011 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § DL-1
A251:909
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
255-2011 8-8-2011 Vehicles and traffic:
prohibited parking
amendment
Ch. 81, Art. I
256-2011 9-26-2011 Land vacation NCM
257-2011 Defeated
258-2011 12-12-2011 Golf course fees
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. V
259-2012 4-9-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
260-2012 4-9-2012 Bond NCM
261-2012 4-9-2012 Bond NCM
262-2012 5-14-2012 Salaries NCM
263-2012 9-24-2012 Land use amendment Ch. 142
264-2012 Failed
265-2012 11-5-2012 Salaries NCM
266-2012 11-5-2012 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 80
267-2012 11-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 81
268-2012 11-5-2012 Police Department:
employment of off-duty
officers
Ch. 33, Art. III
269-2012 11-5-2012 Streets and sidewalks:
traffic control in
construction and
maintenance zones
Ch. 214, Art. IV
270-2012 Not adopted
271-2012 Not adopted
272-2013 2-11-2013 Vehicles and traffic: lane
use amendment
Ch. 81, Art. XVIII
273-2013 3-18-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 142
274-2013 4-22-2013 Bond NCM
275-2013 4-8-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
276-2013 4-22-2013 Fire Department: Junior
Firemen's Auxiliary
amendment
Ch. 17, Art. III
277-2013 4-22-2013 Fire Department bylaws
amendment
Ch. 18
§ DL-1 RIVER VALE CODE § DL-1
A251:910
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
278-2013 4-22-2013 Bond NCM
279-2013 4-22-2013 Tax exemption and
payments in lieu of taxes
for certain real property
NCM
280-2013 5-13-2013 Salaries NCM
281-2013 5-28-2013 Tax redemption
calculations
NCM
282-2013 7-8-2013 Bond NCM
283-2013 10-28-2013 Salaries NCM
284-2013 11-11-2013 Vehicles and traffic:
parking prohibited
certain hours on certain
streets amendment
Ch. 81, Art. VI
285-2013 11-25-2013 Golf fees amendment Ch. 105, Art. V
286-2014 1-27-2014 Salaries NCM
287-2014 3-24-2014 Exceed budget; establish
cap bank
NCM
288-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
289-2014 5-12-2014 Appropriation NCM
290-2014 5-12-2014 Township fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. III
291-2014 5-27-2014 Salaries NCM
292-2014 Not adopted
293-2014 7-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic:
prohibited parking
amendment
Ch. 81, Art. I
294-2014 7-28-2014 Tax exemption and
payments in lieu of taxes
for certain real property
NCM
295-2014 7-28-2014 Lease agreement
amendment
NCM
296-2014 7-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic:
parking prohibited
certain hours on certain
streets amendment
Ch. 81, Art. VI
297-2015 2-9-2015 Golf course fees
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. V
298-2015 3-23-2015 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § DL-1
A251:911
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
299-2015 4-13-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
300-2015 5-11-2015 Parks and recreation:
recreation facilities
amendment
Ch. 166, Art. II
301-2015 5-26-2015 Bond NCM
302-2015 5-26-2015 Bond NCM
303-2015 6-8-2015 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing amendment
Ch. 49, Art. I
304-2015 Not adopted
305-2015 10-13-2015 Land use: temporary
storage containers
Ch. 142, Part 14
306-2015 10-26-2015 Tree removal amendment Ch. 225
307-2015 10-26-2015 Land use: site plan review
amendment
Ch. 142, Part 6
308-2015 11-23-2015 Land use: storage of
boats
Ch. 142, Part 15
309-2016 1-25-2016 Filming Ch. 107
310-2016 4-11-2016 Salaries NCM
311-2016 4-11-2016 Appropriation; bond NCM
312-2016 4-11-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
313-2016 4-25-2016 Appropriation; bond NCM
314-2016 5-9-2016 Fees: Township fee
schedule amendment
Ch. 105
315-2016 7-11-2016 Vacant or abandoned
properties
Ch. 180
316-2016 9-12-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
through streets and stop
streets amendment
Ch. 81, Art. II
317-2016 9-12-2016 Fire Department bylaws Ch. 18
318-2016 9-26-2016 Salaries NCM
319-2016 9-26-2016 Affordable housing Superseded by Ord.
No. 358-2019
§ DL-1 RIVER VALE CODE § DL-1
A251:912
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
320-2017 3-13-2017 Land use generally
amendment;
nomenclature change:
"Planning Board" and
"Zoning Board of
Adjustment" to "Joint
Planning Board"
Ch. 142, Parts 1 - 15
321-2017 3-27-2017 Salaries NCM
322-2017 3-27-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
323-2017 4-17-2017 Appropriation NCM
324-2017 5-8-2017 Township fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. III
325-2017 6-12-2017 Board of Health
amendment
Ch. 21
326-2017 7-24-2017 Land use: dumpsters and
other garbage or refuse
containers
Ch. 142, Part 16
327-2017 11-13-2017 Police Department:
Establishment;
Composition;
Membership Amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
328-2017 11-27-2017 Land Use: Land Use
Generally Amendment;
Zoning Amendment
Ch. 142, Pt. 1; Ch.
142, Pt. 9
329-2018 1-22-2018 Police Department:
Establishment;
Composition;
Membership Amendment
Ch. 33, Art. I
330-2018 2-12-2018 Fire Prevention:
Administration and
Enforcement Amendment;
Smoke Detectors and
Carbon Monoxide
Detectors Amendment
Ch. 112, Art. I; Ch.
112, Art. II
331-2018 Not adopted
332-2018 4-9-2018 Land Use: Land Use
Generally Amendment;
Zoning Amendment
Ch. 142, Pt. 1; Ch.
142, Pt. 9
333-2018 3-26-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
§ DL-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § DL-1
A251:913
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
334-2018 3-26-2018 Animals: Feeding of
Wildlife Amendment
Ch. 61, Art. V
335-2018 4-9-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
Overnight Parking
Amendment
Ch. 81, Art. III
336-2018 4-9-2018 Vehicles and Traffic: Two-
Hour Parking; Thirty-
Minute Parking
Amendment
Ch. 81, Art. XII
337-2018 4-9-2018 Salaries NCM
338-2018 4-9-2018 Appropriation NCM
339-2018 4-23-2018 Appropriation NCM
340-2018 Not adopted
341-2018 7-9-2018 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 181
342-2018 7-23-2018 Emergency Appropriation NCM
343-2018 7-23-2018 Peddling and Soliciting:
No-Knock List
Superseded by Ord.
No. 359-2019
344-2018 8-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
Through Streets and Stop
Streets Amendment
Ch. 81, Art. II
345-2018 8-13-2018 Vehicles and Traffic:
Parking Prohibited
Certain Hours on Certain
Streets Amendment
Ch. 81, Art. VI
346-2018 10-9-2018 Salaries NCM
347-2018 10-22-2018 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
348-2018 11-12-2018 Fees: Golf Course Fees
Amendment
Ch. 105, Art. V 14
349-2019 1-28-2019 Sale of Property NCM 14
350-2019 3-11-2019 Salaries NCM 14
351-2019 3-25-2019 Fees: Township Fee
Schedule Amendment
Ch. 105, Art.
III
14
352-2019 4-8-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 14
§ DL-1 RIVER VALE CODE § DL-1
A251:914
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
353-2019 4-8-2019 Appropriation NCM 14
354-2019 6-24-2019 Construction Codes,
Uniform Amendment
Ch. 90 14
355-2019 6-24-2019 Land Use: Flood
Hazard Areas
Ch. 142, Pt. 2 14
356-2019 9-9-2019 Land Use: Zoning
Amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No.
362-2019
14
357-2019 9-9-2019 Land Use: Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 142, Pt. 9 14
358-2019 9-9-2019 Affordable Housing:
Fair Share Housing
Requirements
Superseded by
Ord. No.
363-2019
14
359-2019 9-23-2019 Peddling and Soliciting Ch. 174 14
360-2019 11-11-2019 Administrative Code
Amendment
Ch. 3 14
361-2019 12-9-2019 Affordable Housing:
Development Fees
Ch. 43, Art. II 14
362-2019 12-9-2019 Land Use: Zoning
Amendment
Ch. 142, Pt. 9 14
363-2019 12-9-2019 Affordable Housing:
Fair Share Housing
Requirements
Ch. 43, Art. I 14
§ DL-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES § DL-1
A251:915